Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 


Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 


public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 


We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individual 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


and we request that you use these files for 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
a[nttp: //books . google. con/] 


44 


BEZAE CODEX  CANTABRIGIENSIS. 


Cambridge: 


PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESH. 


a — — ——— —á"—— — 
» 


| 
| 
| 


Il. 


THNY YXH NAY TOYCCOCA I ANOACCCIAY THN: ocA an 
A TTOACGELAY THN 
eENEKENWTOY EYACPEAIGY COC EIAY THN X 


end 


M 
(1) NS 
ANION AMSUAMSALUAM IFACERE PERGETEAM ! quiaute ὃν 
pROprEeReUuANGelru MSALUAM FACTETEAM : 


AS IC BEIEY NOWNTWANTIALKODCOY TAX Yew c 

€A OZ CAE TU CEIAEA ET1IMEINATAY Tay C 
AIpaaloy PTIAC Y161A 1AB OAOY ΕτΈ 1 

ARAM KIACIKA4XCH4AC 


(2) 


ME ser 


€SATOCTCAACOYMAC GHTENAY TOU Tu ENA HCONT! à | 


9 oYrOC HpZATONTA pHCIAZECBAIENTCY NAP Cor 


e 


QKAIETIHPWOTHCENAYTOYC OTEPEYCAETOON Ne 
WRAIKAGICAIETIITON GPONON AYToyre TC qus 

AMANTE UT alc— ^ ᾿ 
(8 


Ef NTU COCA] IN Co. € a 


CTFACTUMESTREPEN TEcAelaEecho _Nox 
(ΕΝ KAPTOYTHCOAPYIACAYTOY — o PY 


WOHAIOC METACTPAPETAIEIC KOTOC AP 
| ANHAFNOC 
MAnepH 
n _ a2) une tÁR 
TK OAGiGCeACraunnA "s σῳο THE 


APECAY roc Oo VUA T'OI 
Me NTHTIOIOYCIN 


NOCMA 
megiagis, we. ΠΕΡῚ 
rin: ἡ TKS CABBA 

—7 TOY 


15) TT APPWCTOYC KE PAC emen COYCEYN . Supeg βοβοτοβϑαλ ΜΉ ΚΌΡΟΝ : 
ΚΑΙ kaawe CZ0YCIN , ersegebasesunt 


"UK NSINLLA λει ον TALE + SL 


BEZAE CODEX CANTABRIGIENSIS, 


BEING AN EXACT COPY, IN ORDINARY TYPE, OF THE CELEBRATED 
UNCIAL GRAECO-LATIN MANUSCRIPT OF THE FOUR GOSPELS 
AND ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 


WRITTEN EARLY IN THE SIXTH CENTURY, AND PRESENTED TO THE . VIE 
ὡς . " y 
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE BY THEODORE BEZA, A.D. 1581. / ^N M 


EDITED WITH 


A CRITICAL INTRODUCTION, ANNOTATIONS, AND FACSIMILES 


BY 


FREDERICK H. SCRIVENER, M.A. 


RECTOR OF 8. GERMANS, CORNWALL. 


Canrbridge : 
DEIGHTON, BELL, AND CO. 
LONDON: BELL AND DALDY. 


1864 


. ἃ, «^ | 
- oo cop OD. 
bw 


-— Ὁ 


TO THE RIGHT REVEREND 


EDWARD HAROLD, LORD BISHOP OF ELY. 


My Lon», 


Wuen I first projected a new Edition of Codex Bezae, you were so 
good as to recommend my design to the Syndics of the Cambridge Press as 
one worthy of aid from the funds at their disposal; you have encouraged me 
throughout my task with kind interest and ready sympathy: yet I am so 
deeply conscious of the faults of this Volume that I should be ashamed to 
inscribe it to your Lordship had I not unsparingly devoted to it time and 
pains and the best faculties of my mind. My work, indeed, has proved far 
harder than I expected, but its diligent prosecution has brought with it such 
real delight that I cannot part from the companion of many laborious hours 
without some loving regret, not unmingled (I would trust) with reverent 
thankfulness that life and heart have been vouchsafed to me to make one poor 
contribution more to the critical study of Holy Scripture. 


My Lord, may it please Him whose Providence has called you to your 
high office to prosper therein all that your hand findeth to do: may His 
blessing especially rest on your godly endeavour to restore to our dear Cambridge 
her ancient glory of being the school and home of true divinity, by persuading 
her most promising sons to consecrate their fresh strength to the ministry of 
Christ's Church in England, at this time of no common need. 

I am, my Lorp, 
Your obliged and dutiful servant, 
F. H. SCRIVENER. 


S. Gerrans, June 1, 1864. 


* Inelytae modisque omnibus celebratissimae ACADEMIAE CANTABRIGIENSI Gratiam et 
pacem a Deo patre ac Domino nostro Jesu Christo. 


" Quatuor Evangeliorum et Actorum Apostolicorum graeco latinum exemplar ex S. Irenaei caenobio 
*lugdunensi ante aliquot annos nactus, mutilum quidem illud, et neque satis emendaté ab initio ubique 
“ descriptum, neque ita ut oportuit habitum, sicut ex paginis quibusdá diverso charactere insertis, et indocti 
* eujuspiam graeci Calogeri! barbaris adscriptis alicubi notis apparet, Vestrae potissimum academiae, ut inter 
* veré Christianas vetustissimae, plurimisque nominibus celeberrimae, dicandum existimavi, Reverendi Domini 
“et patres, in cujus sacrario tantum hoc venerandae, nisi forte fallor, vetustatis monimentum collocetur. 
* Etsi vero nulli melius quàm vos ipsi, quae sit huic exemplari fides habenda, estimarint, hac de re tamen 
“vos admonendos duxi, tantam à me in lucae praesertim Evangelio repertam esse inter hunc codicem et 
“caeteros quátüvis vet es discrepantiam, ut vitandae quorundam offensioni, asservandum potius quam 
* publicandum existimem. In hac tamen non sententiarum sed vocum diversitate, nihil profecto comperi [ex 
“eras.| unde suspicart potuerim à veteribus illis haereticis fuisse depravatum. Imo multa mihi videor 
* deprehendisse magna observatione digna: quaedam etiam sic à recepta scriptura discrepantia, ut tamen 
“cum veterum quorüdà et Graecorum et latinorum patrum scriptis consentiant: non pauca denique, quibus 
* vetusta latina editio corroboratur: quae omnia pro ingenii mei modulo inter 8e comparata, et cum Syra et 
* Arabica editione collata, in majores meas annotationes à me nuper emendatas et brevi, Deo favente, 
* prodituras congessi. Sed age, res haec tota vestri, sicuti par est, judicii esto. Tantum a vobis peto, Reverendi 
“Domini et patres, ut hoc qualecüque simae in vestram amplitudinem observantiae meae [vestr...eras.] 
* veluti monimentum, ab homine vestri studiosissimo profectum, aequi bonique consulatis. 

* D. Jesus servator noster, et universe vobis omnibus, et privatim singulis, totique adeo Christianissimae 
* Anglorum genti magis ac magis pro bonitate singulari sua benedicat. 

* GENEVAE. VIII Idus Dec. anno Domini cio 10 Lxxxr. 

* Vestrae totius inclytae academiae dignitati addictissimus 
THEODORUS BEzA." 


‘‘Ornatissimo viro et in omni literarum genere excellentissimo THEODORO BEZAE 
primario pastori Genevensi. 


* Accepimus literas tuas (Ornatissime Beza) plenas humanitatis, tresque praeterea libros academicac 
“librariae consecratos, quorum duo quinque Mosis volumina hebraice scripta complectuntur, multis doctis- 
* simorum hominum commentariis illustrata, tertius vero manuscriptus quatuor evangelistas graeco latinos 
* continet cum actis apostolorum. Εἰ quibus omnibus facile existimari potest quam honorifice de Academia 
* Cantabrigiensi sentias quamque vehementer cupias sempiternum apud nos nominis ac memoriae tuae 
* monumentum conservari. Gaudemus hercle (Gravissime Beza) sic esse res nostras ut a te tristi ac directo 
* Theologo sic* lautissimis verbis efferantur, sed quod illud in votis habeas ut aliquo collato beneficio de 
* Academia nostra bene mereare, id vero serio triumphamus. 

* Quanquam (si vere loqui volumus) insignes lucubrationes tuae theologicae, quae quotidio vigent apud 
* nog, et in omnium ore ac sermone volitant tales sunt tamque divinis rebus accommodatae? ut vel eo tantum 
* nomine nunquam tibi satis debere posse videamur. Nam hoc scito post unicae scripturae sacratissimam 
* cognitionem, nullos unquam ex omni memoria temporum scriptores extitisse quos memorabili viro Johanni 
“Calvino tibique praeferamus, ut vel hac sola beneficentia contentus majorem gratificandi modum non 
«desideres. Sed quoniam nullum finem statuis bonitati tuae, nec tibi satisfacis dum illa tua scripta ad nos 
* perveniunt quae cum ceteris quoque gentibus communicata sunt nisi quorundam etiam librorum privatam 
“ accessionem adjungas: publicis tuis scriptis pro communibus utemur, haec vero nuper privata eademque 
* germana dona literatissimi viri multo arctius amplectemur*. Nam si magnorum hominum liberalitatem qui 
“nog possessionibus locupletarunt in summa laude ponamus, quo tandem studio prosequemur eos, qui 
* curarunt ut omni salutari literatura abundemus*®. Ac licet hanc animi tui gratuitam propensionem quam 
* gimillimo munere remunerare difficile sit: quantum tamen amore et industria perficere possimus, enitemur 
* nt intelligas te nobis esse charissimum, nihilque hoc tuo postremo beneficio gratius unquam accidisse. 

“Deus opt. max. fidelissimi ministerii tui uberrimum fructum concedat teque ipsum post multos exant- 
“latos labores imortali gloria coronet. 


4 CANTABRIGIAE, 15° Cal. Junii. anno dni 1582. DEN 
* Salutis et dignitatis tuae cupidissimi 


* PROCANCELLARIUS et 
*reliquus Senatus Cantabrigiensis." 
! “ Calogeri: Monachi, praesertim senio et aetate venerandi (xaXoysjpus)." Ducange Glossar. ad Script. Med. Latin. 
3 sic (cum erased in MS.) 3 accommodatae (aptissimae erased in MS.) 
4 amplectemur (amplectuntur erased in MS.) 5 at abundemus a full stop in the MS. It should be a (7) 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tne Greek and Latin manuscript of the Four Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, generally known 
as the Codex Bezae or Codex D, may seem somewhat less ancient than three or four other extant 
copies of the New Testament, but in respect to the modification of the inspired text which it exhibits 
is perhaps more interesting and remarkable than any other document of its class. It is now the 
property of the University of Cambridge, in whose public Library the open volume is conspicuouy 
to visitors (Nn. τι. 41); and the-Syndics of the University Press have liberally contributed to defray 
the cost of the present work, in which the parallel lines of the Greek original and its Latin version 
(which in Codex Bezae itself are written on separate pages in wncial characters) are represented on 
the same page in cursive or ordinary letters (pp. 1—415), precisely as they were left by the first 
scribe, nine leaves supplied by later hands being banished to an Appendix, and printed in smaller 
type (pp. 417—428). To this edition of the text (which it is hoped will be found as exact as 
anxious care could make it) is annexed à Commentary or body of notes, wherein the many changes 
brought into its primitive readings by subsequent correctors (pp. 429—448), all liturgical marks 
(pp. 448—450) and other foreign matter (pp. 451— 2) scattered throughout the margin of the book, 
are diligently recorded, and their respective dates, so far as may be, ascertained. The three facsimile 
pages in lithograph are designed to illustrate this Introduction, whose purpose is to discuss, briefly 
yet not too superficially, (1) the recent history of the manuscript and the several collations of it 
already executed: (2) its palaeographical appearance, probable origin, and age: (3) the character of 
its Latin translation, and (4) of ita Greek text, as critically examined, and compared with other 
monuments of sacred antiquity, whether manuscripts, versions, or citations of Scripture by early 
Fathers of the Church. 


CHAPTER 1. 
ON THE RECENT HISTORY OF CODEX BEZAE. 


THE letter of Theodore Beza (dated 6 December, 1581) which accompanied the manuscript, hia 
munificent gift to the University of Cambridge, and the reply of the Vice-Chancellor and Senate (dated 
18 May, 1582, but not yet received by Beza as late as October 1582, if ever) are reprinted on the 
opposite page’. The language of the latter, extravagant as it is, only too faithfully expresses the vene- 
ration of that learned body for the donor and his master Calvin, which already boded so ill for the 
peace of the English Church. To the French Reformer's meagre account of his manuscript, that he 
had gotten it some years before from the Monastery of S. Irenaeus at Lyons, must be added a more 


! The former from the original, the latter from the copy in the keeping of the Public Orator, the Rev. W. G. Clark, 
who kindly consulted it at my request. 


explicit statement prefixed to the book (perhaps at an earlier period) in his own cramped hand, and 
still preserved there together with his original letter: * Est hoc exemplar venerandae vetustatis ex 
Graecia, ut apparet ex barbaris graecis qbusdam ad marginem adscriptis, olim exportatum, et in 
Sancti Irenaei monasterio, Lugduni, ad [ad eras.] ita ut hic cernitur, mutilatum, postq" ibi in pulvere 
diu jacuisset, repertum oriente ibi Civili bello, anno Domini 1562." In the face of this statement, 
withheld in his public letter yet by no means studiously concealed, it evinces strange ignorance both 
of the man and of his evil times to suppose. that Beza received this most precious document as a 
present from the hands of the Lyonese monks, under circumstances which would have enabled him to 
learn whatever they might know of its history’. Certainly his own words "nactus," * repertum," 
and *erutum" (NV. 7., 1582, Praef), suggest no idea of a gift, and the last object the brotherhood 
of S. Irenaeus would have selected for such doubtful liberality would have been the ablest champion 
of their enemies in the Colloquy at Poissy (Sept. 1561), who was then actually serving as Chaplain 
and Counsellor of the Huguenot army in the campaign which ended with the battle of Dreux 
(19 December, 1562). Lyons, it must be remembered, was sacked in this very year 1562, oriente 
ibi Civili bello,” by the infamous Des Adrets*, whom it suited for a while to espouse the cause of the 
Reformed; and though his exploit there was marked by less than his usual cruelty, yet his followera 
expended their zeal in profaning the holy places, and have left tokens of their presence yet visible in 
the Church of S. Irenaeus itself It can hardly be doubted that some one who shared in the plunder 
of the Abbey conveyed this portion of it to Beza, who might naturally assume that of which he could 
have no direct information, that it had long lain there neglected in the dust. Yet there is good 
reason for believing that his codex was in Italy only a few years before the sack of Lyons. William 
& Prato, Bishop of the city of Clermont in the adjoining province of Auvergne, produced to the 
Council of Trent in 1546 “a very ancient Greek manuscript: confirming the Latin reading “ sic 
eum volo" in John xxi. 22, which Cod. D, alone of all known authorities, might appear to do: when 
his end was served, the Bishop would of course restore it to his neighbours, the monks of S. Irenaeus, 
from whom he had borrowed it. This view is strongly confirmed by the fact that about the year 
1546, when Robert Stephens was collecting materials for his critical editions of the Greek Testament, 
numerous extracts from a document (by him called B^) which we shall soon prove to have been none 
other than Codex Bezae, were sent to him from Italy by some friend who had collated it in his 
behalt*. 


viii INTRODUCTION. ' 


1 ** Anne omnind credibile est omissurum Bezam ex Marianus Victorius in his notes on S. Jerome, cited by 


monachis sciscitari, tantae vetustatis κειμήλιον sibi in 
manus tradentibus [!], Unde? Cujus olim? Quo casu? et 
caetera ejusmodi! Nemone autem praestó tunc adfuit 
monachus qui ei narraret (si ita quidem res fuerit) codi- 
cem mstum nostrum aded non Lugduni mansisse ab Irenaei 
paen? temporibus ad illum usque diem, ut nuperrim? 
migrásset ab Italia?’ Kipling, Cod. Bezae Praef. p. xx. 

* See his character and career sketched by Brantome, 
- Des Hommes, 1. 111. c. 4. 

3 “Tis s'emparérent des portes et de tous les lieux 
forts, sans aucun meutre que de deux ou trois personnes, 
mais non pas sans leurs impietés et barbaries accoutumées 
envers les choses saintes" (Mézeray, Hist. de France, T. 111. 
p. 87, 1685). Accordingly travellers are shewn the bones 
of unclean aninals which the Huguenots, in wanton 
mockery, then mingled with the presumed remains of 
S. Irenaeus and the martyrs of Lyons. 

* “ Antiquissimus Graecus Codex," as described by 


Wetstein, N. T. Prol, T. r. p. 28. 

5 τὸ δὲ B' ἐστὶ τὸ ἐν ᾿Ιταλίᾳ ὑπὸ τῶν ἡμετέρων ἀντι- 
βληθὲν φίλων (Ep. to the Reader, N. T. 1550): scarcely 
therefore by his son Henry, who at the age of 18, in or 
about the year 1546, collated for his father his other 15 
authorities. The whole story of Beza's manuscript would 
now be clear, but for one difficulty. In the latest edition 
of his Annotations (1598) he nowhere calls it Codex 
Lugdunensis as in 1581—2, but Claromontanus 
(notes on Luke xix. 26; Acts xx. 3): for though one 
may very well suppose that Beza at eighty years of age, 
and after so long an interval, might confound the Lyons 
copy with his own Codex Claromontanus of St Paul's 
Epistles obtained from Clermont near Beauvais, yet the 
cireumstance that it had once been in the hands of the 
Bishop of Clermont in the Auvergne is a remarkable 
coincidence, though (as we believe notwithstanding) quite 
accidental, 


INTRODUCTION. ix 


It is now time to enumerate the instances in which Codex Bezae has been employed by scholars 
for critical purposes. (1) We hesitate not to assign the first place on the list to Robert Stephens 
and his third edition of the Greek New Testament, 1550. The identity of Codex Bezae with β΄ in 
Stephens margin ought never to have been doubted by any one who had availed himself of the 
means at our disposal for testing that editor's accuracy. His principal guthority a' was the Complu- 
tensian Polyglott, a printed book in high repute and readily accessible. After deducting mere errata, 
itacisms, and such like, out of the 2300 places wherein it differs from his own printed text, Stephens 
cites α΄ correctly only 554 times, and falsely 56 times, so that more than one case in ten involves a 
mistake, while three variations out of four are utterly neglected. It is not likely that his representa- 
tion of a docament he had not seen, and only heard of from the report of another, would be more 
exact than that of a well-known published volume: yet after comparing both his α΄ and β' with their 
respective prototypes, we are enabled to declare that the readings of Cod. D, as being very striking and 
peculiar, are much the more faithfully rendered of the two. Except that Stephens cites β΄ in Matth. 
xxvii. 3 παραδουσ (where nearly the whole leaf has perished), in manifest error for his y or Codex L 
(Paris, 62); again in John xix. 6, where, though Cod. D is defective in the original hand, the later scribe 
who supplied the hiatus actually has the reading imputed to β΄ (σταυρωσον σταυρωσον avrov) ; and again 
in Acts ix. 31, also wanting in Cod. D, where the whole reading belongs to his δ΄ (Cod. Act. 5, Paris, 
106) which is correctly alleged for ἡ μεν ovv ἐκκλησια, although the sequel εἰχεν εἰρηνὴν οικοδομουμενη.... 
vopevoj.eyy...«mAnÜvvero is wrongly referred to f'":—with these slight exceptions Stephens never 
employs his authority β΄ in those many passages wherein the leaves of Cod. D have been lost, though 
. he perpetually quotes it up to the very place where the hiatus begins, and recurs to it immediately 
after the text by the first hand is resumed. After a careful analysis of all the variations imputed 
to β΄, we are enabled to state that (excluding itacisms and the like, which early collators always 
neglected) they amount to 389 in all the parts written by the original scribe of Codex Bezae': 
whereof 309 are alleged by Stephens quite correctly; 47 a little loosely, after the manner of the times, 
especially where β΄ is joined with others in support of a reading; 8 in which corrected readings are im- 
puted in error to the first hand (Matth. v. 48; xiv. 34 nearly; Mark vi. 21; 31; John v. 32; vii 39 ; 
Acts vi 10; xx. 18); while β' quite differs from Cod. D in 25 places, or less than one in fifteen, 
whereas we have seen that Stephens’ a’ varied from its printed original once in ten times®. Most of 
these 25 passages have been previously examined by Wetstein (4. 7. Proleg. 1. pp. 36—38), and, regard 
being paid to Stephens’ notorious inexactness, seem very fairly accounted for. Two involve but 
slight inaccuracies, Matth. xi. 21 (χοροζαΐμ); 23 (μη ἕως rov ovpavov ὑψωθηση; ἕως adov κ-τ.λ.); two 
others, thid, x. 4 (καναναιος β. ἡ); Luke xxiii. 20 (poceduovgocv avros B. ἢ), are just as trifling, and 
strictly true for η΄ (Cod. L). In fact where several copies vouch for a reading, absolute resemblance 
to any of them seems to have satisfied the collator: see Matth. x. 8, where vexp. eyep. is simply 
misplaced in Cod. D, but omitted in η΄ (Cod. L) and others. In the following cases β΄ has crept through 


1 Stephens’ last citation of 8' is in Acts xx. 24, only which caused such hesitation in stating his conclusions as 


that it re-appears Rom. iii. ro, in company with a’ for 
the omission of orc possibly in the place of ¢’ (Paul. 9), 
which contains the variation. With like heedlessness, e 
stands for ce’ Apoc. xix. 14; ca’ for es’ tbid. xiii. 4. See 
also p. x. 

* Bp Marsh’s numbers (on Michaelis 11. notes 110, 
114) differ from ours, inasmuch as lie reckons only 339 
citations of 8’ by Stephens, 311 alone and 128 with other 
copies. But his whole treatment of the subject betrays 
a consciousness that he had not fully investigated it, 


we could not otherwiae explain. 

3 Add to this that 8'or Cod. D alone can be referred 
to by Stephens, Luke x. 1, yo^* x ἑβδομήκοντο δύο. On 
the other hand it is uselesa to reckon 81 places in which 
v. or ἐν πᾶσι is cited by him for the united readings of 
all his authorities, as regards Cod. D 41 times correctly, 
40 loosely or falsely: nor do I notice Luke v. 35, where 
Beza, who had access to Stephens' collations, erroneously 
states that β΄ omits xal before ὅταν. 


h 


x INTRODUCTION. 


inadvertence into a list of several copies where it has no place: Matth. x. 10; xii. 32; xix. 29; 
xxvii 46; Mark i. 19; 35; iv. 31; vi. 52; Luke ii. 21; Acts iii 1; xii 6. Twice a reference has 
been misplaced, Matth. v. 3 «crat, instead of v. 10; Mark iii. 3 ξηραν, for v. 1. In Matth. x. 25 (Be- 
eAceBovB) ' is a manifest misprint for a: also & for 7 Matth. v. 25 (BAnOys'); ix. 20 (exovea «v τὴ 
ασθενεια added to ern); John xiii 2 (γινομενου). Three other passages still remain, Luke iii. 19 ἐποίει, 
for which there is no authority except Erasmus’ editions (which Stephens may have here meant by 
β΄, the Complutensian being a’) and a few which followed him; Acts xiii 1 μαναηλ, with the Peshito 
Syriac only; and the more notable addition in Luke viii 18 καὶ περισσευθησεται added to δοθησεται 
avro, a gloss from Matth. xiii. 12, very much in the manner of Cod. D, but for which no other evidence 
has yet been cited than Hensler's Lectionary 44 (Havniens. 3), and Cureton's Syriac in part*. It is 
probable that & search among Stephens manuscripts in the Imperial Library at Paris would shew for 
what other letter B’ has been substituted in this and a few other instances. 

Against these rare and inconsiderable exceptions must be set the many singular readings and 
arbitrary additions to the sacred text, known.to exist in no copy save Beza'a, for which β΄ is vouched 
in Stephens’ margin. Some of them are of considerable length (e.g. Luke vi. 4; John vi. 56; Acts v. 
15; vi 10; xvi 35; 38,39), and very faithfully represented. Yet Stephens' is as far as possible from 
being & complete and formal collation: the readings given in SS. Matthew and Mark are much the 
most numerous; fer twelve whole pages of S. Luke (as Marsh observes) the letter 8’ does not occur at 
all: even such large interpolations as follow Matth. xx. 28, and the wide variations that abound in 
Luke iii. 24—38; John vii. 53— viii. 11 are passed over in complete silence’. 

Collations or copies of Codex Bezae, made subsequently to 1562, may be dismissed with much 
less notice. 

(1) In the several editions of his Greek Testament published 1582, 1589, 1598, Beza made 
some occasional references to the readings of his manuscript, which he professed to value very highly; 
but his skill as a critic may be estimated by the wisdom of his suggestion to the University of Cam- 
bridge, that to avoid giving offence through its extensive deviations from all other documents, however 
old, it was more fit to be stored up than published (supra p. vi). I know not whether this short- 
sighted policy was acceptable to his English admirers. Before the Codex had been here a year (March 
1583), Archbishop John Whitgift, who in 1677 had left the Mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge, 
for the see of Worcester, caused a transcript of it to be made on vellum, which with several of his 
other books he bequeathed to the College, into whose possession it came on his death in 1604*. This 
volume (Trin. Coll. B. x. 3) contains the Greek Text only, very neatly written between lines ruled in 
red ink, but as every alternate page is left blank, it must have been intended to receive the Latin 
version also. lt is executed in ordinary Greek characters, with breathings, accents, and modern 
stops: the lines and pages of the original are disregarded, the changes introduced by later hands 
constantly, and (so far as I observe) invariably substituted for those of the original scribe, and where 
the manuscript is torn, the copyist wrote on as if no hiatus had occurred. After avrov Acts xxii. 29, 


1 »’ (Cod. L) has precisely βληθεισ. Kipling thinks rather than that manuscript iteclf is as needless as it is 
that « was subsequently added by the first scribe to destitute of all ext-rnal evidence. It is barely reconcile- 
βληθησ in Cod. D, in which case Stephens would give the able with those instances, mentioned p. ix, wherein β΄ 
primitive reading: but the final εἰ is not more faint than gives the readings not of the first but of a second hand 
the letters at the end of 12 ὁ. 1. 32, and I believe it was in D. Look too at such cases as padeyada of 8', Mark 
there from the first. | viii 10, where the third letter A is so closely like A in 

2 ous AMONIO “εἰ addetur ei" is hardly ren- Cod. Bezae, that I nearly fell into the same error as 
dered adequately by Tregelles “ εἰ abundubit.” Stephens’ collator. 


3 The foregoing examination will serve to shew that , 4 It is set down in the Memoriale, or Lodge Book of 
Semler'a hypothesis of β΄ being a transcript of Cod. D , Trinity College. 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


where Cod. D ends, he contiuues his text without notice to the end of that verse, in order to fill up 
the page. As all the leaves now missing were lost in his time, except the lower part of Fol. 504, 
which we have taken from the Whitgift M3., it can be regarded as nothing more than a curious and 
rather unfavourable specimen of the scholarship and taste of the Elizabethan age. 

(2) Patrick Young, the librarian of James I. and Charles I, who first collated the Codex Alexan- 
drinus (A), and published from it the Epistles of Clement of Rome in 1633, seems to have been the 
next person engaged on Codex D, extracts from which he sent to the brothera Dupuy, through whom 
they reached Morinus and Steph. Curcellaeus. An unusually full collation of it was made for 
Walton's Polyglott (Tom. vr. Num. xvi. 1657) by pious Archbishop Ussher, who devoted to these 
studies the doleful leisure of his latter years. I am grieved that truth compels me to state that I 
never examined a performance more inaccurate than this. Besides numberless omissions, manifest typo- 
graphical errors, a looseness and carelessness of citation which is really remarkable, and almost com- 
plete inability to distinguish the first from the later hands’, its actual misstatements are so many, that 
I have accumulated a catalogue of 228, with which it is needless to trouble the reader. Some of these 
are wholly unaccountable, others arise from blindly following Stephens, not a few through confounding 
the readings of some other copy he had examined with those ‘of Cod. D. Thus Cant. (as he terms 
it) stands for Gon. (Evan. 59) in Mark xii. 43; xiv. 8; xvi. 9; for Mont. (Evan. 61) Mark xii. 43; 44; 
Acta i. 20 ; iv. 8; viii. 12; xv. 7; xvi. 34 &c.; in the Acts sometimes for Lin./ Act. 33)*. 

(3) Largeness of view, critical sagacity, wide and life-long research, comprehend Mill's claims 
on our gratitude for his great services to textual criticism: those who award to him the humbler 
praise of an accurate collator can have used his edition of the N. T. (Oxon, 1707) but little. His 
volume as at first printed, while it produces many new readings from Codex D, retains nearly all 
the errors of the Polyglott; aud though most of these were amended in his Appendix, drawn up 
many years later as the result of a fresh examination of the manuscript, and though he bestowed (uot 
always with success) some pains and skill on discriminating the changes made by later hands, yet his 
representation of its contents is too defective and mistaken to be used with any degree of confidence. 
Not a few additional blunders were made even in the secundae curae of his Appendix: e.g. Mark 
viii 29; Acta x. 39; xvi. 35; xxi. 1. 

Z. C. von Uffenbach, known as the owner of several manuscripts of the New Testament (Paul. 
M. 52; Evan. 97. 101), when on a visit to England in 1710, inspected Codex Bezae at Cambridge, 
and gives a brief but correct account of it in his Reisen durch Reidersachsen Holland und Engelland, 
T. rrr. p. 21; Ulm, 1754*. 

(4) Very superior in character to Mill's collation was the transcript of Cod. D made by J. J. 
Wetstein in 1716, at the age of twenty-three, when fresh in eyesight as in spirit; yet since he did 
not use it for the next thirty years, and never appears to have consulted the manuscript afterwards, or 
much cared for the collations already published (whose heavy faults he would be well aware of), too 
many of the readings he alleges are even marvellously untrue (e.g. Matth. xi. 30 xpyorov; xxi. 8 
ordo; v.17 + ἕως before εἰς; Mark xv. 33 Cte. ς΄ isclearly primd manu; Luke iii. 33 om. rov $apes; 


1 Thus he describes the two lines written in sloping 
uncials of the virith or 1xth century at the foot of Fol. 
160 b. (Jobn xv. 3, 4) as **eodem fer? charactere." 

3 By consulting the original papers of Ussher or his 
assistante, afterwards used by Mill (N. 7. Proleg. ὃ 1505), 
and now in the Library of Emmanuel College, con- 
taining the readings of Cod. D and three others (Evan. 
59, 61, 63), which Mr Scott of Westminster School lately 


examined for Dr Dobbin (Cod. Montfort. Introd. p. 21), 
it might be seen what portion of this plentiful crop of 
errors is due to the printer. Our single purpose is to 
caution the reader against trusting to the collation as it 
stands in the Polyglott. 

3 My acquaintance with this book, and many other 
literary favours, I owe to the Rev. J. E. B. Mayor, 
Principal Librarian of the University of Cambridge. 


xil INTRODUCTION. 


John iv. 6 yy; xi. 33 (vs; xxi. 9 συνεβησαν, x.r. X), especially in the leaves written by a later 
hand. In many places, readings washed out or otherwise changed by the original scribe, and utterly 
overlooked by Kipling, had already been diligently recorded by Wetstein (e.g. Matth. xxi. 1 βηθφαγε; 
23 avrgre; xxvi 40 avrovo; Jchn v. 19 sow for ποιηση; xx. 28 και o ὃσ for pov Kat 6o): although 
his collation on this 81} more prominent points, copious as it is by no means exhausts the 
subject, and his judgement is often wrong in assigning to later times alterations which were really 
made by the first penman. 

(5) Richard Bentley, by special indulgence of the University, is said to have had Codex Bezae 
iu his possession at Trinity College Lodge for seven years, while preparing his prom:sed edition of 
the N. T. If all the use he made of it be represented in his papers published in 1862 by Mr. A. A. 
Ellis (Bentleii Critica Sacra, pp. 2— 26), a single week might have sufficed for his purpose. The 
readings he gives from Cod. D are few and vague and inexact enough, but no one who has examined 
his collations of the Codex Augiensis and of the Arundel Lectionary 547, still preserved (Trin. Coll. 
B. xvi. 8), would expect much in this way from our great Aristarchus. We could have well 
spared some numerals, &c. set by Bentley in the margin of Cod. D, with the less excuse, inasmuch 
as it was not, like Cod. Augiensis, hls own property. 

(6) An unpublished vollation made about 1732 or 1733 by John Dickinson of S. John's 
College, for John Juckson of Leicester, for six pounds sterling now, with Jackson's other books, 
in the Library of Jesus College, Cambridge (O 0 2') has enabled us, after Kipling, partially to 
supply the hiatus in the Latin of Fol. 504 a. and has been consulted with profit in other passages. | 
It is based upon, and aims at supplying and correcting, Mill's very poor representation of Cod. D, 
and Dickinson has taken laudable care to note the original text, as distinguished from its state as 
at present existing. 

(7 Kipling (Praef. p. xxvi) names three other transcripts: one owned by Richard Simon, the 
Biblical critic ; another sent to Sabatier by Bentley ; a third written in 1766 by Thomas Craster, B.A. 
of S. John's College, for Kennicott, and sent by the latter to J. S. Semler, who published from it the 
Latin version of S. John in 1771, at the end of bis “ Paraphrasis Evan. Joann. cum notis." — Gries- 
bach also consulted the manuscript, but is said to have taken from it only one reading, and that false, 
ἐπήγειραν Acts xiv. 2. 

(8) In 1793 Dr Thomas Kipling (Senior Wrangler, 1768), afterwards Dean of Peterborough up to 
his death in 1822, published at the expense of the University of Cambridge, in two splendid folio 
volumes, his edition of what he was pleased to term ** Codex Theodori Bezae Cantabrigiensis," the fruit of 
five years of toil. The moveable type used for this work in shape resembles as closely as possible the 
characters of the scribe, and some attempt is made to indicate the varying sizes of the letters, and the 
relative spaces between them. The present work was undertaken in the hope of producing an edition 
of Codex Bezae which should be more conveniently read than in Kipling's uncial letters, printed conti- 
nuously; and be more easily accessible to students than his scarce and costly folios, of which only 250 
copies were struck off In proszcuting my interesting and not unpleasing task I have found the text of 
my predecessor less inaccurate than some have suspected : the typographical errors detected (83, of which 
16 are in his notes &c.), I have recorded (see pp. 452—3) as a matter of duty, not of reproach :— perfect 
correctness is quite unattainable, yet Kipling has laboured faithfully and not wholly in vain to 
approach it as near as may be. His most serious fault is one of design and plan, in that he has 


1 Happily lettered “ ΜΆ. Sermons." Mr C. H. Cooper, 1728-9, M.A. 1732, Assistant Minister of Sheffield 1752-66. 
senior editor of the Athenae Cantabrigienses, kindly in- This humble and forgotten man must have been a good and 
forms me that John Dickinson of Sheffield became B.A. early scholar. 


INTRODUCTION. xiii 


placed in the body of his work those numerous changes made by later hands (some of them indeed of 
very recent date') which deform the pages of Codex Bezae itself, but which its editor should have 
been glad to banish into the Notes: nor has he much availed himself of the researches of those who 
went before him. Respecting his Preface it is enough to say that even seventy years ago it was 


obviously behind its age, both in respect to-its general tone and spirit, and to the then existing 
standard of critical knowledge’. 


I had also prepared full lists of the errors found as well in Ussher's, as in Mill's, Wetstein’s, 
and Bentley's collations ef Codex Bezae, but would fain be spared the ungracious office of publishing 
them. It will probably suffice to say that in whatever place any one or all of them may differ 


from this edition, I have ascertained by actual comparison with the manuscript, that my reading 
is the true one 


PosTSORIPT. After this Chapter was in type Mr E. H. Hansell, Praelector of Theology in Magdalen College, Ox- 
ford, favoured me with the copy of a letter written by William Camden the great antiquarian [d. 1623] to Pierre 
Dupuy, and found by the Revd. J. Stevenson of the Record Office among the Dupuy MSS. (490, fol. 95) at Paris. 
Camden’s account of Codex Bezae, though utterly mistaken, is too curious to be passed over, if only as a specimen of 
the untrustworthy character of so many of our most promising materials for literary history. 

* Amplissimo viro Petro Puteano Guil. Camdenus S. P. Serius rescribo, V.C., quod serius tuae per Woodfordum 
mihi redditae, et post aliquot dies quam meae ad te per Porium [sc. John Pory! Calendar of State Papers 1611—1618] 
dederim. D. Thorii Epicedium ad manus pervenisse spero. Torvallius [sc. Jean l'Oiseau de Tourval! Calendar &c.] 
Gallicus regis nostri interpres, cui tradidit, ante mensem per Scotum nobilem se transmisisse affirmat. Gratias viro 
cordatissimo de honorific& ill mentione plurimum debeo.  Patritio Junio [vid. supra p. xi] aurem vello, et subinde pro- 
missi moneo, quod facturum dicit quamprimum exemplar a Cantabrigiensibus nansisci potuit. ^ Quodnam exemplar 
intelligit nescio; sin illud 11m Evangeliorum quod Theod. Beza in Angliam quondam misit, et ipse ante plures annos 
in Collegio Trinitatis Cantabrigiae vidi, frustra erit. Ibi enim jam non comparet, et quid de illo factum a sociis nullus 
dixerit; at dudum rem totam a reverendiss. episcopo Eliensi accepi.  Transmisit Beza ad Cecilium, Angliae Thesau- 
rarium, venerandum illud antiquitatis monumentum, ut in Angli asservaretur. Ille academiae Cantabrigiensis Cancel. 
larius ad Trinitatis collegium misit, jussitque ut academici gratias agerent, quod factum. Post aliquantum temporis 
Beza, qui justum pretium potius quam gratias papyraceas (ut opinati sunt nostri) expectavit, nescio quo obtentu utendi 
in collatione repetiit; et remissum erat. Caeterum in Publica ibi Bibliotheca extat MS. exemplar Evangeliorum et 
Actoram Apostolorum Graecb et Latiné, sequioris aevi, charactere plane barbaro, et monast. S. Iraenei [sic] Lugduni 
anno MDLXII delatuin et a Matthaeo Parkero, archiepiscopo Cantuariensi academiae donatum. Hoc juvenes suspicantur 
esse illud Bezae, sed falluntur, et cum illis Th. Jamesius bibliothecarius Oxoniensis, in Egloga Oxonio-Cantabrigiensi ; cujus 
exemplar, quia forte an non vidisti, cum Eliz. Annalibus, per hunc tabellionem accipies. Cumulato rependas, si Ana- 
lecta Hibernica, quae ex Cramoysii officin& nuper prodierunt, cum commod? poteris, mihi impertias (At jam non opus 
est; nactus sum exemplar) Ama nos et valeas V.C. Saluta mibi quam plurimum ornatiss. Hotomannum, cujus officiosae 
erga D. Beecherum amicitiae ex animo gratulor. Si initium legum Saxonum et Danorum, quae extant in libro cujus- 
dam Archidiaconi in Bibliothec& Thuani in 4°, mihi descripserie long? gratissimum facies. Londini vI Xbris St. V." 

Since Camden's Annals of Elizabeth were published in 1615, and the Analecta de rebus catholicorum in Hibernia 
(without the name of the place) in 1616, this strange letter, written when the latter had just appeared, must be dated 
in the same year: it is easy enough to see why a copy of such a work was not readily procured in England. Thorius’ 
Epicedium on Isaac Casaubon [d. 1614] was not published till 1619, after it had been passed for five years from hand 
to hand, as we partly gather from Camden's expression, and as was very usual in that age. Thus the Bishop of Ely, 
whose testimony he alleges, was the great and good Lancelot Andrewes, who held that see from 1609 to 1619. But 
the story, on whatever authority it rests, involves a simple impossibility. We know from his own letter that Beza had 


! E.g. τῶ (vel τῷ) Σιλεα marg. 486 b. τ. He has even 
inserted by means of manval correction, ‘qui’ foisted 
into the margin of 272 a. L 16, I am afraid in the hand of 


rewarded with the smallest preferment;" as if his book 
were the worse for that. On the other hand, I read with 
surprise a statement extracted by Horne (/ntroduction, 


Bentley himself. 

* Kipling's edition was sharply bandled by Porson 
in two notices in the British Critic, Vol. m. 1794, and 
coarsely abused by one Thomas Edwards, LL.D., who 
satisfies a certain private grudge in his Remarks on Dr Kip- 
lings Preface to Codex Bezae, Part the First, 1793, in 
which I notice nothing worth mention save the poor taunt 
that Kipling's “zealous exertions have not hitherto been 


Vol. π. Appendix, p. 21, 1834) from a later volume of the 
British Critic (x1. p. 619, 1819), that *' Porson himself 
collated the printed copy with the original manuscript, 
and the only fault he could detect was in a single letter 
of the margin.” lfthis were true (and it is stated "'to be 
well known to many of the Professor's friends”), it would 
only prove Porson to be a very bad collator. 


xiv INTRODUCTION. 


the manuscript in his possession in 1581; Archbishop Matthew Parker died in 1575. The explanation of the whole 
matter seems to be that Camden had seen Whitgift's poor transcript of Codex Bezae at Trinity College at some time 
subsequent to ita being placed there in 1604, and came to confound it years afterwards with the original in the University 
Library. If Bp. Andrewes imagined that Beza looked rather for money than for paper thanks, he did not know the 
man, whose stern hard nature loved power too intensely to be the slave of a meaner, though it may be a less 
mischievous passion. Although it seems needless to say more about so plain a matter, the reader may like to know that 
Lord Burleigh the Chancellor's letter which accompanied the manuscript to Cambridge, dated 9 May 1582, is published 
in Hartehorne's Book Rarities of the University of Cambridge, p. 13; and that in the Grace for lending the volume to 
Whitgift ‘‘quo illud describat,” passed 2 March 1582-3 and enlarged Oct. 10 (Baker MSS. xxiv. 181), it is called 
** N. T. Graecum quod nuper venerandus Pater Theodorus Beza dono dedit Academie.” 


CHAPTER II. | 
ON THE PALAEOGRAPHICAL APPEARANCE OF CODEX BEZAE, ITS PROBABLE ORIGIN AND DATE. 


THis invaluable manuscript forms a quarto volume, ten inches high by eight broad, whose 
margin, though still ample, has been cut down, at least in parts, by the binder. Its material is 
excellent vellum, perhaps not quite so fine and thin as that of the Codices Claromontanus (Paul D), 
Vercellensis (Evan. a), and a few others, but for the most part in good condition; although some of 
the leaves are falling into holes, while in others the ink has much worn off, or has been washed away 
or read off on the opposite page through damp, especially on the rougher or outer side of the animal's 
skin. In some places the mischief has been aggravated by the application of a chemical mixture for 
the purpose of restoring the faded writing: but, on the whole, every alternate open leaf, as presenting 
the smooth or inner side of the vellum, is in fair preservation; some being as clear and fresh as if 
written yesterday. Assuming that Codex Bezae ended with the Acts of the Apostles, it must 
have originally consisted of 534 leaves, distributed into 67 quires or quaternions of four sheets or 
eight leaves each, only that the 34th was accidentally made up of only three sheets or six leaves, 
the innermost sheet of the four being left out: the numeral signatures of the quires, written : 
primá manu, were set at the foot of the last page of each, but so low down that they were often 
cut away in part or wholly by the binder; we have carefully noted all that remains of them (see 
pp. 15; 80; 105 &c.). Of these 534 leaves there are lost the first two and seventh of the first 
quire; all the eight of the third, fourteenth, twenty-second, and fifty-seventh quires; all after the 
fifth leaf of the forty-fourth to the end of the fifty-second quire; the first and seventh leaves of 
the sixty-fourth quire; the whole of quires sixty-five to sixty-seven': thus after the loss of 128 
leaves, only 406 survive (about twelve of them being more or less mutilated), besides nine added 
by a much later hand to supply some of the defects, whereof we may better speak hereafter. The 
manuscript once contained the four Gospels in their usual Western order (SS. Matthew, John, Luke, 
Mark), the Catholic Epistles and Acts of the Apostles, but on the missing leaves just enumerated we 
have lost in the Greek, Matth. i. 1—20; iii. T—16; vi. 20—ix. 2; xxvii. 2—12; John i. 16—iii. 26; 
xvii. 14—xx. 13; Mark xvi. 15—20; Acts viii 29—x. 14; xxi 2—10; 16—18; xxii. 10—20; 
the text ends after avrov v. 29: in the Latin, Matth. i. 1—11; ii 21—iii. 7; vi. 8—viii. 27; 
xxvi 65— xxvii, 1; John i 1—iii. 16; xviii. 2—xx. 1; Mark xvi. 6—20; Acts viii. 20—x. 4; xx. 31 
—xxi 2; 7—10; xxii 2—10; the version ends after consentiens, v. 20. 8S. Luke's Gospel alone 
is complete: of the Catholic Epistles nothing remains in either language except twelve lines of the 
Latin of 3 John 11—15* on Fol. 415, that on which the Acts commence. On the other hand a small 


1 We calculate that three quires or 24 leaves would Bezae, that 94} pages of the printed book answer to 951 
be required for the portion of the Acts which follows leaves of the manuscript. 
ch. xxii. 29, avrov, from observing that it fills 24 pages in 3 Followed by the subscription epistulae iohanis ΠῚ 
the Elzevir N. T. 1624, in which, throughout the former explicit &c., where epistulae seems to be the genitive, not 
part of the Acts, where Cod. Bezae is full of interpola- the plural as Credner supposes (Beitráge, 1. p. 456—7. 


tions, cach page corresponds so closely to one leaf of Cod. 


KAT, — XoAN; 


CHMENCONTIOIWSO ANAT COAOZA CEITONON 
KAITOY TOE MO NAEP EIAY TW ΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΕΙΜΟΙ 
ETNCTPAD €ICAEG ONE TPOCBAEGTTECITAN MAGHTHN 
OHHTATIA IHC AKOAOYSOY NTA 
OCKAIANETIECENENTCODA GITIN CO 
EMTOCT HOOCAY TOY KAIEMENAY TO 
KE TICEC TIN OTIAPAATACD NCE _ 
TOY TONOQYNEIAMNOTIETPOCAEre IY Tow )HY- 
KE OY TOCAET 1: A€r€1IAY TWOIHC 
EANAY TON @6EGAC MENEIN OY TC 
EwCEPXOMAITIMpocce CY MOMKOAOY aE! 
EZ HAGE NOY HOYTOCOAOT OCCICTOYy C 
AA EAP OY C _K AIEAOZAN OT10 MAGH THC 
EKEINOC OY KATOONHCKE! KAIOY KEMENAY TO 
O!HC OY:KATIO@NHCKEIC AAAACANAY TON 
OCACOMEN EIN) ECOCEPXOMAINPOCCE 
OCCCTINOMAOHTHC OMApTYP com 
TE prroy TOON XA10T pAWVACTAY' TA 
KAIOLAAM € HOTIAAHOeHCCCTIN AY TOY 
HMApTYPp!A ECTINAEKAIAAAATIOAAA 
OCACTIOIHCCNOXpC1IHC ATINA 
EANT pAPHTAIKAGEN OYAAYTON 
OIMAITONKOCMON Xo pHCE 
TATpPAPSOMENABIBAGIA 


EYALTEAION KATA 
TWANHN ETE AECOH, 
APXETAT_ EYATTEAION 


SICNIFICANS FUAMO RTE HONORIFICA DITA 
€rboccumdixisserdicirilli sequezpeme 
CONU ERSUSAUTEM PETRUS UIdETAIYCIpulum 
quemaqucebatihs SEQUENTEM 
QUIET RECULDUITINCENA 
SUuUPeRpecruserus erdwurrlll 
dm equisesrquirgAdidirre 
huricekGouldeNy perTRusdicrrad ihm 
dmehicAuTemquid-. dicirilliihs 
NEUuUMVoOlos 1 CMANERE 
USFTUECUMUENTIO quidAdTerumesequege 
EXTUITERCOHICUERDUS APUTFRAT RES 
ETPUTAUERUNT QUONIAM discipulus 
ille NONMORIT UR erroonidierrillud 
INS NON MaARIERIS Sedsicum 
uolomANER € uSquedumuenioquidAdre 
hicesrdi$scipus quITESTIMANIUMGAT 
dehis erquiscgipsirThAec 
ETSCIMUS TUONIAMUERUM EST eius 
TES TIMONIUM SUNTAUTEM ETALIA plugA | 
qQuAEFECITXpPSINS quae 
SIS CRIOANT UR SIN GULARITER NECI IPSUM 
FACWHepuTOmumn duoc cApene 
quiSCRiburiTugliby ti 


€uAMGeliua sec nd . 
iOhANEN — explicui. 
IN cpiT. €t AN celiuam 


INTRODUCTION. | XV 


fragment of Fol. 96 which contained Matth. xxvi. 65—xxvii. 1 Latin, xxvii. 2—12 Greek, though 
overlooked by Kipling, is bound up between Foll. 89 and 90, and its contents will be found below 
in their proper place; we have also recovered from the previous collations nearly all the readings 
of the last ten or eleven lines of Fol. 504 (Acts xxi 7—10 Latin, 16—18 Greek), which though 
evidently damaged when Whitgift’s copy was made (see p. xi) were not cut off from the rest of 
the leaf till after Dickinson's time (see p. xii) Our only difficulty is with the Catholic Epistles, 
which could hardly have covered more than fifty of the missing sixty-six' leaves between the end of 
S. Mark and the beginning of the Acts, even though we suppose that S. Jude was inserted, as iu some 
catalogues, otherwise than in the last place. Since the superfluous sixteen leaves would suffice 
neither for the Epistle to the Hebrews, nor for the Apocalypse, nor for any other book at all likely 
to occur in such a position, but would take up exactly two quires, we venture to suggest that the 
original penman may have miscounted bis quires by two at some place in the portion that is lost; 
just as we know tbat one of two later scribes must have done in Cod. Sinaiticus, inasmuch as they 
differ by unity in numbering the quires from the commencement of S. Paul's Epistles (Quat. 82 or 
81) down to the end of the manuscript. 

Like its younger contemporary the Cod. Claromontanus (Paul. D), Codex Bezae has the Greek 
text in the post of honour on the left hand page of each open leaf, the Latin version on the right 
hand or second page: in this respect differing from the other bi-lingual copies, Codd. Laudianus 
(Act. E) and Augiensis (Paul. F), which exhibit the Latin on the left, the Greek on the right, in two 
parallel columns of the same page, as also does Cod. Sangermanensis (Paul. E) only with the Greek 
on the left. Both the Greek and Latin of Cod. Bezae are written in bold, regular, and elegant uncial 
characters with the words undivided, arranged not as most others, in lines containing nearly the same 
number of letters, but in verses or στίχοι determined by the sense, the Greek and Latin closely cor- 
responding with each other. Every page exhibits thirty-three such verses or lines* (kept regular by 
the usual means of a bodkin—acus—and a ruler) except at the end of a book, when the scribe 
breaks off to fill up the rest of each page with simple arabesque ornaments and a brief subscription, 
partly written and partly adorned with bright red colours, but in a style not more elaborate than is 
seen in corresponding parts of Codd. Sinaiticus and Alexandrinus Such an open leaf at the end of 
S. John’s Gospel (Foll. 181 5., 182 a.: infra p. 159) is represented in our first two facsimile pages 
(Plates I, II) to which the reader will please to make frequent reference as he examines our 
statements throughout the present chapter. In the titles and subscriptions of the several books 
the words appear separated, and a tendency to the same practice may be observed here and there in 
the body of the Latin version itself (e.g. Fol 138 a.). The first three lines of each book whose 
beginning is extant, are in the rich red or vermillion paint we have just mentioned, still perfectly 
bright and fresh, while the ink of the rest of the manuscript is on the smooth side of the vellum of 
the yellowish brown colour which (as well as the red) our Facsimile tries to imitate, but of a darker or 
more ashy hue where the surface is rougher, or the leaf otherwise in worse condition: so precarious is 
any argument that may be drawn from mere difference in the shade of ink as to change in the hand 
which used it. 


! S. Mark must have ended on Fol. 349 a., the Acts 
begin Fol 4155.: the Catholic Epistles occupy 401 pages 
in the Elzevir N. T. 1624 (see the last note but one), but 
possibly some little allowance should be made for the 
larger space taken up by Cod. Bezae at the end of the 
several books. 

3 Fol. 251 a. contains 34 lines, to make it correspond 
with its parallel 250 5., which had lost a verse by ὁμοιο- 


τέλευτον between eurer and  exarov l. 29. 


3 [n this reprint of the text of Codex Bezae, since the 
words are divided for the convenience of the reader, it has 
not been so easy as it was to Kipling to represent the 
spaces found at times in the original between the several 
words and letters; but we have done so as far as was pos- 
sible. We have given awrapri and ovxeri, but δια τι. 
always. In such compounds as num quid we follow the 
spaces left by the scribe. 


- 


xvi INTRODUCTION. 


The Greek uncial characters of Codex Bezae are in the main of the plainest yet most graceful 
shape. The form of alpha (the lower left limb sometimes passing from the vertex of an angle into a 
loop or curve, e.g. Facsimile I, ll. 4, 5), beta, mu, nu, upsilon, omega, and more especially delta are of 
the simple and ancient form: the horizontal line in thefa is 80 fine that it is often ecarcely visible: the 
circle in pht (always a large letter in the oldest copies) sometimes becomes nearly a complete 
lozenge (© , Facsimile I, l. 22, and 27 b. 13): in pi the thin horizontal line is always produced slightly 
beyond the two verticals (which is not much the practice in Codd. Vaticanus and Sinaiticus, nor always 
in Cod. Alexandrinus, e.g. Gen. i. 1), and frequently terminates in a hook on the left (e.g. Facsimile I, 
l 5): kappa and rho have usually (though not invariably) at their bottom thin horizontal strokes 
running on to the left, at times barely visible to the eye, occasionally joining them to the preceding 
letter (Facsimile I, 11. 5, 9 &c.); the vertex of the angle to the right in kappa almost always touching 
the verticalline. For the rest, the knobs at the upper and lower extremities of epsilon and sigma are 
rarer than in any save the very oldest manuscripts; eta (H) at times degenerates into something 
nearer to N (e.g. Fol. 434 b. 4); the horizontal line of tav is at times very thin and plain, though 
it is oftener strengthened either at its right or left extremity, or at both, by small knobs or hooks. 
Gamma and zi are among the peculiar letters of Codex Bezae; the upper limb of the former, instead 
of being straight and horizontal, is often curved much as in an English r (e.g. Facsimile I, 1. 12); the 
latter is in some places so much like zeta that it only differs from it by having a trifling protuberance 
in the middle of the descending line (Facsimile I, 1. 12), which now and then is scarcely perceptible 
(e.g. Foll. 54 5. 28; 148 b. 24 secundo loco). All these circumstances (not the less important by reason 
of their delicacy and minuteness), when taken together, would lead us to assign to this manuscript 
full as bizh a date as to the Codex Alexandrinus, which was written early in the fifth century, 
were not our co:clusions somewhat modified by other considerations, of which the debased dialect of 
the Latin version (on which we shall dwell in Chap. 111) is the most obvious and weighty: the palaeo- 
graphical appearance of the Latin character is venerable enough. 

The most hasty glance at our Facsimiles I, II of the open leaf of Cod. Bezae suffices to shew 
the justice of Uffenbach's statement (see p. xi) that the Latin and Greek characters resemble each 
other so closely that at first sight the one might easily be taken for the other. The Latin pages 
are not much like the classical fragments written in square uncials as represented in the 
second volume of Silvestre's Paléographie Universelle, such as the Medici Virgil assigned to the 
third century, the Vatican Virgil of the fourth or the Sallust of the fifth century. They ought 
rather to be compared with the more round and flowing letters of the versions of the Old Latin, 
as the Vercellae, Verona and Brixia Gospels (for which, however, we have access only to Blanchini's 
very poor Facsimiles), the Codd. Palatinus and Claromontanus as published by Tischendorf, and the 
Cod. Laudianus 35 (E of the Acts) The style of this last is evidently of a somewhat later date, 
&nd much heavier in appearance. T, so slender and graceful in Cod. Bezae, in Cod. Laud. is almost 
always turned up at its lowest extremity with a sort of hook to the right. G, which in our manuscript 
is at times barely distinguished from C (Facsim. IT, ll. 8, 12, 32)", has a long tail in Cod. Laud.: in 
Cod. Palatinus the tail or extremity coils inwards in a spiral form, quite peculiar to that copy. Of 
all these Latin monuments its coeval the Cod. Claromontanus most resembles ours, only that the 
hand of the former is less firm and regular. M and U are shaped nearly alike in all: the Claro- 
montane alone agrees with Cod. Bezae in having the last stroke of d perpendicular; the other five 

! Of the compound letters so familiar in the oldest 2 C and G are so much alike that the scribe is apt to 
documents we find NH 65. 13; EM 441 ὃ. 3; and forming write one for the other (e.g. Foll. 31 a. 4; 41a. 33; 474.1 
letters of separate words M 477 b. 19; 489 b. 19; 506 read garcere; 48 a. 14; 79 α. 17; 179 a. 18; 254 a. 26; 


b. 39; NM 9o b. 12: also N very often, whether in the 274 0. 14; 313 G. 18; 462 a. 5; 481 a. 25; 495 a. 23; 
same word or not (c.g. hoth in 428 b. 22). 502 a. 10; κού a. 17; KOR a. 23). 


INTRODUCTION. xvil 


carry it up into a curve, more or less flourished. Codd. Bezae and Claromontanus again conspire 
with Cod. Augiensis of the ninth century in making 1 with a simple perpendicular line very slightly 
turned up in a fine stroke at bottom : the rest have a strong vertical line, sometimes a little curved, 
though seldom so long as the perpendicular memben FPQR descend below the line in most of 
these copies (not however FR in that of Vercellae, or PR in that of Verona, or R in the Brixian 
and Claromontane, but even the angular A in Cod. Pa'atinus), though our codex alone has the fine 
strokes running to the left at the bottom of these letters. On the whole, however, the impression 
conveyed by a careful comparison of them all would suggest the notion that the nice discrimination of 
their dates by means of the style of writing is not so easy or so certain in regard to Latin manuscripts 
of the fourth to the sixth centuries as with Greek documents of the same age (see also Tischendorf, 
Cod. Palatin. Prolegom. p. xv). 

The sister bilingual Codd. Bezae and Claromontanus afford the earliest, and, in fact, the two 
chief extant examples for the New Testament, of manuscripts divided into verses, or στίχοι, the 
Letin lines being intended to follow the Greek, and on!y differing from them by accident. It 
must be conceded that this division, as applied to the books of Holy Scripture, prevailed much 
earlier than has been generally supposed. Not only do Athanasius fd. 373], Gregory Nyssen 
[d. 396) Epiphanius [d. 403] and Chrysostom [d. 407] inform us that in their time the book 
of Psalms was already divided into στίχοι, while Jerome [d. 4201] testifies the same for the book 
of Isaiah (Suicer, Thesaurus Ecclesiast. T. τι. p. 1033), but Origen also [d. 254] speaks of the second 
and third Epistles of S. John as both of them not exceeding one hundred στίχοι, of S. Paul's 
Epistles as consisting of few, S. John's first Epistle of very few (Euseb. //ist. Eccl. L. vi. c. 25), 
while Eustathius of Antioch in the fourth century reckons 135 such στίχοι from John viii. 59 
to x. 31'. The student, indeed, may see this for himself in regard to the poetical books of the 
O.T., as preserved in the two great reliques of the fourth century, Codd. Vaticanus and Sinai- 
ticus; wherein, according to the true principles of Hebrew poetry, the verses do not correspond 
in metre or in the quantity of syllables, but in the parallelism or mutual relation subsisting between 
the several members of the same sentence or stanza. In Codex Bezae, this orderly and system- 
atic arrangement, which must have been designed by those who first distributed into στίχοι the 
sacred text of the Gospels and the Acts, bas to ἃ certain extent been disturbed and broken up, 
in some places much more than in others. Now since it will appear clearly bereafter that the 
manuscript as it stands at present was closely and exactly copied from another, perbaps almost 
contemporary to itself, similarly divided in respect of στίχοι though not similarly paged (below 
p. xxiii), it will follow that the model from which this latter was taken is older still, dating perhaps 
as early as or earlier than the time of Origen. The reader will not doubt that the ancient στίχοι 
were being gradually dissolved in course of time by successive transcribers, if he pays any attention 
to their actual condition in Codex Bezae. In the first Gospel although many of the clauses are - 
not balanced in the strict and regular fashion which would have satisfied the luws of parallelism 
as laid down by Bp. Jebb (e.g. Matth. vi. 1; ix. 17; xi. 21; xiii 40; xvi 18; xxvi. 51 &c.); 
though a few lines end in yap (iv. 10; vi 7; xvii 15), or iu de (xx. 2), or even in the article 
(vi 6; xiv. 35; xix. 1) yet the close of each στίχος usually coincides with some slight pause in 
the sense. With the first page of S. John the dissolution of the verses becomes much more 
marked (e.g. i. 4; 10; 13), and though only one line (i. 16) ends with the article before ch. vi. 32, 
yet such irregularity occurs no less than 48 times from that place to the end of the Gospel, while in the 


ΤΙ thankfully accept the correction of Tischendorf (Cod. Stnait. Proleg. p. xxi, note 2, edit. min.) to modify the 


statements of my Plain Introduction, p. 45. 
i^ 


xvii INTRODUCTION. 


succeeding Gospel of S. Luke an entire breaking up of tke stichometry becomes rather the 
practice than the exception: about Luke viii. the dissolution seems ado;:ted almost in prefer- 
ence; prepositions being separated from their cases (e.g. John xiv. 23; xxi 8; Luke vii. 20; 
viii. 13; x. 7), or even words (not always compound words) are divided, whether in tbe Greek (e.g. 
John xiii 36; Luke i. 1; vi 1; 38; vii 6; xxi. 36), or in the Latin (e.g. Matth. xviii. 33; John 
vi 18) or in both (Luke v. 19; vi. 9; 48; vii. 20). As the work proceeds from the middle 
of S. Luke onwards (however we may account for the fact), the arrangement of the στίχοι becomes 
less broken and careless, though some of the chief anomalies are met with even to the last (e.g. 
Mark xiii. 22 Gh. Lat.; Acts ii, 26 Gh; x. 41 Gk.; xi. 2 Lat). Although the Latin translator 
no doubt intended to follow implicitly the lines of the Greek on the opposite page, yet in very 
many places (full twenty in S. Matthew alone) he departs from them without any visille cause (see 
Matth. xvii 25—27; Mark ix. l);in Luke iii l there is utter confusion between the two, while 
in Luke iv. 16 the Greek has lost something; on Fol. 14 a, L 17 of the Greek is dropped altogether 
(just as a whole στίχος is lost in both after 238 6, 239 a, 1. 30 ; 421 5, 422 a, 1. 23), though the lines 
are set right again by dividing 1. 25 of the Greek ; so also Fol. 314 a, 1. 20—31. Both the Greek 
entirely and the Latin nearly repeat a line Mark xiv. 16; beth misplace J. 13 Foll 565, 57a, 
which should precede 1. 11; and the Latin transposes lines at Acts xvii. 17 ; so Acts v. 29 in both: 
in Fol. 2596 33 καὶ is even employed as a catch word. Yet on the whole the tendency is (as!will 
be seen hereafter, p. xxiii), for the parallel. Greek to keep in check the wandering eye of the 
scribe when engaged in à copying the Latin from its immediate prototype, which, judging from the 
style of the Latin version (see Chapter iii.), must have been nearly of the same age with himself. 

It may be convenient to notice here that citations from the Old Testament are indicated in 
thirteen places (Matth. xxi. 9; 13; 16; 42; xxii. 41; xxvi. 31; xxvii. 9, 10 Lat.; Mark i. 2, 3; 
Acts i. 20; ii. 20—28 ; iv. 25, 26 ; vii. 49; xiii. 383—235) by throwing the beginning of the στίχοι 
back two or three letters: which same is done in Mark xiii. 18, though there is no quctation, 

Abridgements in the Greek text (those of the Latin will be described hereafter in Chapter iii.) 
are fewer than in Cod. Sinaiticus and some others: they are - over the last vowel in a line 
for v (in Latin m), and the letters used for , numerals, with a line placed over them, so common 


in the oldest manuscripts: in Mark vi. 44 € € Stands for 5000. Codex Bezae is s peculiar in its 


mode of abbreviating ιηἥσουσ, χριστοσ, and their cases, by writing always ine xpo for the usual 
forms 1S, xo, &c: 0«oc and Kvpiog are shortened into ὅσ and Ko, as in other copies: πνευμα is 
usually given as πνὰ (even zv Acts v. 9; row mvewa Mark i. 27); μητηρ, νιοσ, σωτήρ, ovpavoc, Saud, 
ἱερουσαλήμ are never contracted, at and πατὴρ not often, yet we see rap John xii. 26; xiv. 28, xv. 1; 
προσ ibid. vi. 65; mpo, mpt ™pa as elsewhere : we have σταυροσ and cravpoo in full, as also 
στρυ Mark xv. 30, 33; στρν ibid. v. 13; στν v. 14; orn v. 15; plené v. 20. 

The punctuation is certainly quite as primitive as in many parts even of Codd. Sinaiticus or 
Palatinus, consisting as it does chiefly of a blank space between the words, or of a middle, sometimes 
of an upper, very seldom of a lower single point, usually placed in the middle of a verse or στίχος, and 
found (as in most other copies) much more thickly in some parts than in others: such a point is often 
set in the middle of a line, in passages where it is hard to see its use. In rare instances, and for 
special reasons, two stops may occur in one verse (e.g. 104 ὁ, 1. 4): double points also are sometimes 
placed in the larger spaces, mostly by a later hand, now and then p. m. (e.g. Foll 79 b 1. 28, 
80 a 28; 188 a 29, and occasionally in Cod. Sinaiticus): in this last case we carefully retain them. 
Nor are capital letters more frequent in this copy than in monuments which all agree to refer to 
the fifth century: much less so than in Latin copies of that date. Indeed the distinction between 


INTRODUCTION. xix 
capital and other uncial letters is seldom strongly marked in Codex Bezae, so that some have been 
loth to admit that it employs capitals at all, believing that like Codex Sinaiticus a letter of the same 
size as the rest is set at the beginning of a line out of range to indicate the commencement of a new 
clause’, Yet not a few instances will be found where a sentence is begun, even in the middle of a line, 
with a letter larger than the rest (e.g. 116 5 12; 153 6 23; 198 ὁ 32; 2068.1; 216 0 27; 306a 17; 
324 a 18), so that the use of such capitals in our manuscript cannot be denied, though they are 
not so conspicuous in size as in one or two others (e.g. Codd. Alexandrinus and Ephraemi) as old 
or older, which have them only at the beginning of a line. 

The dialysis, expressed by two points (., but .* in Fol. 433 ὁ 14) set over iota and upsilon 
when used alone, and over upsilon or both in the diphthong uw, occurs perpetually in Codex Bezae, as 
in all the oldest copies, very often primd manu, sometimes plainly by a later hand (in Acts ii. 17 
evurvow is inserted s. m., a straight line being put for the dialysis, as often in Cod. Sinaiticus’), in 
which case we omit it in our edition: frequently it is quite uncertain whether it was placed by the 
original scribe, or by some of those who followed him, and then we retain the dialysis, giving it, as it 
were, the benefit of the doubt. The only other distinctive mark found in this document is the apo- 
strophus (’), in respect of which the same difficulty constantly arises, whether it was written by the first 
hand or not; a question only to be decided by observing closely the precise shape of the apostrophus 
(usually thus > in Codex Bezae), and by comparing the shade of its ink with that on the rest of the 
page. This mark is judged to be primd manu, wherever we have retained it in our collation, which is 
only with the Hebrew Proper names iepovoaAnp, αβρααμ, σαμονηλ, Saved, wond, paptap (αβελ Luke 
xi. 51 should perhaps have been added): with p final Matth. ii. 9; vi. 2; Acts xi. 24: with £ final 
Matth. xxvi. 41, as in Cod. Sinaiticus vv" Apoc. xxi. 25 &c.: and once only after an elision, μεθ᾽ John 
xvi. 4, which last is possibly by a later hand*. Jota subscript of course never occurs in Codex Bezae, 
but ascript (of the same size as the other letters) in Mark i. 34 p. m. cay, while in another place 
the penman betrays a consciousness of its existence, for in Acts xxii 3, while writing πατρωου, he 
commenced ¢ immediately after w, though he afterwards altered it into o. Of accents I find no vestige 
by the first pen, of breathing only one instance (Matth. xxv. 15 ὦ μεν : so even Cod. Sinaiticus Gal. v. 
21), but a few of each in later hands‘. 

All that appears in our printed pages, therefore, we judge to have proceeded from the original 
writer of the manuscript, with a single exception now to be noticed. Codex Bezae, in its primitive 
state, contained no numerical divisions of the books whatever; neither chapters peculiar (or almost 
peculiar) to itself like the Codex Vaticanus, nor the Ammonian sections and Eusebian canons in the 
Gospels like that of Sinai, nor (together with these last) the larger chapters with their appropriate 
headings, which all other documents exhibit, that date from the fifth century downwards. The sacred 


2 We would say once for all that the limited resources 
of typography hinder us from nicely representing in ordi- 
nary characters the varying sizes both of the capitals and 
of those smaller letters which Co:l. Bezae, like most others 
of real antiquity, often crowds into the end of a line. 
We have done our best, but we are conscious that in 
many places others would have put capitals or smaller 
letters where we have not, and vice versd. 

3 Even in Cod. Bezae the two points sometimes run 
almost into one line: e.g. Fol. 456 b 1. 16. 

3 The apostrophus after elision seen in our Facsimile, 
I, L 22, ovd’ is too faint to be by the first acribe, and we 
have rejected it with αλλ in several cases. In two places 


(81 b. 17 X with ov erased, 302 b. 1 x’ for x p. m.) it is 
plainly the work of the oldest corrector, whom we shall 
hereafter describe as A. I know not what to make of it 
in 193 a. 4, 194 b. 2, which look p. m. 

4 By the corrector we shall call B in r5 5. 15, ἢ ultim.; 
137 b. 6, éva; 149 5. 8, Qv sccund. ; 161 b. 23, δῶ; 164 b. 
25, ἢ secund.; 166 b. 20, ἑν; 214 b. 19, dv; 249 b. 19, 
-Adc ; 266 b. 27, εἰσαγγελοι; 279 b. 14, do; 310 b. 28, ἐν; 
421 b. 25, ddov; 425 b. 10, du; 457 b. τό, óv. But 489 b. 
26, dvrwo, 500 b. 16, duws seem later, and G (to be de- 
scribed hereafter) in Acts xvi. 19, 20 has er:AaBduevor... 
παῦλον... αγορὰν... ἄρχοντασ... στρατηγοῖσ... εκταράσσουσιν 
ἡμῶν Tf» πόλιν. 


XX INTRODUCTION. 


text in both languages is broken up into certain paragraphs of very unequal length, such as we meet 
with no where else, each commencing in a letter (sometimes but not usually larger than the rest) 
which encroaches a little on the margin, and is clearly indicated throughout our edition (see also 
Facsimile Plates I and II, 1. 2): Bp. Marsh counts 153 (I reckon but 148 both in the Greek and 
Latin) such paragraphs in S. Mark's Gospel'. The Ammonian sections, however, without the Euse- 
bian canons’, are inserted in the side margin of Codex Bezae by a scribe whom we shall hereafter 
(mfra p. xxvii) shew to have lived several centuries later than this manuscript was written, and the 
beginning of each section is indicated by double points interpolated in the body of the text before 
or (if spzce be wanting) over its first letter, very often in both places, referring to similar double 
points placed in the margin after the Ammonian numerals? The single point by the first hand 
precedes these latter double points in Fol. 92 ὁ 11. 6, 10, 224 5 1. 16, and follows them Fol. 311 ὃ 20. 
While banishing to our Adnotationes all other matter found in the margin (infra pp. 448—452), 
even that written by the same hand as the sections, convenience or necessity have led us to retain 
these and the corresponding points, which we must once for all request the reader to regard as 
much more recent than any other writing on the page. The variations in pluce and number of these 
sections from these commonly found in manuscripts and editions are recorded in our work (infra 
p. 493), as they are somewhat curious and interesting; it is also remarkable that as in Codex Sinai- 
ticus (where they cease in S. Luke after ch. ix. 57), they are not carried on complete throughout 
the Guspels. This arises at the end of S. Matthew (where the last section noted is τνβ, ch. xxvii. 62) 
and the beginning of S. John (i. 1—16) by reason of the side margins of Foll 102—4 being cut 
clean away; but this explanation does not hold for the end of S. John (xx. 13—xxi. 25), or of 8. 
Mark, where the sections terminate at ci, ch. xv. 16. 

More recent than the Ammonian numerals and points are the nine leaves supplied in their proper 
places as Codex Bezae is now bound, but in this edition exiled to an Appendix (pp. 417—428), and 
printed in smaller type than the rest of the volume. The first of these additional leaves contains 
Matth. ii 21— 1d. 7 Latin, iii. 7—16 Greek: the next seven have crowded into them the contents 
of the eight lost leaves which originally formed quaternion 22 (supra p. xiv), viz. John xviii. 2— 
xx. 1 Latin, xviii. 14 —xx. 13 Greek: the ninth leaf has on the first page Mark xvi. 6—15 Latin, 
on its second page in parallel columns the Greek aud Latin of Mark xvi. 15— 20 and (the Greek in 
blue ink) the subscriptions proper to each. All these Latin pages are transcribed from copies of the 
Vulgate which resembled the Clementine printed edition more closely than do Cod. Amiatinus 
and the best manuscripts (e. g. John xviii. 12; 16; 19; 31; 36 ter; xix. 6; 16; 24; 28; 36), and 


! In S. Luke I count 136 (143 Lat.); in what remaius 
of S. Matthew 583 (590 Lat.), of S. John 165 (168 La..), 
of the Acts 235. Capricious and irregular as these para- 
graphs may be, Mr Hansell did right in retaining them 
in his T'exts of the oldest existing manuscripts of the N. T. 
(Oxford, 1864). It is worth notice that, as in Codd. Si- 
naiticus and Vaticanus, each Beatitude in Matth. v. forms 
a separate paragraph. 

? These numerals are so set in some places (e.g. Foll. 
34, 91, 92, 127, 163, 335, 339 U) as to leave no room for 
the Eusebian canons to be placed under them, so that the 
latter could not bave been designed to be subsequently 
added. Many other copies have the sections without the 
canons which we might have deemed essential to their 
completeness: e.g. Evan. Codd. CFHIPQRW?*Y Z. 
54. 59. 60. 68. 440. i*"- 8°, though s**- contains Euse- 
bius' Epistle to Carpian, What use the Ammonian sec- 


tions can serve, unless in connection with canons of 
harmony, those who have studied them most can the 
least tell. In the uncial fragment of S. Mark [rxth cen- 
tury], discovered by Mr Bradshaw in 1862 (Trin. Coll. 
Cant. B. virt. 5), and by him named W4, the Ammonian 
sections are placed alone in the margin, and a kind of 
table of the parallel passages in the other Gospels set at 
the foot of each column. A similar arrangement is found 
in Evan, E, which contains the canons besides; and 
Tischendorf has just informed me that it also appears in 
the six leaves of S. John, of the sixth century (much 
resembling in style Cod. T of the Gospels) now at S. 
Petersburg, and by him named T*. 

* These double pointe are occasionally misplaced, e. g. 
194 b. 1. 18; or even put in the Latin as well as in the 
Greek, e.g. 93 a. 1. 6. 


INTRODUCTION. xxi 


no attempt is made to accommodate the supplied parallel Greek (which is full of gross ttacisms, or 
errors in orthography), either to this Vulgate text, or to that of the Latin of the original scribe 
in Foll 8a, 177a. Since the other defects of the manuscript have not been thus supplied, we may 
conjecture that they arose in more modern times. 

Kipling assigns the cursive Latin pages to the 9th or 10th century, the uncial Greek and the 
mixed page (though on the reverse of the same leaves) to the 12th; and doubtless the small Latin 
hand looks at first sight very unlike the bolder Greek on the parallel page, while the ink of the 
former is a light faint brown, that of the latter a jet black. But this is just one of those cases 
of first impression which further investigation will completely remove. In the middle of one Greek 
page (Fol. 5 b secundae mands, 1. 13) the ink abruptly changes into a hue much resembling that of the 
Latin scribe, and it is impossible to examine Foll. 26, 3a, p. 420 of this volume without perceiving 
that the Latin was written subsequently to the Greek, and that its penman was reduced to all kinds 
of devices that the two might correspond page for page, though they could not line for line; since 
the Greck scribe who wished, in the supplementary portion of S. John, to set in seven of his leaves 
what had covered the eight that are lost, first unduly compressed his matter (pp. 420—424), and 
afterwards, on finding that he had overshot his aim, as absurdly spread it over the page (Foll. 7 5— 
8a). We are convinced—indeed the contrary supposition seems even a priori very improbable—that 
all the supplemental leaves were written in the same hand, that of a Latin of about the tenth century: 
the Latin of the bilingual page (Fol. 9 b, s. m.) is obviously due to the penman of all the Greek, and it 
sufficiently resembles the other Latin, due allowance being made for the former being in a large bold 
hand, the latter in a small and somewhat cramped one, That the scribe lived in the west of Europe is 
clear, as well from the shape of his Greek letters (especially epsilon and upsilon, so very like e and 
y: the vertical stroke of k is very tall: T' too is nearly the same as T), as also from such blunders as 
ραρρησια Fol. 2 b sec. man. |. 20, P being perpetually substituted by such persons for II, and vice versa’. 
See Facsimile Plate III, No. 18, wherein the last seven words of Mark xvi. 18, Latin and Greek, are 
given from this hand. 

Thus far we have described the contents of Codex Bezae, as reproduced in the body of our present 
work. It remains to speak of those numerous changes brought in by later scribes (some ten or twelve 
in number), from whose presence arises the chief difficulty of editing documents of this age and class, 
and which in the case of Codd. Sinaiticus, Claromontanus and others have largely tasked the patience, 
and put to a sharp test the experienced tact of Tischendorf himself On this portion of our labours 
we have spared no care or pains, and by means of the ensuing descriptions and the Facsimile Plates 
designed to illustrate them, we hope to make the general result of our researches intelligible to an 
attentive reader: requesting him perpetually to consult our Adnotationes (pp. 429—448) in all places 
where he has occasion to study the text, and to regard the date assigned in them to each alteration 
rather as the probable opinion than the dogmatic judgement of one who has done his best to arrive at & 
true conclusion. In these Adnotationes are also incorporated the few corrections and variations 
which a close and final comparison of the manuscript with his pages, as already printed, has suggested 


to the editor (e. g. Foll. 851. 8; 1261. 26; 1651. 33; 20561. 1). 


1 Thus in the bilingual Codex Augiensis of the ninth 
century, but plainly earlier than this supplement to Codex 
Bezae, we find opepua, Rom. ix. 7; παραρτωματι, s:bid. 
xi. I1 ; ayapyro, 1 Cor. x. 14; but ταπακαλει, 1 Tim. ii. 7; 
πληποφορεσον, 2 Tim. iv. 5: all corrected by the later 
scribe of the kindred Cod. Boernerianus. Again, we see 
in the Latin of these later leaves the usual forms and 
abridgements proper to its age; e.g. € for ae, aut for 


autem, 7 for -ur (Mark xvi. 17), n for non, c for con, efor . 


The account which we shall give 


est, qm for quoniam (John xix. 3 1), the note of interrogation 
(3) constantly. In the Greek w» and w are on the same page 
(Fol. 55), the apostrophus in the middle of a word (Jobn xx. 
1), the circumflex frequent (see p. 447), aspirates in John 
xix. 37; the acute accent in Fol. 36 1. 26; the upper stop 
mostly with the tail of a comma; in Fol. 351. 21’ lookslikethe 
Greek interrogation ; and we find such compendia scribendi 


as p», συ, στου (Fol. 65): this Latin always has L, not L 


xxii INTRODUCTION. 


of the liturgical and other matter set by various hands in the margin of this document, will be 
found rather curious in itself, and may tend to throw some light on the disputed question of the 
region in which Codex Bezae was written, and of the country in which it was preserved prior 
to the sixteenth century. Of these marginal notes we subjoin Facsimile specimens (Plate III, Nos. 
11, 12, 14, 15), and a full list at the end of the Adnotationes (pp. 448—452). 

(1) The text as it came from the original scribe is represented only so far as seen by the editor 
with his own eyes. In a few places (e. g. Foll. 366 1. 27, 37 a 1. 23, 43a 1. 29, 79a 1. 7, and on 
Fol. 510) letters have been omitted which Kipling inserted, and which were probably visible enough 
seventy years ago; in many others (e. g. Full. 26 ]. 1, 3261. 2, 35a ll. 24—27, 96 ll. 1—5), where 
mere fragments of letters and worda survive, which yet can be discerned without any doubt, 
they are scrupulously retained, though overlooked by him. In the numerous instances where later 
changes cover the readings of the first hand, every stroke that could be traced on repeated 
examination in a strong light by the aid of glasses has been faithfully noted, but no others, 
however easily they might be restored by conjecture: in one or two passages only such letters 
have been printed within brackets (Foll. 186 b 30; 444618). As in all.other manuscripts of the 
highest antiquity, some of the alterations found in Codex Bezae were made by the original writer (one 
evidently before he had completed the line, Mark xvi. 3), and must be held in the same estimation as 
if they had formed part of his work from the first: sometimes (e.g. Luke xxiv. 18) the Greek is 
revised by him, while the corresponding Latin is overlooked. We refer to him the minute interlinear 
corrections, 89 in number (60 in the Greek, 29 in the Latin columns), thinly scattered on our 
printed pages, and which, as being an integral portion of the penman's task, are unrecorded in our 
Adnotationes. They seem to have been lightly laid on with a dry pen in the act of subsequent 
revision, in the same firm character as the text, and are for the most part easily distinguishable 
from all more recent changes. Wetstein, indeed, who could be guided only by distant recollec- 
tion (supra p. xi) too often speaks of them as by & second hand; Kipling usually discriminates 
them correctly, and where I differ from him in assigning to a later corrector what he refers 
to the scribe or tke contrary, the reader is expressly apprised of the fact in the Adnotationes, 
where my conclusion is limited by such terms as me judice (e.g. Foll 104 b 9; 130 b 2; 
148 ὁ 27; 219 63; 290 b 18; 309 5 23; 28; 318 b 13; 31; 325 b 2) They seldom indicate 
any variation in the reading, but simply &mend manifest errors made in the act of transcribing, 
mostly by the insertion of one or two letters, more rarely of whole lines or parts of lines 
previously passed by through negligence (e.g. Foll. 51 b, 52 a; 52 b, 53 a; 262 b, 263 a; 
314 b, 315 a). Corrections of the slighter kind may be seen in our Facsimile Plate I, L 17 
(John xxi. 24) where v stands over or in oroc, and possibly (but not so certainly) the two dots 
over av in avro l 8, whith, together with the superfluous av, were partially erased by a more 
recent hand. A good example of the writer more important changes appears in Facsimile 
Plate III, No. 1, where oo ὃ av ἀπολέσει avryy (Mark viii. 35) and the parallel Latin qui auté 
perdiderit eam, at first dropped through the clerical blunder called ὁμοιοτέλευτον, are interpolated 
primá manu at the end of the first line and between the first and second on each page. As 
performing this office for the manuscript on its completion, the scribe is often termed o avrt- 
βάλλων, the comparer. 

The present seems the most fit place for speaking of a practice of the original scribe 
to which frequent reference is made in our Adnotationes. Since the ink or paint which he used 
had no metallic base, it might be almost entirely washed out from the vellum by a sponge 
applied immediately. Although a few erasures may have been made by him on a subsequent 


INTRODUCTION, xxiii 


review (eg. 75 a1 3; 118 b 1. 4; 127 b 1. 16; 135 61 1; 192 b 1. 33); his chief mode 
of amending faults of transcription was by means of the sponge, employed so early that the 
gradual dryiug of the ink may be distinctly traced in the increasing faintness of the portion 
obliterated as we come towards its end. Hence the letters (see Facsimile Plate II, 1. 4, a under e ° 
in diligebat), or words or whole lines which lie under the present text, quite thickly in many 
places, nearly all distinctly visible, though almost completely overlooked by my predecessors': of 
all these I have thought it right to render as complete an account as possible; the cases amount 
to as many as 234 in all. 

From carefully observing these peculiarities, apparently so slight and insignificant, we are led 
to the interesting and valuable fact that Codex Bezae, as well the Latin as the Greek pages, 
was copied from an older model similarly divided in respect to the lines or verses. This will 
plainly appear from the multitude of places in which the words washed out came to be written 
because the scribe allowed his eye to wander from the proper line to one a little before or after 
it; and after detectiug his mistake (all the sooner by reason of the parallel lines on the oppo- 
site page) immediately expunged what he had set down in error, and substituted the proper 
words in its room (see 253 b 20; 256 b 15; 268 a 27; 295 b 11). One example out of 
hundreds, any one of them adequate to prove the point at issue, shall be discussed at length, 
because it will also incidentally shew that the pages in Codex Bezae and tis exemplar could not 
have been identical. In Fol 435 b 2 under py λαλειν era τω ovo we can faintly trace by the 
aid of an eye-glass καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοι, all but completely washed out. These words commence 
the last line of the preceding Greek page (434 6), and standing as they did on his model im- 
mediately before the line he had just finished, the scribe heedlessly repeated them at first, and 
then cancelled them forthwith. The same appears from Foll. 89 ὁ 32, 33; 90 ὁ 1. On the same 
principle we can fully explain six several instances of the inversion of complete lines on the 
Latin page, which ought to correspond with the Greek, respectively noted by a, B, y, 8 (or by 
some of them), set in the margin by the first hand: they occur on Foll. 209 a; 220 a; 233 a; 
264 a; 276 a; 504 a; in the second, fourth and sixth of which passages the source of the 
error can be distinctly traced to words the scribe afterwards expunged: e.g. in Fol. 220 a, 
profluvium sanguinis now legible under tunicam ejus l 7 was the proper ending of the line 
parallel with 1. 8 of the Greek; having once written it, the scribe goes cn to what is pro- 
perly 1. 9, but finding out his blunder as soon as he had completed 1. 16, he then subjoins 
the true 1. 8, substitutes (unicam ejus for profluvium sanguinis in l. 7, and puts a f y in 
the margin for our guidance. The case of Fol. 264 a, if studied with our Adnotationes, will 
be found even more complicated, yet just as satisfactory: in Fol 504 a, the eye, misled by in 
navem (eo ro πλοιονὴ yet discernible under invicem l 18, recovers itself in one of the lost lines, 
to which B was doubtless prefixed’. 


1 Kipling, if he can be said to have a system, nyste- 
matically disregards them. Mill saw apxeon Matth. xxv. 9; 
Wetstein several other instances, see above p. xii. Indeed 
in Acts xvii. το Wetstein was misled by the first 3 in 3:3 
under ὕπο to state that axo wasread p. m., just as through 
his over-anxiety Mill in Acts xvii. 4 transforms eua ca 
into σίλα δια, the 3 supplied in the vacant space being 
eimply read off from another page. 

3 [n Fol. 218 b 31, this errur of the eye is made in 
the Greek, although the Latin is quite correct, but is left 


untouched by the scribe: the requisite change was re- 
served for a comparatively modern hand. 

3 The same process applied to the lines of the Codex 
S'naiticus proves that it was copied from some document, 
probably an Egyptian papyrus roll (Scrivener, Collation 
of Cod. Sinait. Introd. pp. xiv, xv), similarly arranged 
with itself in lines containing on an average from 12 to 
14 lettera, or, when small letters are added on to the end 
of the line, as many as 16. Let us illustrate our state- 
ment by two or three examples. (1!) John xix. ?5, 26, 


XXIV INTRODUCTION. 


(2) Of readings to be ascribed to persons who lived posterior to the original penman, those 
of A must be first considered. Since he is not quite contemporaneous, and may be referred to 
the end of the sixth century, the appellation of o διορθώτης the corrector, would not be applied to 
him; nor indeed do we find many such critical emendations in this manuscript as would proceed from 
an early hand engaged on the revision of the text: speaking generally, its most ancient changes 
relate chiefly to the removal of transcriptural errors. Of this hand we give two specimens (Fac- 
simile Plate III, No. 2), the former from Matth. v. 25 «sev evvowy tw αντιδικω cov raxv, to which 
«og is so neatly added by A, that it is distinguished from the rest of the line mainly by the light- 
ness of its strokes: I once regarded it as by the first hand, and as such have wrongly retained it 
in the text (see p. 11). Of x¢:, the Ammonian section, we have spoken above, p. xx. The second 
example is from Acts xv. 34, where over iav in εδοξε δε rw σειλεα exyservat αὐτουσ (the final σ is p. m.), 
A places προσ in minute but firm characters: just as small are pt Fol. 300 b 1. 6, w epyxe Fol. 
502 5 1. 23, and all much smaller than the interlinear emendations of the first writer (see p. xxii). 
The ink of A often differs little from that of the original scribe. He touches the Latin very rarely 
(Matth. xvii. 20; John vi. 25) in John v. 32 to make it suit his changes in the Greek. This 
hand often places e over the initial « sometimes improperly enough (e.g. Foll. 1385 L 18; 1465 
]. 1; 153 ὃ 1. 19, and elsewhere; 215 6 1. 13; 229 6 11. 8; 10; 12; 244 51.2; 268 ὁ 1. 25 ; 2756 
]. 3; 283 61.30; 28551. 251; 347 b 1.9; 42361. 29): in Fol. 222 ὁ 1l. 23, 24 the change is some- 
what more extensive than usual. We note 181 alterations by this early hand, pretty evenly dis- 
tributed throughout the manuscript. Some of his emendations of the letters of the text itself are 
very neat (e.g. Foll. 3025 1. 1; 303 ὁ 11. 22, 29; 325 b 1. 24; 327 51.9; 343 b 1. 24; 344 δ]. 23). 
About Foll. 311—347 his ink became very thin and pale. 

(3) Somewhat later (probably of the seventh century) and not always to be discriminated with 
ease from A (see however Fol. 338 6 1l. 20, 29; 340 6 1l. 14, 23, 30), is a very old hand, called by us 
B, to which may be assigned most of the breathings and accents enumerated above (p. xix, note 4), 
and the greater part of the marks of dialysis and apostrophi (p. xix), though a few of these last must 
be due to A (see p. xix, note 3). The style of B is less firm and elegant than A's, his ink of an ashy 
or slate-like tinge, and like A he usually places his emendations in small characters between the lines, 
though he sometimes annexes them to the text, or changes the original letters. Facsimile Plate III, 
No. 3 contains instances of both, viz. (1) Acts xiii. 10, where racc over ipa in και ραδιουργιασ wt δια- 
Bodov and omnes over fal in the parallel Latin are both written by B (see too Matth. xiii. 13 Zat.), 
who has also changed ito: into we by erasing « and the right side of o and inserting the tongue 
of ε: exactly like πασηὴσ here is ενὕπνιοισ Acts ii. 17. (2) Acts vi. 9 x ἀσιασ added to xat των ἀπὸ 
κιλικιασ. This compendium for « though common in the oldest manuscripts, does not occur in Cod. 
Bezae earlier than by this hand (e. g. Matth. iv. 16; xxvii. 31; Luke xv. 20; xvi. 18; and in 16 


ἢ μαγδαληνὴ και. Insert the omitted words thus, and 
the sense, utterly ruined before, is now complete: 
vy μαγδαληνὴ ἐσ ov 
du» τὴν upa κα. After completing μαγδαληνὴ the 
scribe's eye wandered to the corresponding place in the 
line below: it must be added that μητερα, which is always 
written in full in Cod. Beza» (see p. xviii), is thus abridged 
in Cod. Sinaiticus in 13 out of its 23 places in the N. T. 
(2) Apoc. xviii. 16 ovat-5 πολισ μενὴ is mere nonsense: 
restore it thus, ovdi:5 πολισ ἡ μεγαλη 

ἢ περιβεβλημένη , or possibly (as in 
Cod. Alexandrinus) the third article might have been 
absorbed in the preceding 7, and the first line ended in 
ad in small letters, as usual, the second line beginning 


with Ay rep. (3) Jbid. xxii. 3, 

worapou ενθεν ποταμοῦ evOer 

kat ποιοὺυν kaproug: this should stand καὶ ενθεν ξυλου ἴω 
NO ποιουν Kapwoug 

That ev6ev and not ἐντευθεν or execOey should be read in 

the second line appears certain from the fact that this 

manuscript is singular in having e6e for the first errev- 

θεν. In Luke xxi. 8, John xii. 25 complete lines must 

be inserted: in John iv. 45 two complete lines; and so 


apxorvrec Τῶν € 
perhaps in Luke xxii. 25 ξουσιαζουσιν av which is clearly 


& case in point, though I see not at present the best 
method of rectifying it. 


INTRODUCTION. XXV 


other places). Where v ἐφελκυστικὸν is omitted p. m., B sometimes supplies it aLove the line; e. g. 
Foll. 116 51. 20; 120 511.3; 4; 150 δ]. 8; 249 δ]. 2, and in 5 other cases. Ἁ has the v in like 
manner Foll. 261 δ]. 19 (cf. Adnot.); 507 b 1. 5. This hand has made about 327 changes. 

(4, 5) The two next correctors, though their respective emendations can be separated (C being 
neater and mostly much smaller than D, and his ink of a brighter and more yellowish brown cast, 
while D's is coarse, and often looks as if blotting-paper or some such material had been applied 
to it) may both have lived towards the end of the seventh century’. They sometimes shew a alight 
tendency to leaning, mostly towards the right. To C belongs (Facsim. Pl. III, No. 4) πεμπω over 
axo in αποστελλω υμασ John xx. 21, where the shape of μ (which C repeats several times: e. g. 
Fol. 508 b 1. 26, unless this be B's), though not often met with in the earl:est vellum documents, 
is frequent enough in the papyri of Herculaneum and Hyperides of the first century. D wrote 
at above er in eurev avro tw erÀgoovrt (N, see p. xvi, note 1), Luke xxiii. 43. In Facsim. Pl. III, 
No. 5 appears a case of D's rude changes in the body of the text, which first stood «roc ἡρξατο 
παρησιαζεσθαι «v συναγωγὴ Acts xviii. 26, where (as well as setting the ry over vo) he obliterates 
al the H except the first vertical line (placing awkwardly at the top of iv the curves of Y) and 
prefixes to it a smaller o out of the range of the lines. See also his corrections in Foll. 245 ὁ 1. 31; 
492 b 1L 4; 25; 494 b 1. 21—23. He sometimes adds v ἐφελκυστικὸν at the end of a line (e. g. Foll. 
217 b1. 31; 259 δ]. 27; 315 b 1. 21; 489 D 1. 3), and sometimes, like B, over the text (Fol. 417 ὃ 
l 10; 495 51. 18; 31; 498 b 1. 15): also « in Fol. 495 61.10. D appears once in the Latin, to 
make it correspond with his correction of the Greek, in Fol. 494 a 1.27. In all C is found 130 
times, D 163 times; D most often in the Acts. 

(6) E inserts smaller letters over the lines, of much the same general appearance as C's, only 
with fresher ink and of a more modern look and in a straggling and broken style Such is arye 
set over ove in xat ernpwrncey avrovg οἰερευσ Aeyov Acts v. 27 in Kassim. Pl. III, No. 6; the Latin 
R betraying his nation. In John xiv. 28; Acts vii. 34 we find (apparently in this hand) the com- 
pendium M for pov, nearly as in Cod. Sinaiticus: other characteristic specimens of this scribe appear 
in Matth. xiii. 2; xxvii. 46 (where a letter in the text is changed by E); John iii. 29; iv. 38; 
Mark v. 30; Acts ii. 9; iv. 20 (where 7 is like h in English); xv. 40 and xvi 4 (where T is much 
like Γ). It occurs 72 times in our Adnotationes. The addition at the end of Fol. 308 5 1. 24 is very 
doubtfully ascribed to E, by reason of the brightness of the ink: the Latin alterations also in Foll. 
420 a1 25; 429 a1. 20 (see also 434 4 1. 20; 483a 1. 16) may have been written by it, as well as 
the corresponding Greek. 

(7) The words appended to καὶ καθισαι ext rov θρονον avrov Acta ii. 30 in Facsim. Pl. III, 
No. 7, viz. προειδωσ ἐλαλησεν περι tno (the στίχος we mentioned p. xviii as being dropped at this 
place) are supplied by a hand (F) younger than any yet named, and seldom met with (see however 
Matth. xii. 19; xxvii 13 and 5 other places in the Gospels) except in the Acts, where it is em- 
ployed about 27 times, as here, to supply omitted clauses at the end of lines, and to make the cor- 
responding changes in the text (e.g. Acts ii. 13; 33; 45; xx. 26; xxii. 6)  F writes in clear 
uncial characters, a little smaller than those of the first scribe, with thin strokes, in blackish ink, 
without breathings or accents, The additions at the foot of Fol. 163 b seem to be by this hand, but 


1 Kipling mingles the emendations of our A and B to retain the distinction ; even if it be deemed over-nice, 
under one bead A (i.e. antiquissimus), our C and D are the error is on the right side. A and B can be separated 
included in his P (i.e. perantiquus), our E represents with ease, as can the several hands later than all these, 
his V (i.e. vetus). I have sometimes doubted whether which Kipling includes under the general name R (i. e. 
C and E are not identical, but on the whole I am disposed recens), such as our H and K. 


d 


xxvi INTRODUCTION. 


the two lines in sloping uncials at the foot of Fol. 160 6 look more like J's (see p. xxvii), though 
not so large as thé rest of his F appears once in the Latin (Acts xxi. 18), doubtless, to accom- 
modate the version to a change it made in the lost Greek. 

(7) The next scribe G, of about the eleventh century, is one of the most diligent, least in- 
structive, and the most troublesome to an editor, of all the many correctors of this manuscript. 
He uses à kind of yellow ochre (though it sometimes looks rather browner), and his rude, Gothic- 
looking, sometimes angular, characters cannot be confounded with any other. Facsim. Pl. III, No. 8 
represents one line of the Greek and one of the parallel Latin at the foot of 59 b, 60 a, «acra. 
δεδεμμενα εν row ovpavow erunt ligata in caelis Matth. xviii. 18, and the word voz in the margin 
of Acts ii. 2 e£. factum est repente caelo echo, as an alternative for the Greek echo, instead of which 
both the Vulgate and Cod. Laud. 35 have sonus: although in Matth. xv. 18; 20; xxv. 25 G cor- 
rects the Latin of our manuscript from the Vulgate. G touches the Greek only in four other places 
(Foll. 417 63; 4216 21 ; 426 b 15 ; 20, besides inserting the breathings and accents in Acts xvi. 
19, 20; seo p. xix, note 4): for the rest he confines himself to the Latin, busily correcting the lapses 
of the scribe and amending his spelling (especially the interchange of b and w), but after Fol. 118 a 
(unless the scrawl on 280 a be his, as is probable) he ceases altogether up to the beginning of the 
Acts (416 a), leaving off after 428 a, unless indeed he re-appears once 438 a 1.4. The marginal 
addition 73 a 1l. 9—16 looks a little like G's hand, but is not so old, besides that the ink is too 
brown and good'. His corrections are 283 in all. 

(8,9) H aud K are both recent, the former somewhat later than G, the latter quite modern, 
probably not many centuries old. In Facsimile Pl III, No. 9, we have one of the cases, just enu- 
merated, in which G touches the Greek, oc$voc in the margin being due to him.  H, conceiving 
this correction of ex xapzov tno καρδιασ avrov Acts ii. 30 insufficient, proceeds to erase xapdia and 
substitute oodvo in its room; the earlier and true reading of Codex Bezae is just legible under 
the later word. This violent process of presumed amendment is perpetual throughout the Acts, 
as indeed our Adnotationes abundantly shew; and renders the study of the book in this manu- 
script peculiarly irksome to one who is bound to give account for every change. In No. 10 Acts ii. 
20 o «ioc. μεταστρεφεται ewkoroa was the original reading: B in its smallest hand placed Hc (now 
nearly invisible) over the « (now wr) which followed $: but K erases nc of B and over the first ε 
(which B had probably already changed into a) sets a, and then rudely retraces φισται εισκ in ἃ coarse 
dark brown ink or pigment. I have sometimes indicated by K such very recent changes in several 
hands as Fol. 35033; 6a 27; 6622; 32617; 47627; 50613; 5364; 6561; 26; 88 b 29; 
90521; 167 b 8. H. is employed 97 times, K about 74. 

Hitherto the various hands described have been engaged in correcting the text. We have now 
to speak of the several persons who have left traces of their diligence (well or ill bestowed) in the 
margin and elsewhere; and principally of the writer of the Ammonian sections. 

(1) On the purpose and general character of these enough has been said (p. xx): we are at 
present chiefly concerned with their date. Now it is evident from a careful comparison of the 
marginal numerals of the Ammonian sections with the great body of the liturgical annotations 
(written in thick, clumsy uncial letters with ink of a purple hue), especially in the Gospels, that 
they are the work of one scribe, whom we shall call L. This clearly appears as well from many 
other places, as from the study of Foll. 278 b, 279 b. On the former page the necessity of keeping 
right the numbers of the sections has forced L to make the only change in the text (excepting Matth. 


1 'This is the hand Porson speaks of as *' Teutonic, nearly resembling the Anglo-Saxon” (Brit. Crit. Vol. rit. p. 141). 


INTRODUCTION. xxvii 


xiv. 34 and possibly Luke viii. 41) he attempts throughout the volume, by inserting in Luke xxiii. 34 
at the foot of Fol. 278 b the omitted section TK rx (o be ισ' ir ἐλεγεν πατιρ adeo avrow ov yap οιδασιν Ty 


ποιουσιν), as necessary to be placed beforo section τκα iu ]. 33 (see Facsimile Pl. III, No. 11, and 
infra p. 256): here we see that the added clause is the 16 work of the same writer as the sections On 
turning to Fol. 279 b it is equally evident that the liturgical note in small uncials avvayvoopa εἰσ 
Tw παρασκευγὴν (compare too the spelling with warp, Luke xxiii. 34) is in the self-same hand, as 
are also the numerals abreast of it Te: (Facsimile, as above). These again are plainly written by 
rer 
the scribe L, who penned the great mass of the other notations of proper I lessons though in UN 
lettera, such as Fol 244 b, 1]. 2—5 ἀνναγνοσμα περι τῇ caf Barov, with por : by the side of it: 
Foll 254 b, 257 b, and elsewhere L's lines are longer than in this last specimen, the uncials being 
sometimes smaller (e.g. 91 b, 95 b)  Respecting his age, not Kipling only (Praef. p. xv), whose 
opinion might carry little weight, but even D. Schulz has ventured to say, *" Haec glossemata an- 
tiquissima, si minus a primá quidem manu, at certe ante seculum septimum jamjam adscripta esse” 
(Disputatio de Cod. D Cantabr., Vratislaw, 1827, p. 10): the clumsiness of the uncials has even been 
considered a sort of proof that they were written in Egypt, inasmuch as they bear some kind of 
resemblance to the Coptic characters. L appears in the Acts only on Foll. 423 6, 435 b, 500—502 6. 
A bare inspection of Facsimile Pl. III, No. 12 will prove that L, instead of being dated before 
the seventh century, cannot be placed earlier than the ninth. At the top of 150 b, in the left or 
outer margin, is seen a liturgical note t ry xvpiikg των προφότησματων, and under it the labarum 
with a and «, all in late unicals leaning to the right (J): its date cannot well be anterior to the 
ninth century, but ἐξ must be older than L, which adapta the annotation to its own system by writing 
over it avvayvoopa ep and by tracing over τῇ κυρι the letters ro κυρι in its own paint of a red or 
purple tinge, though it does not follow the error of the earlier Scribe in regard to προφδτησματων 


(see pp. 449, 450 ad calcem) : L added at the same time ap (i.e. ἀρχὴ) at the head of the column, 
and the number of the section qn yu: The barbarous orthography too is a further argument for a 
lower date. It is possible that J wrote the omitted lines in Foll. 160 b, 161a; at any rate these 
leaning uncials bear some resemblance in the Greek (see p. xxvi). 

(2) In Facsimile Pl. ITI, No. 13 we have er appworove χειρασ επιθησουσέιν" και καλωσ εξουσιν᾽ 
(Mark xvi, 18) and its parallel Latin (from Fol. 9 b secundae mands) Super egrotos manus imponent 
[the double letter N'as in the writing of the original scribe] et bene habebunt! for which see above, 
p. xxi and note ]. 

(3) The scrawl found in the upper margin of SS. Matthew and Luke and a few places of 
S. John, but in the lower margin of S. Mark, is represented in Nos. 14, 15 Facsimile Pl. III, and 
an interpretation of it in ordinary Greek letters in our Adnotationes, pp. 451—2. Those in S. Mark 
consist of moral apophthegms, some of them silly enough: the rest are rírÀou or summaries of the 
contents of the page. No. 14 is found at the foot of Fol. 302 b eav yor [i. e. evo] eXevxovoiv σε + 
in capital letters (M,, with whom <=o, y- v), as are all in SS. Matthew and Mark; No. 15 is at 
the head of Fol 205 b, and was not easily decyphered even by the help of my learned friend, 
H. Bradshaw, Esq., Fellow of King’s College, whose great and constant assistance throughout the 
whole work I wou:d thankfully acknowledge once for all: it runs in a cursive scrawl (M,) περι Savy.’ 


1 The insertion of the guttural y here and in Aevycror lettera, and ekporeugomenon from Mabillon de re diploma- 
Fol. 204 b after v, of v before y in rapavypa (πραγμα) tica, lib. v. p. 366 (1681). Mabillon also gives (p. 367) 
Foll. 301 b, 303 a, and of y even by L in rapackevy- Foll. pisteugo from Thuan. Col. No. 537, of the tenth century, 
95 5, 99 b, 279 b, points to a Western and Celtic origin of and Wetstein compares evavyayyoay I Tim. i. I9 from 
all this marginal writing. See Wetst. N. T. Proleg. p. 31, Cod. Alexandrinus. 


who cites ptsteugo from a Creed in the Bodleian in Latin 


xxvlil INTRODUCTION, 


wre (i.e. ore) ἰσηλθεν ev ro θυσιαστιρηδ & payw Too αρτὸσ Tia προσθεσεοσ (i. 6. φαγειν Tove oprova rc, 
à being equivalent to ov) Unlike as the two hands may seem, it is just possible that they are 
the work of one scribe of about the tenth century, for in Fol. 190 ὁ # συμεων x avac rwr προφητιδοσ, 
συμεων is in capitals resembling those of S. Matthew, the four following words in the running 
scrawl, and all three dec dedly written at the sume time, and with the same ink. The apophthegms 
in S. Mark may be by a different person, whom we will call M,. 

In the list of liturgical directions (Adnotationes, pp. 448—450) several other letters besides L are 
employed to indicate the penmen engaged on this manuscript. I occurs in 130 5, 197 5; it is quite 
as early as L (of about the ninth century) in uncials leaning to the right, with very thick down strokes. 
The writer of the marginal scrawl in the Gospels, or one of them if all be not by the same hand, 
seems to have scribbled the marginal notes in Foll. 191 5 (where he is seen from 1. 25 to be later 
than J), 347 b, and throughout the Acts. We reserve the notation of simple M for the hand that 
made the coarse corrections of the twelfth century in Matth. xxvii. 65, 66, with the liturgical note 
in 132 6, in a round semi-cursive style and for another (somewhat earlier) which occurs about 
twelve times in the Gospels. — M, is assigned to the annotator of Foll 191 b, 347 b, and some twenty 
places in the Acts, where the ink differs from that of the scribe last mentioned, though the writer 
may be the same. N indicates a large scrawl in charcoal (as black-lead would now be used) rather 
than in ink, chiefly scattered throughout the early pages of the manuscript to denote the beginnings 
(apx) and ends (reA) of Church lessons, so faint and evanescent as to be barely legible, and some- 
times even invisible to the naked cye. Some of these may have been overlooked by the editor, in 
spite of his best care, and Mr Bradshaw’s ever ready and intelligent help. A large vulgar uncial 
scrawl, dating early in the twelfth century, in vile brown paint, is denoted by O (e.g. Foll. 416 8, 
418 b, 420 b, 462 b, 488 δ) eight times in the Acts, where also O, indicates in Fol. 419 5 a neat but 
quite modern note. All these liturgical notices doubtless refer to the established ritual of the Eastern 
Church, and more time than to some they might seem worth has been spent in assigning them to 
their different days. From our Adnotationes it will been seen that L at least is very careless, often 
pointing out the wrong place for the commencement of the lessons, and in fourteen instances even 
substituting Saturday for Sunday or vice versd. 

The danger of inferring identity of hand-writing from seeming resemblance in the shade of 
the ink in these very old documents (see p. xxi) appears clearly in the case of a mark (/ ) which 
occurs 45 times in both languages throughout Kipling’s edition at the beginning of lines, a little 
in the margin, but which in this volume is uniformly rejected. It is firmly and neatly made, and 
in many cases no difference in colour can be detected between it and the letters of the original 
scribe: yet that it must be at least four centuries later is evident from Fol. 206 b 18 where / is 
written over and partly covers the Ammonian numerals μὲ, and from Foll. 233 ὃ 20, 284 ὃ 9 
where it is placed over the double points(:) which respectively follow pre and ρλη. It seldom 
coincides with the commencement of a lesson, and not always with a pause in the sense, so that 
I am unable to understand what end it was designed to serve’, 

Where mere strokes or points are our only guides, therefore, it is always a little uncertain 
whether a correction is due to an earlier or more recent reviser. This we have already seen in the 
instance of the dialysis and apostrophus (above p. xix), and hence it seemed advisable to designate 


1 / is found at the beginning of the following lines: 2274 7; 2336 20; 21340 9; 247410; 24907; 27; 
13 b 19; 14 b 30; 26 b and 27 a 1l. 29; 39 a 29; 50b 250a 27; 30; 271a 2; 287 ὃ 28; 303a 16; 317 a 11; 
32; 595 12; 64623; 78521; 79 b 29; 81 b and 82a 338a 22; 343 b 13; 423015: add 48 b 21, not seen by 
Il. 11; 85518; 91038; 985 30; 104821; 115b 10; Kipling. ‘The following seem later, 299 5 16; 306 b 15; 
124 ὃ 30; 127a 3; 153 b 22; 29; 178622; 2026 3; 331 ὃ 31, and over initial O 329 ὃ 26. 


203a 31; 206 b 13; 209 b 24; 221 b 18; 24; 236 b 10; 


INTRODUCTION. xxix 


in the Adnotationes simply as 8. m. (secundá manu) all mere erasures (such as that of -ro in the six 
places named 191 b 1. 24), and the numerous points and obeli employed in all ages to cancel what 
is to be recalled: we cite s.m. in no less than 422 places. Of these the points placed over the 
letters to be removed seem very old, perhaps from the hand of A or B, and are often found (e. g. 
Facsimile Pl. I, 1. 8) where a later hand has altogether erased the letters (e.g. Foll. 11566; 1246 
27; 125 b 26). 

Strokes ' " or even "" (Fol. 420 6 19, 20) are occasionally set over words to denote that their 
order should be changed, ten times in the Acts (e. g. Fol. 415 5 10), thrice elsewhere (Foll. 52 ὁ 19; 
68 68; 165 b 32). These are, of course, distinctly recorded in the Adnotationes, being really of the 
nature of various readings, as are also some instances where a late hand (mostly K) rejects or expresses 
doubt about a word by drawing a line under it (e.g. Foll. 71 5 9; 118 a 29; 126 Ὁ 2; 128 a 28; 
31). In the Acts especially some sixteen whole clauses are placed within brackets «^ or <“* by no 
early hands, which yet we have carefully noted. There are also many other marks, probably intended 
for reference, placed in the margin by recent scribes, which it seemed needless to enumerate :—such 
as *, ;, 4, |, ) (Fol. 432 a 26), < (Fol. 458 b ad calcem), c (Fol. 307 ὁ 12, 13); although Kipling 
has strangely inserted in his text some of the most modern of them (e.g. Foll. 4425 8; 12; 464 b 
l7 &.). The numbers of the chapters, set down apparently by Beza and Bentley, disfigure the margin 
of the whole manuscript. 

If to the corrections we have enumerated as made in the text by various hands we add 20 
places noted where it has been rewritten, 17 where changes are made in the letters by the first 
hand, and 59 instances where dots, apparently accidental (see however p in 336 a l. 30), are set 
over letters prima manu, the Adnotationes Editoris discuss as many as 2149 matters pertaining to 
the work of the original scribe, besides those which relate to the Appendix (pp. 447— 8). 

It is really wonderful that an excellent scholar like David Schulz should have so lightly ac- 
quiesced in Kipling's belief that Cod. Bezae was written in Egypt, and even have reproduced his 
very unsound reasons for such a groundless notion (Kipling, Praef. p. xii; Schulz, Disputatio de Cod. 
D. pp. 6—10). The rudeness of the Latin version will soon be seen to spring from other causes 
than mere ignorance of that language (see Chap. III) and the long list of Alexandrian forms, if 
we may so term them, which will be accumulated: hereafter (see Chap. IV), will not be found more 
extensive or remarkable than in other copies of high antiquity; while the errors of transcription 
in the Greek text certainly do not exceed those found in the Cod. Sinaiticus, As regards the proper 
lessons for Saturdays set down among the liturgical notes, which Kipling, on the supposed authority 
of Cassian, conceives to have been & peculiar ordinance of the Egyptian monasteries, they prevail 
and always have prevailed, throughout the whole Eastern Church!, and are found in nearly all 
codices dating from the eighth century downwards, and consequently older than the earliest hand 
which was employed on the marginal annotations of D. Kipling’s plea that John iv. used to be 
read in Egypt on the Saturday before the Nile was expected to rise, and that the lessons appointed 


1 He cites Cassian, Institut. Lib. 111. c. 2, when speak- 
ing of the perpetual service kept up in the monasteries of 
Egypt: ““ Quamobrem exceptis vespertinis ac nocturnis 
congregationibus nulla apud eos per diem publica sollem- 
nitas absque die sabbathi vel dominicá celebratur, in qui- 
bus horá tertiá sacrae communionis obtentu conveniunt." 
But though Kipling quotes c. 9 of the same book, he did 
not observe that Cassian describes this keeping of Saturday 
as quite general ‘‘Quas [vigilias] a tempore praedica- 
tionis apostolicae, quo religio ac fides Christiana fundata 
est, per universum orientem idcirco statutum est illuscescente 


sabbato debere celebrari—because Christ lay in the grave 
throughout that day. Credner (Beitráge zur Einleitung 
in die biblischen Schriften, Halle, 1832, 1. p. 510) saw 
clearly that Kipling had proved too much, and alleges 
Constit. Apost. V. 15, VII. 23, τὸ σάββατον μέντοι xal 
Th» κυριακὴν éoprdtere ὅτι τὸ μὲν δημιουργίας ἐστὶν ὑπό- 
μγημα ἡ δὲ ἀναστάσεως... “Ἐν δὲ μόνον σάββατον ὑμῖν 
φνλακτέον ἐν ὅλῳ ἐνιαυτῷ, τὸ τῆς τοῦ kvplov ταφῆς, ὅπερ 
γηστεύειν προσῆκεν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ éoprájew. Both fast and 
feast implied a religious service. 


XXX INTRODUCTION. 


for the corresponding Sundays related to the Lord's walking on the sea (Praef. ubi supra), has just 
no weight at all. John iv. 3 is marked simply as avvayvoopa “reading”; it is the Greek lesson for 
the fourth Sunday after Easter: while as regards the other lessons referred to, which can only be 
Matth. xiv. 22—33; John vi 16—21; Mark vi. 45 —56, the last of them is not noted at all, that 
from S. John merely as ἀννάγνοσμα, though it is the Greek lesson for the second Saturday after 
Easter, that from S. Matthew is actually set down avvayvoopa περὴ το cafjaro, though it does not 
belong to a Saturday, but to the ninth Sunday of S. Matthew. 

A copy of the Greek Scriptures, furnished with a Latin version, would most likely be written among 
a people with whom Latin was vernacular. It would require a great deal of proof to rebut this 
very natural conclusion, while on the other hand every thing we ses of Codex Bezae tends powerfully 
to confirm it. The very order in which the Gospels stand is peculiar to the West (above, p. xiv): 
our manuscript has it in common only with the great codices of the Old Latin Vercellensis (a), Pala- 
tinus (e), Brixianus (^), the Gothic version, and a Greek copy seen by Druthmar, a monk of Corbey 
in the ninth century'; Cureton's Syriac places S. Mark second, but S. Luke (not S. John) last*. The 
same inference may also be drawn from the insertion of Latin letters in the Greek text; e.g. τυῦλοι 
Matth. xi. 5; αἀπεσταϊκεν John v. 38; papcoy Fol. 296 ὁ title; ψαζοφυλακιον Mark xii. 43; apost Fol. 
469 b title: and of Greek letters in the Latin, from the mere strangeness of the task, e.g. y for u in 
illym Matth. xv. 22; cyminum ibid. xxiii. 23 ; won¢ in the Latin Fol. 196 51. 13; x from x in aenox 
Luke iii. 37 ; vpocrita ibid. vi. 42 (so xi. 399; Mark vii. 6); karissimus Mark ix. 7; magixa Acts viii. 9, 
and the letters washed out (as stated in the Adnotationes) in Foll. 129 61.6; 308 a 1. 20; 478a1. 20; 
481a]. 1. Add to these, as indications of a Western penman, those unmistakeable Latin forms and 
terminations brought into the text by the analogy of the Latin ; such are θηνσαυροσ Matth. ii. 11 ; xiii. 
44 only, but thensaurus always in the version ; σαμαριτανων ibid. x. 5 only; δανιηλου xxiv. 15 ; λε- 
vpocov xxvi. 6 (leprosi in the version always) ; Aeyewvgo xxvi. 53 (but Acywy Luke viii. 30; Mark 
v. 9); φλαγελλωσασ xxvii 26; Mark xv. 15; serpovo nomin. John xiii. 24; exerec Mark vi. 38 ; 
ypaBarrow ibid. vi. 55 only: x ibid. xiv. 5, both in the Greek and Latin, for Syvapwv; βασιλεουσ 


1 «Vidi tamen librum Evangelii Graecb scriptum, 
qui dicebatur S. Hilarii fuisse, in quo primi erant, Mat- 


thaeus Jobannes, et post [alis prits] alii duo. Interrogavi ' 


vero Eufemium Graecum cur hoc ita esset: dixit mihi, m 
similitudine boni agricolae, qui quos fortiores habet boves 
primos jungit." Christian. Druthmar. Matthaei Expositio, 
p. rr, Basil. 1528. Wetstein first cited this passage 
(N.T. Prolegom. p. 28) to shew that the liber Evangelii 
Graec2 scriptus seen by Druthmar, a native of Aquitania, 
might be Cod. Bezae itself, to which however, his descrip- 
tion does not answer very well. Marsh (Michaelis, 11. 
p. 701, ed. 1793), observing that ἐκπορευομένῳ διὰ στόματος 
8co0 (ch. iv. 4) was wanting both in Druthmar's Latin and in 
Cod. D, calls for an examination of the former to ascertain 
whether the Greek copy he employed (for Druthmar knew 
Greek) was our manuscript or not. I have found on trial 
that Druthmar usually follows the Vulgate, and never in 
the least resembles the Latin of Cod. Bezae; that when 
he departs from the Vulgate to accord with D, the manu- 
scripte of the Old Latin more or less agree with him (e. g. 
Matth. iv. 4. ἀποκριθεὶς δὲ ὁ ἴδ ; ix. 4, εἶπεν abrois); 
and that the several editions of Druthmar himself vary 
so mucb, that that of Basle contains the very clause 
whose absence (in other editions) was noticed by Marsh. 
From such premises no safe conclusion can be drawn. 


Kipling, in his heedlessness, urges yet another argument ; 
namely, that the supplemental Latin leaf of Cod. D, 
containing Matth. ii. 21—iii. 7, exactly resembles (‘‘ om- 
nino convenire" Praef. p. xvi) the Corbey manuscript 
(f) deposited in that very monastery in which Druthmar 
was a monk: never caring to remark that this Latin page 
is taken word for word from the more recent Vulgate, 
but assimilates less completely with ff. 

3 Christian Hermansen the Dane, no unworthy successor 
of his distinguished countrymen Adler and Zoega, in his 
valuable Disputatio de Cod. Evangeliorum Syriaco a Curetono 
typis descripto (Hauniae 1859), together with the familiar 
instances given above, cites Tertullian contr. Marcion. 1v. 
2. 5 as following ordinem a vulgari alienum of the Gospels 
(p. 4). Tertullian certainly draws broadly the plain dis, 
tinction between Evangelists who were themselves A postles, 
and those who derived their information from the A postles 
'** nobis fidem ex Apostolis Joannes et Matthaeus insinu- 
ant, ex Apostolicis Lucas et Marcus instaurant, iisdem 
regulis exorsi" c. 3, but the order in which he names 
them is clearly accidental, or rather suggested by the 
course of his reasoning, so that no stress whatever can be 
laid on it: not to mention that in c. 5 his order varies, 
e ohn, Matthew, Mark, Luke. 


INTRODUCTION. xxxi 


xv. 26 ; xpyryo καὶ αραβοι Acts ii. 11 ; rove axovoyres $bid. v. 11; axovcavreo accus. xvii. 8. To the 
same cause may perhaps be referred the dialysis over the Latin 1 in iohanne Fol. 57 a1. 12; dae 824 
l. 24; iam 427 a 1. 260, which may be observed once in Cod. Laud. 35 (Act. E) igitur ch. vi. 3. 

We can say little about Scholz’s statement, that the native country of this manuscript may be 
regarded as the South of France, by reason of its resemblance in style of writing to the uncial Lectionary 
of the Gospels Evst. 60, whose subscription shews that it was copied A.D. 1022 “ in castro de Colonia” 
for the monastery of S. Denys (Scholz, N. 7. Proleg. 1. pp. x1; ciii). It is hard to conceive that there 
can be any striking likeness between codices which differ in age by full 500 years, though there is 
certainly some affinity between their respective texts; yet the very fact that a Greek Lectionary 
should be written for a French convent in the eleventh century adds one more link to the chain of 
evidence that the Churches of Gaul and Asia maintained for many ages the intercourse commenced by 
Pothinus and his missionaries about A.D. 170, and makes it quite credible that Oriental proper lessons, 
as well as the Oriental liturgy (Palmer, Origin. Liturg. 1. p. 153, 2nd edit.), were long used in some of 
the monasteries of those regions: the liturgy, as we know, survived till Pepin's time. Hence we 
need not transfer our manuscript to Greece in order to account for the liturgical notes scattered 
throughout its margin in the course of the eighth and three following centuries, or refer them with 
Beza to the work ‘“‘tndocti cujusdam Graeci Calogeri" (see his Letter, supra p. vi) The very ortho- 
graphy of these notices savours of a Celtic origin (see p. xxvii, note 1); and the only three Saints’ 
Days whose proper lessons are marked are just such as would be specially regarded in the West at 
their respective dates, viz. the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin (Aug. 15) by a hand of the tenth 
century (M,, Fol. 229 ὃ), the Festivals of S. George and S. Dionysius the Areopagite, the patron saints 
of England and France, inserted as late as the twelfth (by O, Foll 462 b; 488 6)'. Thus all outward 
appearances point to Gaul as the native country of Codex Bezae (we shall notice internal incications 
of the same fact in Chapter IIT), nor is there any valid reason for thinking that it ever left that 
country till it was carried into Italy in 1546 (see p. viii). 


CHAPTER III. 
ON THE LATIN VERSION IN CoDEX BEZAE 


Tse origin and character of the Latin version standing parallel to the Greek text of 
Codex Bezae, and known to critics by the name of d, involves questions of considerable diffi- 
culty, which have given rise to much discussion. In the present chapter an attempt will be 
made to prove (l)that it is on the whole, an independent translation made either directly from 
the Greek on the opposite page, or from a text almost identical with it; (2) that the translator 
often retained in his memory, and perhaps occasionally consulted, both the Old Latin version 
and Jerome's revised Vulgate; (3) that he probably executed his work in Gaul about the close of 
the fifth century. 

I. On the first point, we regret to find our judgement at variance with the decision, or 


1 Credner (Beitrüge, 1. p. 514) who was neceasarily | the times. The Areopagite had been fully established in 
dependent on Kipling's edition, is ignorant of tbe first the estimation he long held as early as the ninth century, 
of these Festivals, which my predecessor passed over in when his works were translated by Hilduin for Louis 
silence, and I presume was unable to read: Mr Brad- | the Meek; while the glory of S. George (who had been 
shaw and I had quite enough to do to decypher the known in Gaul even in the sixth century) was spread 
writing between us, though when once made out the sense throughout the West by Robert of Normandy and his 
is unquestionable. The other two are written in the followers on their return from the first Crusade at the close 
same large, clear, wretched Western hand (wherein v is of the eleventh century. 


t, ard ¢ is e) and are well suited to what we can learn of 


xxxli INTRODUCTION. , 


at least with an obiter dictum of Tischendorf. While seeking to account for the absence of 
the larger chapters (κεφάλαια majora) from Cod. Bezae, although they are found in copies of 
as early or an earlier date, he says “excipiendus tamen est D codex Graecus et Latinus Canta- 
brigiensis, quod inde explicandum videtur, quia Italus ejusdem codicis textus, a quo ipsum G'raecum 
pependisse certum est, nihil ejusmodi praebuit" (Cod. Sinai. Proleg. p. xxxii, not. 2, edit. min.). 
By ‘“Italus ejusdem codicis textus" our version d must needs be meant, yet we hold it certain 
that so far from the Greek text being dependent on or derived from it, the Latin version is 
little better than a close and often servile rendering of the actually existiug Greek. 

(2) For how else shall we account for the frequent insertion in the Latin of purely Greek 
words which no other known version ever employed, and for which there are adequate equivalents 
in Latin? Such are ana Luke ix. 3 only; promeletantes ibid. xxi. 14; aporia wid. v. 25; 
machaerae ibid. xxii. 38, but cladius v. 36, gladius in 17 other places; aporior ibid. xxiv. 4; 
echo Acts ii. 2; allophylus ibid. x. 28; allophoelus ibid. xiii. 19; adynatus ibid. xiv. 8; anetius 
tbid. xvi. 37; spermologus ibid. xvii. 18; ellada ibid. xx. 2; eremum ibid. xxi. 38; so John vi. 31 
only’. On the other hand a few mere technical terms, such as a remote provincial might have 
heard used, are employed happily enough by d alone of «the Latins; e.g. optio carceris (δεσμο- 
φυλαξ) Acts xvi. 23; 27; 36; sestertia, docenta (μυριδασ  mevre) ibid. xix. 19, a fair computation, 
Professio Luke ii. 1—5; Acts v. 37 and decurio (fovXevrgo: cf. Plin. Ep. i. 19) Luke xxiii 50; 
Mark xv. 43 are also in the Vulgate. We should notice also one or two ritualistic terms peculiar 
to d among the versions, which may possibly suggest a somewhat later date than can be assigned 
to the rest: John xvi 2 λατρειαν προσφερειν hostiam offerre; Matth. xxvii. 62 παρασκευὴ cena pura 
(but in Mark xv. 42, where alone it occurs besides in Cod. Bezae, parasceue with the Vulgate), although 
this latter expression was used by Tertullian and Augustine, and has been already explained by Mill 
(AN. T. Proleg. ὃ 1281) after Ducauge: cena pura, however, is found in several of the earlter Latin 
codices in John xix. 14 (c); 31 (a. b. e); 42 (e); Luke xxiii. 54 (a. b. c. e. f). 

(B) "Violations of the rules of Latin syntax occur not unfrequently in all extant modifi- 
cations of the primitive Latin version of the N. T., and are now held to demonstrate the 
African origin of that venerable work: some of the manuscripts contain them more plentifully 
than others; none, whether in respect to number or barbarism, to the extent of our d, which 
indeed is quite unique in its tone and the general current of its diction: nothing is found 
elsewhere so gross and palpably ungrammatical as many of the following instances, which we 
commend to the reader's careful examination. The Greek construction of a genitive absolute 
occurs Luke iii. 15 semel; ix. 43; xix. 11; xxi. 5; 26; 28; xxiv. 31; 36; and not elsewhere; 
as if the inexperienced translator had been trying an experiment which he saw cause to dis- 
continue: just as o δε «.r.A. is rendered qui autem &c. in Matth. ii. 14 and in 53 other passages 
in that Gospel, but afterwards only in Acts xii 15; ad (i.e. at) ille, ile vero, tpse vero 
(Acts xii 16) being used instead. Notice also the neuter plural noun with a singular verb 
in Matth. xii. 26; xviii 12; Luke xix. 421; Mark iv. ll: the double negative increasing the 
strength of the negation, Matth. xxii. 16; John vi. 39; viii. 33; ix. 33; xi. 50; xiv. 30; xvi. 23; 
Luke xx. 40; xxii. 34; Mark xiv. 60: the genitive is used after a comparative as in Greek 
(even the Vulgate hes it in Acts xvii 11), Matth. xii 41; (not v. 42); John v. 20; vi. 31; 
x. 29; xiii 16 semel; xiv. 12; xv. 13; Luke vii. 28 semel; Mark xii. 31; the examples being 
found here again chiefly in the same Gospel: the same remark applies to the following cases 


! I should have added to this list basiliscus John iv. 46, but that the word is also found in Cod. Vercellensis (a). 


INTRODUCTION. xxxiii 
of Attic attraction, as it is called, John vii. 31; Luke i 1; ii 20; iii. 19; xiii 17; xix. 37; 
xxiv. 25; Acts i 2 (but not in the Greek) Verbs also govern other cases than the rules of 
Latin syntax demand, and that too in accordance with Greek: the genitive in Matth. ix. 21; 
x. 31; xx. 25 bis; xxii 101; John vii. 40; ix. 29; 31 semel; x. 3; 8; 27; xii. 47; Luke i. 531; 
54; xx. 20; 35; xxii 25; 351; xxiii. 157; Mark x. 42; or the dative (all except those in S. Luke 
with adoro mpooxuvew) Matth. ii. 2; 8; 11; ix. 18; xiv. 33; xv. 25; xxviii. 9; John iv. 21; 23 semel; 
Luke i. 3; xiv. 33; xviii. 13'; Acts vii. 43: add te nocui (αδικω oe) Matth. xx. 13 (cf. Mark xvi. 18 
in am. fuld., manuscripts of the Vulgate); maledixerunt illum John ix. 28; maledicentes vos [but 
thus also Cod. Palatin. (e)| Luke vi. 28 (see the Greek); benedixit eos Luke xxiv. 50 (so v. 51) with 
Augustine in loco; and such a form as puelles Acts xvi. 19. The same inference may be drawn from 
the varied and luckless shifts made by the Latin scribe to render that great stumblingblock to 
translators, the Greek article He begins the attempt with hic in S. John (viii. 26; x. 36; xiv. 19; 
22; 307; xvi 21; 28 bis; xvii. 6; 9; 11 semel; 21, all with o xoopoc), which he resumes in the 
Acts (iv. 8; 22; 37; xi 22; xviii 27; xix. 23; 35); so perhaps Luke xxiv. 17 ista verba haec οι 
λογοι ovroi: next he tries tlle in John xi. 517; Luke xxiv. 9 (with other versions); Acts iii. 10; 
vii 43; xii. 7; xx. 25; xxi 38: or ts in Acts iii. 25; xvi 19: or (as Schulz has partly notice l) 
tpse in Acts iii. 14; v. 24; 26; vii. 8; 13; 17; 18; 35; 43; 48; 58; viii. 9; x. 16; 21; xi. 12; 
23; xii 23; xvi 25; xix. 30; xx. 24: unus seems to be a later expedient. The servility and 
awkwardness of the translator is especially manifest when he mixes up the constructions of the 
two languages thus producing what is neither Greek nor Latin, e. g. Matth. xxiv. 24; John xii 
37; Luke i. 79; xii 1; 4; 5; xx. 46; xxii 55; xxiv. 14; 27; 41; Mark ii. 8; v. 4; ix. 14; 
42; x. 32; xv. 29; 33. This is most observable in the Acts, whose text, both Greek and Latin, 
js in so unsatisfactory a state: e.g. iii. 13; 24; vi. 4; viii 12; x. 25; xi. 1; xii. 20; 25; xii 1; 
28; xv. 20; 22; xvi 4; 16; xix. 25; 29; 40; xx. 12. The study of a few of these examples 
will suffice to shew that they are but halting renderings of the Greek. 

(y More conclusive still are those many instances wherein the Latin has an erroneous 
rendering which could not have originated in that language, but is plainly derived from fol. 
lowing some other Greek readiug than that now found in the manuscript, or some false reading 
of the existing Greek which could not have sprung up in the Latin, or else from a mere misap- 
prehension of the sense of the Greek. Such are Matth. xxii. 40 νομοσ verbum (the scribe 
misread Aoyoo); wid. xxvi. 6 cov tq yevop.evov thu facto*; Luke i. 9 θυμιασαι sacrificare (as if 


1 Miserere mihi, a doubtful instance, for in this ver- 
sion misercor several times takes a dative; in Matth. xviii. 
33 we find both a genitive and dative; a dative in Luke 
xvi 24; xvii. 13; xviii. 39; Mark x. 47: ἃ genitive in 
Luke xviii. 38; Mark x. 48 ; and six other places, 

3 This attempt to make factus answer all the purposes 
of γενομενοσ disfigures no less than 42 places in the ver- 
sion. In the Acts indeed d has learnt to use a little 
more licence at times, rendering eyewero by nascebatur 
ii. 43; eyerero by respondit xi. 9; by contigit xiv. 1; yevo- 
μενοσ by conversus xii. r1. In the Acts also, as was quite 
necessary, much greater freedom is used in translating the 
particles: thus re is etiam ii. 44; quoque ii, 46; x. 22; 
tero iv. 27; xiii. 46; que iii. το; v. 14; vi. 12 &c.: δε is 
not only autem as usual (vii. 1 &c.), but quogue viii. 13; 
X. 24; que V. 14; Vil. 32; xix. 3; itaque viii. 1; vero v. 
16; 22; 24; X. 24 &c.: uev ov» quidem xv. 30; ergo xvii. 


12; quae xvii. 14; tlaquae xvii. 30; ut vero cum xix. 9: yap 
praeterea i. 15 a8 well as entm, so constant elsewhere: ay is 
generally made by utique (Matth. xxiv. 43 ; Luke xii. 39, &c.), 
butin Actsxvii. 18; 20 by nunc, inxviii. 14 by forsitam. These 
are stronger reasons than any assigned by Kipling (Cod. 
Bezae, Praef. p. xii) for supposing that a new hand was 
employed in the Acts because ava:rioc is made by anetius 
Acta xvi. 37, but by tnnocens Matth. xii. 7 (he might have 
added by sine culpa two verses previously): αδυνατοσ by 
inpossibilis Matth. xix. 26; Luke xviii. 27; Mark x. 27, 
by adynatus Acts xiv. 8: δοξαζω by clarifico Acts iii. 13; 
iv. 21; xi. 18; xxi. 20, but no where else. Yet in regard 
to Óofajw we meet with just the same variation in the 
Gospels. In S. Matthew it is glorifico four times, never 
in S. Luke, but honorifico five times, honoro three times, 
in the passive gloriam accipio iv. 15: in S. Mark we bave 
honorifico once: in S. John glorifico fourteen times, honori- 
e 


XXXlY INTRODUCTION. 

it were θυσαι); xxiii 12 αηδια lite; ibid. v. 40 «v τω avro κριματι in ipso judicio; Mark xii. 38 
Toy Telovoy qui volunt! (he translates rov ÓÜcAovrov); xiv. 51 συνδονα επιγυμνου (for emt y.) sin- 
done nudiatis; Acts vii. 19 κατασοφισαμενοσ cum Jjustitias coepisset; ibid. xii. 18 ετροποφορησεν 
ac si nutrix aluit (he read erpogod., as Mill saw plainly at first, less clearly when he wrote 
his Appendiz to the N.T.); xiv. 9 ὕπαρχων «v doBw possidens in timore; thid. v. 15 ομοιοιπαηθεισ 
ἐσμεν ὕμειν avOpwrot patientes sumus vobis hominibus (as if he read avOpwrow); ibid. v. 16 eae 
sanavit (as if from caopat); xvi. 33 eAvoey amo των πληγων solvi plagas (ελυσεν for ελουσεν is 
natural enough, solv.t for lavit far less so); xviii. 18 προσευχὴν (for evxny) orationem; xxi. 21 
pyre ev Tour εθνεσιν (for «Üecw) avrov περιπατεῖν neque gentes ejus ambulant, in mere blind per- 
plexity. The student may find hundreds of these instances, just as convinoing as any we have 
given. 

(8) The same inference, so far as regards the fact of the independent origin of the Greek 
text, at least of the Latin which stands on the opposite page in Codex Bezae, may be drawn 
from those places where the present Latin differs from the Greek in respect to a variation which 
could have urisen ouly in the Latin. This process, applied by Wetstein to the case of the 
Velesian readings (V.7. Proleg. Vol. 1. p. 60) has settled the question as to their history and 
value’, Examples of this kind might be adduced from d without limit, but a few of real moment 
are as good as a thousand. Such are John xii 43 ἡγαπησαν dixerunt (ie. dilexerunt, cf. xiii. 
23; 34); ibid. xiv. 26 ἔπομνησει commovebit (i.e. commonebit); Acts v. 17 ζηλου aepulationem (i.e. 
aemulationem); ibid. vi. 1 wapeBewpovvro discupiuntur (i.e. dispiciuntur) ; vii. 28, xvi. 35 εχθεσ 
externa, (i.e. hesterna) die; vii. 32 ἐτολμα audiebat (i.e. audebat); ibid. 9. 46 «vpe referit (i.e. reperit); 
xii 20 δια ro τρεφεσθαι propter ne alienarentur (i.e. propter quod alerentur); xii. 21 εδημειγορει con- 
tentionabatur (i.e. concionabatur); xvi 35, 38 ραβδουχουσ lectores (i.e. lictores: so fuld. of the 
Vulgate v. 35); xvii 4 γυναικεσ rov πρωτων mulieres quae morum (ie. primorum); xx. 9 «aro 
zosum (i.e. sursum); ibid. v. 27 βουλὴν volumptatem (i.e. voluntatem). 

II. We shall best investigate the next branch of this discussion—the relation which the 
Latin version of Codex Bezae bears to the old version of the Western Church, and to the Vulgate 
revision of it executed by S. Jerome—if we select a passage of some length, extant in all the 
principal manuscripts of the Old Latin, rich in peculiar and idiomatic expressions, and little liable 
to be corrupted from the synoptic Gospels (Luke xxiv. 1—24); wherein we may compare the 
translation found in our Codex (d of the critical editions) with that of the Vercelli (a), Verona (ὃ), 


fico six. This precarious argument drawn from the use of 


τανούσαι for ac μαρτυρουσαι, but this was amended primd 
different words in the several parts of the same work 


manu, as indeed were all except Luke vi. 20 by later hands. 


weighs far tco much with some critics, and is peculiarly 
inapplicable in the case of a writer who is apt to change 
his expression in the self-same verse; e.g. Matth. xix. 12; 
John xii. 12 (gender of dies); xvii. 1; xx. 19; Mark vii. 
15 ; ix. 37 ; Acts xx. 13. 

1 The following various readings also, the Latin ver- 
sion being quite correct, could only have originated in 
the Greek: e. g. Matth. xi. 3 εργαζομενοσ for εἐρχομενοσ' 
(renis, d) ; Joho xiv. 21 er$urgac for ἐμφανισω (ostendam, 
d); Luke ii. 13 acrovyrwr for awovrror (laudantes, d); 
ibid. vi. 20 ers apao for ewapac (TI for [1: elevans, d); 
xiv. 26 wee: for μεισει (odit, d); Acts iv. 29 αγιασ for 
απιλασ (VI for ΠῚ; minacias, d); ibid. v. 4 uecor for pe- 
vov (manens, d). Credner (Beitrdge, 1. p. 463), besidea 
several of the above examples, also cites John v. 39 auap- 


We demonstrated above (p. xxiii), by noting certain errors 
of the transcriber, that the Latin as it now stands was 
taken from another Latin copy, similarly divided in re- 
spect to στίχοι: we have now further and independent 
proof that the version (d) was not made direct from the 
actually existing Greek (D), but from some earlier text, 
almost though not quite the same, in which such varia- 
tions as τελωνων, ἐεργαζομενοσ, expurnow &c. had not as 
yet sprung up. 

3 Mr Field has employed this method for the happy elu 
cidation of that old puzzle in Barnabas c. 3, where the an- 
cient Latin version has ‘‘sicut dicit filius Dei resistamus 
omni iniquitati et odio habeamus:” a saying no where 
ele imputed to the Lord. The Greek in Cod. Sinaiticus 
stands wo wperet νιοισ Ov κ. T. À.: sicut decet filiis Dei. 


INTRODUCTION. XXXV 


Colbert (c), Palatine (e), and Brixia (/), copies or modifications of the elder Latin; and with the 
common printed or Clementine Vulgate as amended by collation with its three best manuscripts, 
Codd. Amiatinus (am.), Fuldensis (fuld.) and Forojuliensis (/or.). Single verses may readily be 
found which might serve to shew either that d is completely independent of all other known 
translations and made exclusively from the Greek on the opposite page; or, on the contrary, that 
it is à mere modification of the Old Latin, differing no further from other copies of it than e (for 
example) does from f. The careful study of d in many such long passages as that here subjoined 
leads us to believe that neither of these views presents us with the whole truth. The Latin of 
Cod. D was really constructed immediately from its Greek text, servilely following it (as we have 
just seen) to the violation of the simplest rules of Latin syntax, and thus contains much, both in 
respect to words and phrases, that is quite peculiar to itself: while on the other hand, inasmuch 
as it was the work of a Western scribe on whose memory the diction of his native version was 
firmly imprinted, like that of King James' Bible is on our own, the iranslator unconsciously and 
habitually imitated it, sometimes for whole verses together, even in places where the Greek original 
might have taught him to render otherwise. The parallel columns containing the several versions 
cover pp. xxxvi, xxxvii. 

The general independence and occasional conformity of d appear equally clear throughout 
these verses. As our attention is directed at present solely to the diction of the several translations, 
we only note in passing the remarkable identity in reading between Codex Bezae (Dd) and c 
in e. 1 (ελογιζοντο Se «v εαυταισ τισ apa αποκυλισει rov λιθον, where yet the Latin words of c 
and d are as far apart as they can be), in v. 5 (οι δὲ evrav) and elsewhere (e.g. vv. 6, 7); as also 
between Dd and e in v. 24 (edopev)*: Dd is opposed to all the Latins in v. 5 ra προσωπα, 
v. 10 in omitting xv de. Our d will be seen to stand quite alone in v. 3 introeuntes; v. 4 
aporiarentur (one of the barbarous Greek words catalogued above) and amictu scoruscanti ; 
v. 5 timore factae (here again from the Greek, yevoueva); v. 6 mementote; v. ll paruerunt in 
conspectu and derisus; v. 13 abeuntes and iter habentis ; v. 14 horum, in heedless misapprehension 
of the final rovrov; v. 16 ué non for ne; v. 18 advena and mescisti (to which a comes 
nearest); v. 20 potentes; v. 21 incipiebat (μελλων, a word similarly rendered by d in Matth. 
ii 13, and 22 other places, by coeperat Acta xvi 27, by volente Acts xx. 4, by habeo Luke 
x. 1; xix. 4); v. 22 seduxerunt and matutinae (mane in a); v. 24 de his qui erant nobiscum 
and sic sicu£ (ovrom wo): most of these instances being highly characteristic. Just as visible, 
however, is the resemblance between d and some or all of its fellows: in v. 23 it approaches 
very close to a, and has with it eivwm v. 5; stadios v. 13: in v. 9 row evdexa is rendered dis 
undecim by all except c, with which alone d has reliquis v. 9: in v. 13 κωμὴν is castellum, in 
v. 15 ομειλειν is fabulari (neither of them very happy translations) in all but a, as d renders 
ομειλησασ in Acts xx. 11 and with bce has fabulabantur here in v. 14, though / and the 
Vulgate rightly change it into loquebantur : in v. 16 all save e employ tenebantur (detinebantur, e). 
Above all, there occurs sometimes for verses together (e.g. vv. 7, 8) such a similarity in the tone 
and rhythm of the sentences as cannot be deemed accidental; yet may perhaps be sufficiently 
accounted for on the part of the scribe called d by imperfect recollections of the primitive 
Latin version stil fondly cherished in his mind. 


1 ΑἹ] necessary information respecting these MSS. various readings full of interest: e.g. in v. 17 et sfcterunt 
will be found in Scrivener's Plain Introd. pp. 256—269, tristes, with N A p.m. B. Besides v. 24 Tischendorf 
and in Mr Westcott's noble article on the Latin versions (Cod. Palat. Proleg. p. xviii) cites John x. 3; xvii. 11; 
in Smith's Dictionary of the Bible. Luke xxiii. χοῦ; xxiv. 49 as passages where D and e agree 


3 'The version in e is often very rude and free, aud its against all others. 


XXXVl 


INTRODUCTION. 


qviany um32yj ponb suva 
-jm windes (4497 «uatqu) 
1uq9 19 wysud ("wy vjos 
*w£0) ἘΠῸΒ €euru ejut] 3]pi4 
suequmao1d ya umniueui 
-nuoui pe 3J41nono sues 
-Jus Wane snJ3ed ,, sit 
(279 1unaoptpauo) 3uuq 
-Gpo49 uou 39 8151 Bqias 
unjueurvtpop (“of 3nots 
*t40) 1Π01Ὲ 50{{| 9105 108 
VsiA 39 ,, DIBY so[oysode 
pe 3us»qooip eunb juwio 
via Uno esnb 98.19)90 19 
Ἰᾳοοῦι wireur 19 Vuustjor 
19 (Μη ewu-) eue[upseur 
θαι WING 2819 4, snq 
-|üUJO 8110100 79 Uitoopun 
Β|Π1 Swruulo oe9Q 2junJoA 
-$unu Ojueunuou 5 
ewsso1Ho1 3o 4 νῃ(9 uin 
-OQJ2A 3UNS GujUp1029J 
39 , (2, Ἰοδαῦνθ op 
81.191) 94e24nse4 9j 
eip 4a 1Sgtond9 39. 1.0] 
-999ed wunuiuoq snurui 
ut mper srurmuoq uni 
τῷ 39310do vinb suavip , 
η9889 wanes ut (pyr 
ony w Wee) onugps uno 
$1q0A 219 snjnoo[ .0}}} 
-wnb jui uspaooe4 (‘waza 
-40f 3ixoJ4ng) 31Xo44ns94 
pos oig 59 uou , $in340tu 
'Uno uiejue4la suueunb 
pinb 5811 pe juniexip 
ἴ08...1.9} ut cunj["a 10.0.81 
-Hoep 19 WoIne 09.911} 
Wo) ¢ nueZ(nj 07884 Ul 
SE] $0298 4UNIIIOIS LITA 
onp 92289 Ot ep j3ues 
-89 QujeUJ9)suOO OGjuoul 
unp 389 unjovy Ja, us 
“8: iuruop sndaoo qun4ou 
Ὅλ} UOU OU$$94J2U! 99 gy 
03ueuinuouti B unjnjoaeJ 
wapide; JUNIOUGAU 393 , 
vjuuo49 1uuJoAvJvd eenb 
$93u9?340d tunj3ueumnuoui 
pe junsauaa o[non[rp ep 
-[UA H9qqu9 wong vun , 
"SISNSITOf 
-Ou0 J ‘SISNAG10 ἃ ‘SON 
-1LYIR V *ad07) (3000 
-0]|2Q) VLVOINA OISUZ2A 


quien 
{0108} ponb wndes sues 
-[Ul 911Q8 3e vjisod w[os 
vujueojui[ jepia sueq 
“ἀπο 419 unmnjuostunu 
“OW PB j3111nono suaZuns 
0910} Βῃ.)96 ,, 51{Π| 084 
-9paid uou 32 WNIT! eq 
“194 Unjueureamop tsenb 
$0|/I WIBIOD JUNE BSA 19 |, 
981 so[ojsodu pe 3uuq 
-93:p ewnb 3uv49 sio tuno 
owunb ov12300 19 τηοῦϑι Ula 
-$Ul 10 BUUBYO! 19 Θ0918Ρ0 
-Juui eire WO ING 1009 o, 
$nurüuio #119309 19 uroep 
-UN si([I Siuuo οὔθ 3un4 
-2aA?pjunu ojueumuour « 
ovesaizos jo , suío wns 
-OQJ24 JUNS evjepioos 
39 , 0192nso1 etp 93103 
19 i13gr0n49 19 uinjojso 
-aed wnuiuoy snugiu ur 
1051} stüruon Way 291 
-10do €inb suaoip , 3asse 
uwe[ed ur onyps uno 
$iqoA 982 ΒΗ2Π0ΟΙ 1911] 
-enb tuturcpa2022431xoJ1ns 
pes ot] 38a οὐ» $1nj1otu 
wind ulejUGAIA enizaunb 
pinb set pw zunsexip 
[08.1.91 ut tunj3[n4 3uougu 
-Ioap 39 τυϑλῖῖπ 3uoietu 
Ἢ una ga nueZ[nj ejso4 
ut seri e3xaf 3uní93nspu 
OUP Lila 9298 901} op 2.19. 
-θ}18981) WHp Ysa τυ 708: 
qa, Ὧδϑι sndiod ἡπ04298 
-QAUL uou eussoJZut 38 g 
ojueuinuod B uimnjn[o40J 
tuapidel 3unJeueaut 19 , 
sia umo [nuns eeu 190 
vjuui0Jv quvJeA9Jed oenb 
soju€jlod unjueuimuoul 
ΡΒ 3un4eueA o[non[rp ep 
-[9A 19*qqvs u1ejnu vun , 


(A) 


SANYIXIMQ X3qd0;) 


st[(| 3u9Sqopeuo uou 
19 Bis] equoa tunjuou 
-wJe|op j3noIS SO[[I 9108 
quns ὍΡΙΑ 39 ,, So[0o3sodu 
ΡΒ 3ueqeoip oov 1uw1o 
-nj sidr wino eenb ow 
“0339 90 *'i1qo'"t *ireu 
19 "UBYOR 39 *** Lreur 
trop 9ΠΟΜΙ" ““" sue] 
-89 9 si[ndiosrp uroepun 
St[[! rui DeBy 3unJoAtr) 
-unua4 98669..329. 30 , *' 01 
“OY tuinJoqJ23A BUNS 993v. 
-OUI9HIa; 38g 9J93ansoJ e1p 
2131493 39 ]Zytonujo 49 tunu 
-1WOY snuuul ur tpuzg stu 
-1tuoqg uinig 39310do winb 
sueotp , 29889 mev[re3 ui 
"HD? Unmno-392 snjn 
^ qpenb:*****oueur og 9 
"34000 Uno Ul9394lA 
$9314e9nb pinb seit pe 
qunJexip tuu4493 UL Wn} 
-[h4 JUdITUILIOP 39 waz 
-u9 3uaJauim uino, o3uoz 
-[nj 0194 ut 58 $noos 
γ 0.929} IIA OUP 90029 
39 03st OP 3uns 99Ί81..1915 
-u09 ojueu) mp 799 wn} 
-09J 38, snduoo junsouea 
αι uou tuejns oess01j 
“Ul, OjUaUnuou B uin 
-n[o49 Wapidey 3un1auoa 
“UI 38 , 3u9494€v1ved ecnb 
squvjod unjueunuou 
pB e10duie3 op[8A 3un1au 
“94 [j9qqus Wayne vun, 


(3) 
SONILVIVG X300) 


————MMMMM M A — MM ÀÀ— P SSG € A 


$10 
queqopeio uou 19 oovu 
*"q1eA snstiop isenb wn. 
-09 n332edsuoo ur yunsans 
τά 3e ,, Savy so[ossodw 
ΡΒ juuqaoip sia wind ov 
-0390 92 1qQO08] δι. 30 
ὍΠΒΟΙ 19 Bualepsea vi 
“BU o, sinbijaa snqiuwo 19 
uitoopun KI! 981 πιάτο 
qunieawnunu ousloAol 
19, suío tunioAJ04 guns 
OBIBIOMIW 30, .o1o24ns 
«01 OIp 213193 19 1SpionJo 
je umnuidiog snugur ui 
ipei) Slu;MoY uinig 393 
-sodo witiuonb , «89Ὲ|}182 
Ul 39889 onQp* uino eIqOA 
189 s$ujnoo[ Sjusnb wa} 
“NB 9810᾽ 9901 sijJoui 
umo tunata sruesgnb pinb 
sua ΡΒ JUNIOXIP NI! pe 
9449] UL $Ons 807/04 100 
-OABULJOUL G?jO5J üUlojnw 
e100) Ul ; DUuuosnioos 


᾿ὨΊΟΙαΙΒ UL 519 3unJojstspe 


h-——————Á—————————— ς..,. -. 


μι ONP 9909 00 ep 1n3uo4 
-wauode τὰ 399 umjogj 
29 . sndiod 3unueuoa 
καὶ Uou Wane t93unoo2) 
-Ul e 0juauinuour v umnj 
-njoaa1 uiepide| 3un4au 
“OAUL Ul9JQU 82]UOIUGA ς 
mopidel qeraajoaer enb 
“190 sinb es ujur wayne 
3uvqew1rdoo SIT] GUND we 

-inb 3a 3unJoA?4ud oen 

$93U949jp9 uimjueunuoul 
pe 3ueqeruea o[nonjtp eu 
-€u neqque 1010 vun , 


(p) 


a4YZ2g X4d0) 


1949nj unioyj 
ponb sumiu unos 178 
19 wviisod wos vuruso? 
-Ut[ 1901 suequinoouad 3e 
unjusunuoui pw IND 
“nd sueaZuns uojnw snJj 
-0d 5, sur 3ueqaparo uou 
49 WISI UVq9A v1uouis[op 
isenb soy: pnde 3uns oes 
“14 30 ,, 8251: sojojsode pe 
3u9qeoip ecub egnbtio139 
IQOdB, €eureu) 19 vuueqot 
3e euo[epZeui wiv wa) 
“NY 3u€40 οἱ sinbijo1 sng 
-iuu1o 38 sipo3sodv uitoep 
-un 8781 eruuio 3unJaAu? 
-unuol 19 3Uns evsJoaal 
39 y sufo wnsoqgiaa 3uns 
OVIVIOWSWM0S 39 g 9195) 
-Jn$9J Ojp v1203 39 pt 
-J€ 19019 3a WNI0}8I00 
unuruot snueal ui tpe 
siutuoq tunmg 3e310do 
umwiuonb ,  vewpes ul 
30950 ONY PB umo 418 sn3no 
“ΟἹ siqoa egnb rurueuor 
-OIUWOD FINWOW € XII 
-4NsS@1 g τΠΌϑαθΖθι uns 
-ef βιλ 980} wonb 3uu1o 
-Xip Wo3nB tjt {18.1.91 ut 
Uleto9j 4qunJeautjout uia? 
“NB 9U314191000, e3ue?f[nj 
ΘΊΒΘΑ UI SU[[I $1298 JUNIE} 
-1189 LILA OU p 9220 9Ot| ep 
1u9s4edn3s WUp isa tu που 
49, ἴδοι iumuop sudaoo 
juniaueAU; uou Uuoa)ng 
3usssiuaa LUND, o3uetunu 
“OW € uinju[uael Ulapid 
-R] JUNSIUBAUL 3uassiuaA 


rt M — 


~ 


“OT *a snpoj;sody pn yung 


-221p 9204 *$ °A 9222 32 Ul 313U99UO0 94 (nO em! ‘pa 
"L'N pueqosiy, pudv (5) sisussvu0jg “pod *grN 


ΒΙΠῚ 3u*q 
-9p9J9 DOU 19 BIST eqJoa 
WNIUOWIBLIT[SP INIIS SOT]! 
9108 JUNE ΒΕΙ͂Δ 30 ,, 80] 
-03s80dv pe queqoorp oevu 
queens sisd: uino aenb 
9949390 19 IQOTB! BIIBU 19 
wuuvgor 19 eBuarepsea 
BIB uj93n9 29-40 οἱ snq 
“JUWO $1193192 39 IX 581 
BIUWO BBY 2ungeAumunu 
-O1 ewssoidol 19, tuni 
τοῦ tunJOqJ9A JUNS 9818. 
-οἰὐμϑίαϑι 39 4 o10fanso1 
*n18e2 eip 19 LAyIONID 38 
umuruiotq suugu UL IPB) 
siuimoy unig 39310do 
vinb suaoIp , 2a86a Β08Π| 
-8J ur onQps uno unostq 
“OA 380 snjnoo[ aoj1eub 
turueJoutetuaJ s Sr3Joq 
uno uiejuaATtA snioeunb 
pinb ser pe jungexip 
Weise} UL ἀπ} πὰ 3ueJeu 
“ap 19 tuejnw j3uououl 
Ὦ uno, 9jueJ[uj ejs9A 
Ul Β0Π1 $0299 311493938 
LULA Onp 9299 19 OZR 
9p JUIESO 9BIVUIIISUOT 9) 
-ueui uimp 760 um 19vj 39 , 
snduoo 3unJauaauUu! Uou 


$10 }UBQepeld uou 19 
9980: €wqieA *urep unb 
“UB? Si[[I IANS WSIA 30 ,, 
osey so[ojsodw pe 3uvq 
-9a1p evnb sro uno ewnb 
-H34 39 BUUBYOL 19 Iqoo 
“Bl eredi 39 vuo[epzieui 
WONT 1819; $nqruuio 811 
-3392 29 WNOOPUN si[[I viru 
-UiO DANY 3unJoAtigUn ne 
9U$49494 9 q UINIOY wns 
-0q13A 1008 ovjRJoulQuI 
39 g e1eclunse1 910 vri193 


' 39 165.) 3e320do srüruou 


tunity wemonb sueolp , 


Raves ὧι 39990 onupe 


tup $Iq0A 189 $n3noo[ 180 
-18 IULUUSJOUIQUU p SIm 2.1001 
uino wnat stjuewub pmb 


ΒΒ: PB 3unJexip {18.2.91 


pe uejnu sajusurout 


evsuoqedpes uje;nv κοι 


Ὥς nueS[nj 93x94 ur su[ 
-|t ΒΊΧΌΓ 1un1a35spv onp 


LITA 0229 900, op yuared 


“118 tunp 3se u1039j 39 , 


endiod 3Uunieueaur dou 
wuejuv oessoJS ut , ojuour 


-uuoul v umnjnjo4o4 nop 


uno 3e , wepids[ 30404 

-[0484 inb 3esso weusinb | 
es «0}01 U9jn9 j3utvq9j 

-1200 3u&Jo4919d onbuno | τ 39 , jUBseavsed ounb 
-eunb s03u049j 'o[non[ip | $93uvjuod umjuaumuotu | eplea uieon[ ογῦν 3unjau 
unjueumuot pv 3unioau | pe eoduie; epjua 3un4eu | “891 uUinJo39qqvs SIP ura? 
“941 BQQES uiejn9 oun ,|-94 H9.qqVs uioynu vun , |-nevtud, "px AVON] 


Ὁ) (4) (v) 


SaNLEHad' IO). X43dg0;) SISN3NOUSA X3q00)) SISNA1132)0H2A X3GdO)) 


-tduy wayne 3un4eueAUt , 
'Junugeaesed ewnb sojuo4 
-9jpv tunjuetunuoui pe 


[091ΠῈ oussoJ2u! , uinju[ 
-0A9J wepide, gunuauaa 


xxxvli 


INTRODUCTION. 


(“οὔ 4ün12py) qunuenea 
“ul uou 0494 wnsdy 3un4 
“OXIP $910rnur INAS 3und 
-eusAuj 91i 19 tunjueuinu 
“οὖσ pe 6113600 xe tuepinb 
qunJelq9 19 ,, Giaata uina 
gunojp inb ossipia una 
-o[ofuw mouoysta uve 
0s s21139Ip 3unJeuoa 5πι9 
910d.100 o1ueAul DOM 19 gs 
unqjuaumuou pe 3unJoenj 
won, ojus ounb sou 100. 
-9n419j 911380U xe WEP 
-awnb soaJejnul 19 pas ες 
guns 8100. devy ponb 910 
"Οὐ (1.229. 489 "ppv) 8910 
Billa} wiuuo 911 sad 
τσ ounu 19 [eqcust (‘40 

snanjd-) saunjwepes η98 
-sa edi umb snmeqviads 
wayne sou τς wna guns 
-oxgionJo 3e νοῦς Wau 
-onvutünp ut 113800 606 10 
-uid 3o (“usp cn} -) seyop 
-190w8 1uiuns ("40f una 
*Dtp913) 3un1optpu) wns 
opouonb 4a og o[ndod 
JUWIO 38 oap tu8409 θυοία 
καθὸ 42 eJedo ul suejod 
wjaydoad an 31nj inb ouod 
-Vzuu ποῖ ep 3unJoXIp 30 
ewnb axip ejr snqiub ,, 
snqorp su wit ur 3uns 
9100} eunb nsiaouzioo uou 
je ure[ssnugen] ui sa snu 
-wwZasad $n[os ΠῚ ta 31xip 
("14979 ‘tof seyd- ) sedoojo 
uauiou Iho snun suopuods 
“OL 42 ει 999811} 81982 19 
sojuv[nqtuw (πϑοχδυ pe 
$1119j3u09 sonb seuotuJes 
τᾷ guns ;nb so[pt pe 418 
19 ,; j$u249090uJ9 tune 
eu 1njusqouo; (11979 “of 
τοῦ ο Ὁ wnsoe Wane 1 
“Ὥσορι ΒΗΠΕ WIND 7864} suunb 
-uidoidpe snsej esdi 39 
3u94e4outb unoos 39 103 
-ü9Je[nquj tuup 2289 610} 
-2uj 39 4, 1u91opj229 ownb 
snqiawo sjy ΟΡ dia2jAUI 
pe un3ueqonborg [561 19 ,, 
sNews euruiou ula[usna 
-0iq qv (pif x12) viui 
“ἜΧΟΥ uinioipv)s ojpisds 
ur 3410 ponb τι0|{{91689 0} 
orp (‘pyaf 90u) ww, γυ86! 


4uU1epta WON 0194 umsdi 
qunaexip seJenar $n3is 
3unJauasAUi 8}119 τ Πγυϑῖα 
-nuod pg $11380U Xe 80 
Ὁ 3un3eiqu 39 ,, 9404 
τὰ uina 3unorp mb ovetp 
ὦ dmindo[aZuse weauorstas 
rupe es sa3uaorp 3un4ou 
-0A snio eJodaoo o3ueaut 
UOU 39 ἐς Ulnjusuimuoui 
pe 3uníenj waon, 9108 
eunb sou yunsensi93 9141s 
τοῦ xo urepesenb soe1omnur 
39 pos ες 3uns Ἐ10 8} oe€q 
ponb aipoy 3*0 saip 913493 
vjuuio davy sedne ounu 
9 jayeiey suanjdurepaa 
josso osdi vinb snuieqea 
-eds mayne sou ᾿ς umo 
1unjoxgionJo 9 spot 
ureuotjvuurep ur nsu 
sediouidd 39 s230puo0Us 
suus j3unJepipeJi uino 
opowonb ., ojndod iuto 
19 ΟϑΡ WeI0I Θθιοῖ 198 
3» 9:960 ui suajod wjeud 
-oid $41nj ib ouasozeu 
NGA ep 3unjexip di 3v 
aenb jixip 91} snqinb οἱ 
$119! Suqeip UI 89 ut γὴν 
8329j oenb ΒΔ 0055 uou 
39 uewsuiet ui Ba sunu 
-143e18d snos n3 19 31x1p 
suydoa(> uauiou qno syed 
xe snun suapuodsa: 19 s, 
9931911) 9139 19 SajuE[nq 
“WE ulaotaut PB st319u00 
sonb sauouieas ty 3uns mb 
SO|[] ΡΒ 118 39 ,, 21194908 
“οὐδ une eu 1n3ugqeu 
-93 uinJ409 WINE t[n20 0 
819 umo 186! suenbuid 
-o4dps sung; asd 39 7091 
-asinbuod uinoes ya u1nj 


| "uaJe[nq9j wp 189 unj 


-08j 33 ,, 3u*weproo9 ewnb 
snqjuuio si] ep tineoríut 
pe 4n3usqonboj [86] 9 ,, 
SNVUIWE eurdiou ua[vsna 
“8: q€ XT runJotpr3g on 
: «di 3194equ ponb uino1 
-$"9 Ul GID ulopsa 3uvqi 


si xe onp 92208 9 ¢, , Hedy xa onp 6029 19 ς᾽ 


"u$ 809 04d ΒΟ0ΠῚ LT ἃ 


snuipta uou uio 
“Ne umnsdi sasaqnal 3unJo 
-XIp 1Π018 8284 JUNLOUOALT 
19 tunjueunuour ps siq 
-ou ep tuepimb 3utuorqu 
49 ,. GLOATA UNIT jUSq 
-eotp mb essrpia es anid; 
-eSuv* wadolsts s93us0Ip 
qun1euea snro snduoo 2.98 
-ueAur Ou WIND 10 o¢ 
umja'unuou pe vuüson[ 
aque juassmj umo sou 
1uu18AWJOruauGo2 Siqou 
xa  wwpenb salen 
pos ες 3uns wor onb xe 
eipou 3139 woIp mino? 
$t] uino wayne [niuis [aq 
-Wipsi 3€-19 snanidujopoi 
tnb 41nj osdt vemb snum 
-ods mane sou ᾿ς 3un1axg 
urne JONI 3e κι οι! urau 
-onsutuwp WEP utr 123800 
gn3913stJuur 40 $930pJ90€9 
qunsepipez] ountQ opom 
-onb og i[ndod 1:1ϑλιπῷ 
39 Ip n3oedsuoo ut 51101Ὁ 
j9 sory ut suajod we 
-04d aya ging tnb ogosezeu 
uiqt ep junJoxip wane 


Π| ewnb srt axIp urejne 
ej! οἱ suqerp SHS! 2089 
vjow  euwnb mnstoudoo 
uou uo[gsniop] 48 seu 
-uSe1ed snjos n3 uii 
pe jxip 19 s**dos[o 1829 
uatuod tno wna pe snun 
uigjnuv yipuodses », 8918 
“μι 9U0193078 19 Wedlau! 
pe sijsajaz sonb sauom 
-199 14 3uns imb soe ps 
UXIp Wane 911] ,, 3u94 
-8o0goudoo Ye eu τυ. 
-8 Neawd unio» u33uv 
NO ,, Sup πὸ 4n) 

-v11uoo 39 31 enbujdoa 

-pe sqi ueojaur pu 1091 

C 

-a1gmbuoo 36 u1nigqv[uq 
“BJ UP 369 tunj329j 393 ,, 
4uwjepeoow ewnb snqu 
“WO ep u1oo[aur pu Me NE 
4njgqw[nqsj ,, δεάοοιο 
49 ΒΒιυ 18 eujtuüou {191 
-des wipeys siu(osozejq 
qv 3s: ponb unjjojswo 
ut eip Bedi sejunoa sit 
X9 ODP Wane 10.190} οἱ 


sntüpra 
dou 1910} ur saJernur 
qunJexip 10918 ο15 1ππι90 
“AU 99 Umjuouiuoui ut 
umosiqou 11.8.19 inb sty 
ep wepinb γ00 9168 39 ,, 
eJ9AlA Wine j3unoip mb 
essipla uiJo[eSug weu 
-Ol#l4 S93U0IIP JUNIIUeA 
snio snduoo juassiusaut 
uou UNI 33, umnjueu 
-nuoui pe enunnjsul 981 
-09y sou JUNIEXNpos wep 
του! soJeunur 39 pas ες 
1ungs €wjosj savy oub xo 
138 erpoq werp tunmje; 
8181 snqiutuo ut 3e uero 
pos [oqvust oJea [os 3 eqoid 
-your mb 39e osdt uuu 
-onb snmaweds wane 
sou ,, wna junJexgionJo 
19 9134001 UIni9Ipnr ui 1139 
“Οὔ s930230d 3a uim30p4930 
-9$ sadjoutid 30n10pipsag 
ounq γποῖσος radod stuwo 
leap njoaedsuoo ui €1edo 
Ὡς 


39 0q184 ut suojod weyd 
-oJd “τὰ 3j inb oe10zvu 
nyt ep Send 19 3IXIP 9[TT 
PP at 818} ΒΏΘΘΙΡ uj Be ΠῚ 
june vjoyj senb nejosau 
Ue[esuioi| ui $9 Bua 
-p* sn[os n? uina ΡΒ 31xIp 
sudoo[o ueurou Ind sio xe 
shun tuejuv suopuodso », 
9939143 Sejuu[nquie soa 
pv s$11ejuoo evwnb 9981) 
6292 8151 3uus ognb jx tp 
OT]! pe ,, wna 4ueJ00s 
-0u$oo uou 3n 1njusqau 
-9) GIN109 Wayne 1490 gi 
411Π| GINS 39qt [nuiis suBid 
-oud pv sq] 92 e1azenbuoo 


19 S09 J1B/NQV 00 1 399 
$0)09j 39 ,, ΠΟΙ. 108 
-a8nuoo eenb snqjuuio 
ep sosdi 30u199 pw u$ 
-n9 1Jnju*?qnnqy ,, snuur 
“wan euruou woeEns 
“O14 QU vjursiuxos soiprys 
spuaqvq 1931 cin[[93s99 ut 
ejp wed; uj sje xo so3un 
-equ onp u9jny 2019 ¢, 


3uniopia uod 
aieyne tonsdr soeJjejmnur 
QUNJOXIP 3nors$ 3unJeusa 
“Ul 3e uinjueumnnoul pe 
siqou ep wepinb $3unaje 
-Dj 39,4 910A!A UNO 10}9η 
-201p tnb ossipta os mou 
-OISIA uinJo[oZuvw so3uo0 
“Ip 3ungauaape snio snd 
7100 qUGusiaAUI UOT tuno 
ewnb ,,  wunjueumnuou 
pe unuwon[ aque 1.198 
-81j uino sou 3unJeAotü 
«τοῦ siqou xe wepeunb 
$OJej[Rt't 19 gg JUNE 8708) 
oou oub xo erpoy 14n3/3e 
Sap $ni1193 ounu 398 1981 
κοι 1819 sningdwapes rob 
1mj osd: wenb snumqui 
-eds uiojnu FOU ᾿ς 2019 
exg WING t9uJ23 39 98:10 
euonvuurep ut Lnsou snj 
-BVIISIZRAL 30 s0j0pJaoUs 
qUNJepipesy ume opoul 
-onb og :(ndod rsue4tun 
19 lop n30edsuoo ut st3orp 
uj 39 $1329 ut suejod tA 
any tnb ovesezeu nser 9 
qunjoxip WINE i[[r oun 
ΒΙΠΕΉΧΙΡ {092} e[[t m, Snq 
-OIP 81381 Ut BITC ay jung 
wav ewnb rmnsuaoudoo 
uou wurí[osolo! qu sriPu 
“δορά snjos nj un[ 
ΡΒ ἩΧΙΡ 19 seqdoo[o 1819 
uewou τᾶ. snun wane 
jipuodsea ,, 5975.1 sriso 
19 uU991Aup PB smniojel 
sonb rst seuounms 3uns 
ib soa pe jiXip mene 
ej[[1,, 3ue190290u2w una 
eu Jnjuwqeunep tuuioo 
u93ng {{πῦ0 g. SII] uino 
angequiiaiod yo yequub 
-utdouddw sense, woataut 
pe zuwqeanbuoa 30 umo 
«88 Jn)u9quinqyj unp 189 
1100} 19 οἱ 1UUJOpIOOS 
evnb enqiusuo op waaaut 
pe uejng 10jU9q9|nqgj ,, 
enews eupuou wus 
“Ἔχ vtpvis siaifjoso9; 
qe yseqe ponb ung 
899 Ut erp wsdi ay seguno 
$i] Xe onp 9900 39 οἱ 


1Un3epia uou 0192 tunsdy 
qunJexip eaJeinur jnois 
juniaueAUut 93r 39 um3ueur 
“NUOUL pe si13s0U XO Ulup 
-inb 3unJgetqv 39 ,, 0494 
ola tine 3unoJp mb essip 
“tA umnJo[oSue ujoedoistA 
Ulvtj2 09 gajuootp 3unJou 
“94 S01@ eJodqoo o3uaaui 
UOT 30 gg um3ueuinuoul 
p? 3unjonj moon] ejus 
avnb sou 1unJen119) sis 
-ou xa urepesub se1o:n«ar 
SNQIUMIO st] ur 19 ες 3uns 
1700} οϑῦι ponb erpou 
488 SOIp 913193 Ounu 19 
[91[U3291 30$92 snungdwop 
-31 inb esso tunsd; gsnarq 
-wieds o134 δοὺ ᾿ς 1081 
-axy uno tonJo 19 spour 
ueuopnwuusp ur sn[nd 
-od saumio 19 unjopuao 
τῷ sodiouud 3unJ4oprpu 
ouunq opodionb og eqejd 
juuio 19 OOP UI9409 ououi 
-4e€ 39 θ1960 ut suejod 
vjeudoud 4mj imb oozezeu 
nso] ep j3unJoxip 19 ownb 
UXIp erprsnqmb,, snqorp 
St UL vi ur 3uns 8105) 
ewnb nst«00209 uou we 
“BEN191y ut 99 δ 3.9. 
snjos u3 {ΠΠ| 3!XIp 19 65)0 
-9|9 oulwou srsd; xo snun 
1puodso1,, 803812) 91399 
19 σου! pv smiejuoo 
sonb sououies rq 3uns mb 
ΒΟΙ PB 319 19 ,, 3u940909 
-oudpe wine eu un3uvqou 
-03 WINIOS WIN j[n90 s, 
Sit} uno 3wqT 39 jjueA 
-Jadns senso; esd, 30 273 
-u€qu[nqsj unp 1s9 wn} 
-09j 20 ,, 3ug40pj29€ ounb 
snqiuuo stq xo 1nj3u9qe[ 
"Π48) jedi 30 ,, snemue 
19 Β8)0910 eujurou Wales 
-Ὦ29}} qv v3ujdvxes vjp 
“878 3€10q€ ponb um(q3 
“s¥O Uf OIP wed, uj 3πα! 
RII} x6 onp 0290 38 gi 


juni 
-opla uou uie3ne wed! 
JUNIOXIP seJejuur 3n 6}: 
$unJausAu] 19 tunj3uoeul 
-nuoui pe susou xa dep 
“(Nb 4unaerqe 39 ,, 919414 
une 3unorp inb ovsipia 
95 (tunuojesue tuouotsiA 
Ure sojuootp 2unJeUoA 
ento suduoo 3uesstusAur 
uou WIND 19 ες uüj3uetu 
-nuotu pe euv*u junJe 
-nj eunb sou 3un3enaio) 
-Xo $113s0U X3 urgpownb 
$3101|ntu snqtuuio stq sid 
-08 10 4, 9981} 3Uns 9]29j 
onb xa ejpou 380 9910 
ἘΠ1191 ounu [eqenst 108 
“sa sn1njd uiopou inb osse 
unsd: snunavzods oJo4 
$0U τις tunj[r2ungoxgrongo 
19 sp)10U1 Ojotpnt αἱ L11$00 
seognuod . 3unJiepipw; 
ouny opowonb ὡς ojndod 
JUULO 29 OOP UIBI0D OQJaA 
qa e1edo ui suejod vjeud 
-0ud ying mb oussereu 
Neel op 2unJexip 19d; 32 
ewnb sit 28 jab 4, 5115: 
snqaip ur wp ur ans 
visaS ownb sqoseu tuo[es 
-nsaiy ur sa suutodod 
snjos n? ὉΠῚΠῚ pe ἸΧΙΡ 
suqdooj53se uawou Ind 519 
xo shun wane suopuods 
*94 g, 8919113 S190 19 {111} 
-nJe)[e pe $1930943 ΘΕῸ 
ws! @qsaa 1009 evnb soo 
PS Mone jrxrp ,, uni 
queJoosoude ou 1u3utqou 
“91 unJo9 WINE 1{Π90 οἱ 
“ὑπὸ “πηθϑαπηιου 
suepueoss sensa; 19 [66] 
Ἰυ}018)00.12) INP 49 um) 
-09j 30 ,, Ἰυ:9 29 1000 st 
evab snqiuuio op sueqey 
-9w1) 15} 30,, snvuiuv 
deuiou imo aie [esnaepq qu 
x1 υἱϑγυϑαβῇ sojpes wn 
-qdyoqjuna uy sojuna st 
xo JUVLE OUP 9009 39 4g, 


xxxvili 


INTRODUCTION. 


In the Acts of the Apostles all the elder Latin versions fail us: we have, however, to compare 
with d, the Vulgate Latin in its best manuscripts (am. fuld.), and e the parallel Latin version 
of Act. Cod. E (Laud. 35), about a century younger than Cod. D. 


Acr. vi. Versio VvLaGATA. 


! Tn diebus autem illis crescente numero 
discipulorum factum (factus fuld.) est 
murmur graecorum adversus hebraeos eo 
(om. eo fuld.) quod despicerentur (disp. 
am.) in mipisterio cotidiano viduae eorum 
8 convocantes autem duodecim multitudi- 
nem discipulorum dixerunt non estaequum 
nos derelinquere verbum dei et minis- 
trare mensis * considerate ergo fratres, 
viros ex vobis boni testimonii septem ple- 
nos spiritu sancto (om. sancto am. fuld.) et 
sapientia quos constituamus super hoc 
opus ‘ nos vero orationi et ministerio 
verbi instantes erimus ὅ et placuit sermo 
coram omni multitudine et elegerunt ste- 
phanum (stef. fuld.) virum plenum fide et 
spiritu sancto et philippom et procorum 
et (om. proc. et fed.) nicanorem et timo- 
nem (timotheum fad.) et parmenam et 
nicolaum advenam antiochenum (anthio- 
cenum fuld ) 5 hos statuerunt ante con- 
spectum apostolorum et orautes imposu- 
erunt eis manus 7 et verbum domini (dei 
am.) crescebat et multiplicabatur numerus 
discipulorum in hierusalem valde multa 
etiam turba sacerdotum oboediebat fidei 

stephanus autem plenus gratia et forti- 
tudine faciebat prodigia et signa magna 
in populo surrexerunt autem quidam 
de synagoga quae appellatur libertino- 
rum et cyrenensium et alexandrinorum et 
eorum qui erant a cilicia et asia dispu- 
tantes cum stephano 19 et non poterant 
resistere sapientiae et spiritui qui loque- 
batur !! tunc summiserunt viros qui 
dicerent se audis-e eum dicentom verba 
blasphemiae in moysen (mosen am.) et 
[in]deum (addit et fuld.) 18 commoverunt 
itaque plebem et seniores et scribas et 
concurrentes rapuerunt eum et adduxe- 
runt in concilium !? et statuerunt testes 
falsos dicentes (qui dicerent am.) homo 
iste non cessat loqui verba adversus locuin 
sanctum et legem !* audivimus enim eum 
dicentem quoniam iesus nazarenus hic 
destruet locum istum et mutabit tradi- 
tiones quas tradidit nobis moyses (moses 
am. fuld.) 15 et intuentes eum omnes 
qui sedebant in concilio viderant faciem 
ejus tamquam faciem (om. faciem am.) 
angeli. 


Cop. BrzaEg (d) primá manu. 


! In diebus autem istis multiplicantibus 
discipulis facta est murmuratio quae ex 
grecis erant adversus aebraeos quia dis- 
cupiuotur in ministerio diurno viduae ip- 
sorum in ministerio haebreorum 3 Con- 
vocantes itaque -xil multitudinem dis- 
cipulorum dixerunt ad eos non enim 
placet nobis derelicto verbo di ministrare 
mensis 5 quid ergo est fratres prospicite 
itaque ex vobis viros testimonio b no 
— — 

-vii- plenos spu et sapientia quos consti- 
tuamus in negotio hoc *nos autem sumus 
oratione et ministerio berbi perseveramus 
5 et placuit sermo hic in conspectu omni 
multitudini discipulorum et elegerunt ste- 
phanum virum plenum fidei et spiritu 
sanoti et philippum et prochorum et nica- 
norem et timonem et permenan et nicho- 
laum proselytum antiocensem * quos sta- 
tuerunt in conspectu apostolorum cumque 
orassent superposuerunt eis manus 7 et 
verbum dni crescebat et multiplicabatur 
numerus discipulorum in hierusalem nimis 
multaque turba sacerdotum oboediebant 
fdei ? stephanus vero plenus gratia et 
virtute faciebat portenta et sizna magna 

— 3 τὸ 
in populo per nomen dni ihu xpi ? sur- 
rexerunt autem quidam qui erant de 
synagoga quae dicitur livertinorum et 
cyrenensium et alexandrinorum et eorum 
qui sunt a cilicia altercantes cum stephano 
10 qui non poterant resistere sapientiae 
quae erat in eo et spo sanctoin quo loqueba- 
tur quoniam probatar illis ab illo cum omni 
fiducia non potentes autem resistere ve- 
ritati !! tunc summiserunt viros qui dice- 
rent quia audivimus eum loquentem verba 
=, 

blasphema i» moysen et in dum 13 com. 
moveruntque populum et seniores et scri- 
bas et adgressi adrripuerunt eum et ad. 
duxerunt in concilium !? et statuerunt 
testes falaos adversum eum dicentes homo 
hic non cessabit verba loquens adversus 
locum sanctum et legem '* audivimus 
enim eum dicentem quia ihs nazoraeus 
hic destruet locum istum et mutavit 
iterum quos tradidit nobis moyses !^ et 
intuiti in eum omnes qui sedebant in con- 
cilio et viderunt faciem ejus quasi faciem 
angeli stans in medio eorum. 


Cop. Laupian. Act. (e) primá manu. 


! In diebus autem istis multiplicantium 
discipulorum factus est murmratio grae- 
corum ad hebraeos equod despicerentur 
in ministerio cottidiano viduae eorum 
? Vocantes autem duodecim multitudinem 
discipulorum dixerunt non placitum est 
relinquentes nos verbum dei ministrare 
mensis ? considerate igitur fratres viros 
ex vobis testificationem habentes septem 
plenos spiritu sancto et sapientiae quos 
constituamus in usum hunc * nos nutem 
orationi et ministerio verbi instantes eri- 
mus ^et placuit verbum coram universa 
multitudine et elegerunt stephanum vi- 
rum plenum fidei et spiritu sancto et 
philippum et p. ochorum et nicanorem et 
timonem et parmenam et nicolaum ad- 
venan antiochensem * quos statuerunt in 
conspectu apostolorum et orantes inpo- 
suerunt eis manus 7 et verbum domini 
crescebat et multiplicabatur numerus dis- 
centium in herusalem vehementer multa 
vero turba sacerdotum obaudiebat fidei 
5 stephanus autem plenus gratia et fidei 
ac virtute faciebat signa et prodigia magna 
in populo in nomine domini ihesu christi 
9 adversus quem surrexerunt quidam de 
conventione qu^e apellatur livertinorum 
et curinensium et alexandrinorum et a 
cilicia et asia disputantes cum stefano et 
non poterat resistere sapientientiae quae 
erat in eo et spiritu sancto quo loque- 
batur !? propter quod redarguerentur ab 
eo cum omnei fiducia cum ergo non pos- 
sent contradicere veritati !! tune sum- 
miserunt viros dicentes quía audivimus eo 
loquente verba blasfema iu moüsem et 
in deum '? et haec dicentes commoverunt 
quoque plebem et seniores et scribas ct 
concurrentes rapuerunt eum et duxerunt 
in concilio 15 statuerun autem testes falsos 
dicentes homo hic non cessat verba blas- 
fema loquens adversus locum sanctum et 
legem !* audibimus enim eo dicente quia 
Ihesus nazoraeus hic dissolvet locum hunc 
et mutavit consuetudines quas tradidit 
nobis mouses '^et intendentes in eum 
omnes qui sedebant in concilio viderunt 
vultum ejus velut vultum angeli. 


Of these translators d and e seem quite independent of each other, and there is no appearance 
that either had access to the other's performance; the Vulgate is plainly the groundwork of e, and 


INTRODUCTION. xxxix 


it probably lay before the writer while engaged on his task; even d was familiar with it, whether 
he retained it in memory (e.g. quos constituamus v. 3), or only referred to it occasionally: hence 
e has more of the characteristic diction of the Vulgate than d (e.g. vv. 1; 4; 5 jfin.; 12 fin). 
Both d and e aimed at representing the peculiarities of their respective Greek texts, which the 
Vulgate was obviously unable to accomplish for them; and e frequently quits his model in the 
attempt to render the Greek more strictly and literally, in the same spirit as we have observed with 
regard to Cod. Bezae, though not carried out on the same plan. Thus in v. 1 the translator ὁ seems 
to think that «Ag0vvovrov rev μαθητων depends on yoyyvo cos, while on the contrary the really de- 
pendent genitives after axjxoapev in ev. 11, 14 are treated as absolute and rendered by eo loquente, 
eo dicente. He follows the Vulgate in representing προσήλυτον v. 5 by advenam, which is true to 
the derivation but not to the technical meaning, so that here d is preferable: while for μαθητων 
v. 7 e alone has discentium, but then his Greek is rov uavÜavovrev. In v. T σφοδρα is differently 
rendered by all three, d being quite wrong (nimis) though he has always valde in the other nine 
places where the word occurs In e. 1 discupiuntur of d has already been noticed as an error 
for dispiciuntur (p. xxxiv). Of the various readings found in d and e throughout Acts vi. we 
wil speak in the next Chapter: but there seems nothing in the dtctton of d as here contrasted 
with the only other two forms of the ancient Latin extant in this portion of Scripture which 
would lead us to modify the judgement arrived at on fuller evidence in the case of Luke xxiv; 
namely, that the parallel translation in Codex Bezae was made directly from its Greek or from 
& text almost coinciding with it, by one who had full acquaintance with (though he made no formal 
use of) the labours of his predecessors, especially the revision executed by Jerome about a century 
before his time. 

Though on the whole disposed to advocate this view, as best satisfying the facts of the 
case, we must not forget that it is encumbered with one considerable difficulty ; namely, that 
the Greek and Latin texts in the parallel columns of Codex Bezae differ from each other, as 
regards the readings they follow, in little less than two thousand places. As the result of a 
minute examination of the whole manuscript, undertaken with a view to this single point, 
-it may be stated that the Latin (without taking account of its own clerical errors) is at 
variance with the Greek in 1919 instances (in S. Matthew 251, S. John 229, S. Luke 428, 
S. Mark 380, Acts 631), being less than the whole number of places (1981)' in which the 
Greek Codd. FG of 8. Paul (which no one doubts to be separate transcripts from the same 
prototype) differ in but the first thirteen of the Pauline Epistles. And it must be added 
furthermore that the vast majority of these 1919 divergencies relate to matters so insignificant 
that they would be utterly overlooked except by a reader who was narrowly watching for them. 
In 75 the Latin scribe silently corrects plain transcriptural mistakes of the Greek text; in 104 
Proper Names are spelt with some slight variation; in 59 small particles are interchanged, e. g- 
Se is rendered by enim, or yap by autem; in 133 singular nouns are made plural, and vice 
versd, the sense being completely unaffected; in no less than 514 cases a similar change is 
made in the tenses of verbs, (which however are sometimes carefully distinguished) or a finite 
tense is substituted for a participle; 318 are transmutations in the order of the words, a few 
(e.g. Matth. xvi. 20; xx. 19; John vii 5; Mark ii 1; vii 22; Acts iii. 20; iv. 10; xxi. 13), 
and but a few, being of the least consequence. The residue (716) are real various readings, 


1 Not 1982 as stated in my Plain Introduction, p. 137, υμασ in Cod. G at Dresden, not ἡμασ aa edited by Mat- 
for in Rom. xvi. 7 Tregelles now tells me that he read thaei in 1791. 


xl INTRODUCTION. 


in $& Matthew 78, in S. John 72, in S. Luke 135, in S. Mark the higher proportion of 146; 
in the Acts (whose primitive text both Latin and Greek was left in a very rude condition, 
and has been largely corrected in later times) they &mount to as many as 285; yet even these 
are of no great moment, many the manifest result of mere negligence, while in some of the 
more considerable our translator d adopts the very expression of the Vulgate Latin: e.g. Acts 
i 4 (with am. fuld.); ii. 3; iv. 14 (without ποίησαι ἡ, but yet habebant in d, poterant Vulg.); 
v. 8;. vii. 7; xv. 37; xvi. 11; xviii 2; xix. 23. 

III. We must now state our reasons for believing that the Latin translator executed his 
work in some remote province, where the language, though still vernacular, had far progressed in 
its decline; most probably in Gaul, about the time of the Frankish invasion, and in the dialect 
then employed in general speech (for the rustic Latin was commonly spoken in Southern Gaul 
up to the close of the seventh century') rather than in that more correct manner which Church 
writers like S. Gregory of Tours would of course preserve even at a later period. Its provincial 
character and growing corruption are abundantly manifested in the gross violations of grammatical 
propriety which prevail throughout every portion, to a far greater extent than is found in any 
other Old Latin translation of Scripture. Such especially are those perpetual errors in the govern- 
ment of prepositions, of which, however, we find many examples in the Cod. Palatinus (e)* and some 
in other copies, (e.g. / supra p. xxxvi, Luke xxiv. 11, not v. 19). Thus a or ab takes an accusative 
in d, Matth. xxvii. 24; John xxi 9; Luke iv. 1; ix. 8; xii. 36; xiii 29 (mixed with ablative) ; 
xx. 42; xxiv. 27; Mark i. 9; xiii. 27 (mixed); Acts v. 15; x. 23 (so Greek p. m.); xiii. 8; 14; 
xvi 18; 38; xvii 9; xvii. 16; xxi 21. Also ad with an ablative Matth. xvii 19; Luke ii. 
52 (mixed); xi 51; Mark xiv. 34; Acts xv. 22: aput or apud with an ablative Matth. xix. 26 
(mixed): circa with abl. Acts x. 9; xii 13: cum with accus. Luke i 39; xxii 11; Mark i. 29 
(mixed); ix. 4; xiv. 54; Acts i. 26; iii. 4 (so Greek, p. m.); v. 26 (mixed); vii 19; 45; 
xi 20; xii 21; xiv. 20; xvi 4; xvii. 17; xix. 38: de with accus. Matth. iv. 25 (mixed); 
Mark vi. 33; Acts ii 30; xii 23; xv. 5; xviii. 15 (mixed); e or ex with accus. Acts i. 18; 
v. 3; xviii. 2: prae with accus. Luke xiii. 2; 4 (so prae turbam Cod. e, Mark ii. 4): per with 
abl. Matth. ii 14; xxviii 13; Acts v. 19; xi 2; xx. 19: post with abl. Acts xx. 71: propter 
with abl. Matth. v. 10; Mark vi 26 (mixed): secundum with abl. Acts ii. 30: sine with 
accus. Mark iv. 19: supra with abl. Matth. xiv. 11: sub is found Mark iv. 21 with both cases 
in the same sense. The significations of 4n with ite two cases are confounded 39 times in 
S. Matthew, 8 times in S. John, only 5 times in S. Luke, 32 in S. Mark, 28 in the Acta 
This unequal distribution of the most notable peculiarities in the style and grammatical con- 
struction we have had occasion to point out before. The preposition de, moreover, is employed at 
least twice in the Acts as a substitute for the genitive: thus de praecordia (rgo xapdiac) ii. 30; 
de ecclesiam (ryo exxAnotac) xx. 17, look more like French than Latin: though ex in x. 25; 
xvii 12; xxi. 39 (with genit.) is of course correct enough, though not indispensable. 

It is worth while to note besides the variations from the common forms both in regard to 


1 See Hallam's Middle Ages, Vol. 111. pp. 324—7, 


Literature of Europe, Vol. 1. pp. 27— 32, and the convinc- 


ing evidence of the fact which he bas there collected. 

3 * Haud raro, et constanti& qu&dawm."  Tischeud. 
Cod. Palat. Proleg. p. xx. He enumerates de verbum, 
extra vinea, per caverna (we saw on p. xxxvii de ibm 
Luke xxiv. 19): and for anomalies of a different kind 


omnem castellum (vid. p. xli infra), omnem olus ; qui for 
quis, vocitus for vocatus, -es for -is in dicues, diligites; the 
putting of b for p (scribtura, corbus), d. for t (capud), q 
or c for qu (secuntur), τ for 0 (ficurnea) ; o interchanged 
with τὸ (hoc, huc), ὁ with y, ¢ with th, ? with ll, ὃ with u 
the oftenest of all. In these respects d and e closely re- 
semble each other. 


INTRODUCTION. xli 


inflexion and syntax, which occur in this version: not a few will also be met with, though 
much more rarely, in the other Old Latin Versions, including the Vulgate. 

(1) Nouns of the fourth declension, though often used with their proper terminations, are 
frequently turned into the second: actus Acts xix. 18; adcubitus Luke xi. 43; xiv. 7; xx. 46 
(addub.); concursus Acta xix. 40; conspectus Luke iv. 7; xiii. 26; xv. 19; 21; xix. 27; xxi. 36; 
Acts x. 30 (not wv. 31, 33); cornum Luke i 69; cubitus Mark xii 39; fructus Matth. xii 33; 
xxi 34 (both); 43; Luke vi. 43 bis; 44; xii. 17; 18; xx. 10; gradus Acts xii. 10 -(graduus 
acc. pl ibid. xxi. 35); habitus Acts xii 21; intellectus Luke ii. 47; tntercessus ibid. xxii. 59; 
magistratus Acts xvi. 19; 22; 35; porticus John v. 2; spiritus Matth. i. 20; Luke i 67; 
i. 27 (spo, but v. 26 spu); iii. 16; Mark i 25; v. 8; ix. 25 (both); xii. 36; Acts i δ; 
iv. 8; 31; vi. 10; vii. 51; x. 38; xi 16; 24; xiii 4; 9; xv. 7; 29; 32; xvi 6; xix. 21; 
xx. 22; tonitrum John xii 29; veultus Luke xxiv. 5. We find the genitive of such nouns 
in -ui Luke ix. 55; Mark iii. 17; xi. 21; Acts xx. 19, and in -« Acts vi. 5; in -wm in the plural 
Mark xi 13. Notice also the ablatives caelu, Luke xvii. 24; domw Acts xvi 34; tyru 
Luke x. 13; and the genitive dolus Acts xiii. 10; somnus John xi. 13. 

(2) Neuter nouns of the second declension are sometimes made masculine: as donum Acta xi. 
17; foros Matth. xxiii 7; sabbatum once (Acts xii. 27); signum Luke ii 34; templum once 
(Mark xiv. 58); verbus John xxi 23; Luke iv. 32; Acts xix. 38; domus is masc. Luke ix. 4; 
manus masc. ibid. xxii. 21; apex fem. xvi. 17; porticus masc. Acts iii. 11 (with am.); valetudo masc. 
Acta v. 15: on the other hand cibus is neuter Mark vii. 4, and humerus Matth. xxiii. 4. We find 
for κωμὴ castellus Luke ix. 56; xvii 12; xix. 30; Mark xi. 2 masc; but castellum eut. cer- 
tainly seven times and probably eight more. Z/wm appears to be neut. Mark x. 15; Acts xii. 1; 
also eum Matth. xxii 18; 20: we read quendam cwitatem Acts xxi 16; marem Mark iii. 7; 
salem ibid. ix. 50. For rete we find retia and of the first declension in all places, viz. Matth. 
iv. 18; 20; 21; John xxi. 6; 8; 11 bis; Luke v. 2; 4; 6; Mark i. 16; 19: sidona Matth. xv. 
21, only: tenebra John vi 17 only: baptismus is preferred to baptisma Luke xii. 50; xx. 4; 
Mark i 4; vii 4; x. 38 (not v. 39); Acts x. 37, but not in the ten other places. Lystra 
is neut. pl. Acta xiv. 6 even against the Greek, but fem. stng. in its four other places (xiv. 20; 
21; xvi 1; 2) once (xvi 2) against the Greek: we have socra Matth. x. 35 only: columbus 
Luke ii. 24 cnly. In the accusative of the third declension we have securem Luke xiii 7, but 
testim Acts iv. 33: in the ablative rude Luke v. 36 bts; nave Mark v. 2; mare Luke xxi. 25; 
Mark v. 13 semel; vi. 47: even ae for e in regae Acts vii. 10; but i for e in sidoni Luke x. 13; 
peccatori ibid. xv. 10; veteri Mark ii. 21; corpori ibid. v. 29; morti vii. 10; sermoni Acta xv. 32: 
in the plural nominative -ae is put for -es in lampadae Matth. xxv. 8: civitatium is gen. pl. 
in Luke v. 12; vi. 17. Moysi is the genitive form in Matth. xxiii 2; John ix. 28; Luke ii. 22; 
xxiv. 44 (i); Mark xi. 26; Acts xiii 39; xv. 1; 5; tohannit Luke vii. 24: alio is dative 
Luke xiv. 31; xvi 7: the unusual quemquem Mark xii. 14; Acts ii. 3: tpeud Acta xvi. 35: a few 
adjectives in -us and -er sometimes are formed in -ts, or vice versá, as austeris Luke xix. 21 
(not v. 22) ; infirmis Matth. xxv. 43 (not v. 44); xxvi. 41; John v. 13 only; paupera Luke xxi. 2; 
3; pleres Acts xvii 12; subdoles Acts xvii. 5; uberam Luke viii 8, but uberes ibid. xii. 16; 
unanimes Acts i. 14. Merely barbarous are fratrorum Matth. xxv. 40; salutarem Luke iii. 6; 
hominorum ibid. xiv. 24; stadios xxiv. 13 (not John vi. 19) so Cod. a; tnterfectt (dat.) Acts 
vii 1; progeniebus ibid. xv. 21; novus xvii. 21: perhaps altari (gen) Luke i. 11. 

(3) In verbs the chief anomalies occur in the compounds of eo, which make -tebam &c. in 
the imperfect, -4am -tes &c. in the future: such are exiebot Luke vi 19; exwbant John viii. 9; 


7 


xlu INTRODUCTION. 


Luke iv. 22; 41; Acts viii 7; exies Luke xii. 59; exvet Matth. ii 6; John x. 9; Mark x. 12; 
periet John x. 28; xi 50; Luke xxi. 18 (but peribunt Luke v. 37); transiebat ibid. v. 15; trans- 
tebant Mark ix. 30; pertransiebat Luke xix. 1; pertransiebant Acts xvi 6; transit Matth. v. 18; 
Mark xiii. 30 (not v. 31) and in six other places; pertransiet Luke ii. 35; rediebant (but also ibant) 
Mark vi 31; abientes Luke vii. 14; xxii. 13; exientes v. 2; Mark vi 34; veniunt Luke xii. 6; 
venitum est John xii. 5; veniri Mark xiv. 5. Possum, fero and odi are also conjugated incorrectly : 
potebat Luke xix. 3; poterint ibid. xxi. 15; differitis xii. 7; 24; conferitis xxiv. 17; adfers (imperat.) 
John xx. 27 bis; Luke xii. 7; offers (imperat. Mark i. 44; adferi (infin. pass.) ibid. vi 27 
(adferent for -unt vii. 32, as often elsewhere, may be a clerical error); odies Matth. v. 43; odtet 
Luke xvi. 13; odtent Matth. xxiv. 10; both odit and odivit John xv. 18; odterunt ibid. xv. 24; 25; 
odierint Luke vi. 22; odientibus Matth. v. 44; Luke vi 27; even Jieretur John xiii. 2. The 
simple pareo for appareo occurs Matth. vi 5; ix. 34; xiii. 26; xvii. 3 (paretur depon. xxiii 27, 
but parent Vulg.); xxiii. 28 (so Vulg); xxiv. 30 (so Vulg); xxvii 53; Luke xxiv. 11; (but con- 
paruit v. 3l) Other anomalies in conjugation are lugunt Matth. v. 4; fodiit Matth. xxi. 33; 
mubor pass. Matth. xxii. 30; Luke xvii 27; xx. 34 (joined with pariuntur); 35; Mark xii. 25; 
loquor pass. Matth. xxvi. 13; linuit John ix. 6; 11; pariret Luke i. 57; ii. 6; habibat (from habeo) 
ibid. vi. 8; custodiabatur viii. 29; stupwebant ix. 43; egeri xv. 14; consolatur pass. xvi. 25; pae- 
niteor xvi. 30; xvii 4; certabatur depon. xxii 59; comerwnt (from cogo) xxiv. 29; proficebat Mark 
v. 26; obstipuerunt ibid. v. 42; secuntur vii. 5 (so Cod. e sometimes); petieremus x. 35; respondite 
xi 29 (not v. 30); taediari xiv. 33; respondis xv. 4; possidit and crepavit Acts i. 18; locuntur 
vid. ii. 7; serpiat iv. 17; obstupiscebat viii. 13; quaesire xiii. 7; resistabat xiii. 8; decedisset xiii. 
13; serunt xv. 13; perconfirmor depon. xv. 32; extorsuit xvi. 15; vetatus xvii. 15; vellit xvii. 18; 
20; conventi xxi 18; adsistans xxii. 20. In Luke xv. 6 ovvyapyre is barbarously rendered cum 
gaudete (but not in v. 9), so Acts xvi. 13; compare Luke vi. 4. 

(4) The most remarkable peculiarity of the syntax in this version is the frequent habit of 
omitting the antecedent to a relative: such cases are seen in Matth. xxiii. 31; John iv. 34; v. 10; 
vi. 39 (not v. 38); Luke i. 45; iii. 7; vi 4; xiv. 10; 15; xix. 24; xxi. 26; xxii. 21; xxiii. 25; 43; 
xxiv. 33; Mark iii 34; v. 40; x. 23; Acts iv. 21; vi. 1; xvi 10; 13; xvii 11; xxii. 11: the 
relative is omitted in Mark xi 21; Acts xiii 2. In expressing prohibitions non is more frequent 
than ae, e.g. John xiv. 1; 27: vay is vestris John xiii. 21, nostrorum renders pov Acts xvii. 27. 
Otherwise, though there is & rudeness in the whole style approaching to barbarism (e.g. Luke 
xxiv. 31 fin.; Acts xiii 1; 10; 29), yet there is seldom found any notable violation of the rules 
of Latin grammar, except to accommodate it to the parallel Greek, on which point we have 
already spoken at large (see p. xxxii) We find however suaserunt turbas Mark xv. 11 against the 
Greek: so vetare eis Luke xviii. 16. Sometimes the Latin softens down a loose construction of 
the original (e.g. Acts iii 13; iv. 3) while in a few instances it approaches nearer to classical 
propriety than does the Vulgate (e.g. Mark xiii. 20 «Ha caro, yet it is omnis iu Matth. xxiv. 22). 
It is even elegant at times, e.g. oma: facile puto John xxi. 25. In the Acts it nicely discri- 
minates throughout the Jewish from the Christian πρεσβύυτεροι, where the Vulgate completely fails. 

(5) As in other specimens of provincial Latin, we find À very often omitted, and as often 
inserted, improperly. Instances of the former are eroden Matth. ii. 12; «merus, tbid. xxii. 4; 
Luke xv. 5; ypocrytae Matth. xxiii. 29; Luke xi. 39; ebraice John v. 2 (-aeice); xx. 16; ora 
thd. v. 35; Mark vi 35 bis; xiv. 35; 41; xv. 33 semel; umorem Luke viii. 6; ac (ie. hac) 
ibid. xii. 20; abeo. xii. 50, and both abet and Aabet xix. 26; umido xxiii. 31; abetis Mark iv. 40; 
aentaverit ibid. xi. 23; exortor Acts ii. 40; xx. 2; aebraeos ibid. vi. 1; ospitor x. 6; 18; xxi. 16» 


INTRODUCTION. xliii 


peribent x. 43; ymnum xvi. 25; exibere xvii. 31; estéussent xvii. 34; ellada xx. 9: of the latter 
exhortus Matth. xiii. 5; Mark iv. 5; 6; harunt Matth. xiii. 6; Aaruit ibid. xxi. 19; 20 (not John xv. 
6); hostendite xxii. 19; haridam xxiii. 15; habundabit xxv. 29; habe (i.e. ave) xxvi. 49; xxvii. 29; 
xxvii. 9; Luke i. 28; xxiii 37; Mark xv. 18; Aarundinem Matth. xxvii. 29; 30; 48 (not xi. 7); 
Luke vii 24; Àeliam Matth. xxvii. 47; 49, and in all the 24 other extant places; hosteis John 
xx. 19; 26; hieris Luke ix. 57; holus xi. 42; honerates and honus xi. 46; Acte xv. 28; hiericho 
Mark x. 46; hebrit Acts ii. 15; habire ibid. iv. 15; hopus v. 38; hemulati vii. 9; harena vii. 24; 
horabit x. 9; hiconio xiii 51 (not xiv. 1); hemulatores xxi. 20. 

(6) Other peculiarities of spelling, which prevail indeed through every page of this version, 
are the interchange of b and v (more rarely 6 is turned into p, e.g. Matth. ix. 32; xiv. 35; xxii. 
44; Acts xvi. 20, where b is washed out under p, and both are by the first hand) which the cor- 
rector G has emended in two large portions of the work (see p. xxvi), and the placing of f for ph 
and d for ¢ in such words as a£ (ad ille is the universal form employed), constitudo Luke xiv. 32, 
capud Acts xvi. 12 &c.: at is also now and then put for ad, as in Acts xxi 37: see too aliut 
ibid. xix. 32: p stands for m, Acts xiii. 34. The diphthong ae is perpetually expressed by the 
simple e and vice versá: thus with the vocatives plenae and inimicae Acts xii. 10: praesbyteri 
Luke xx. 1; Acts xxi. 18 only: raeaedificabo Acts xv. 10: praetium is used eight times, pretiosi 
only in John xii 3; we find quaerere Acts xvii. 27, but quero &c. occurs twenty times, que- 
stio three; caecidit John xi. 32; saepes Luke xiv. 23; Mark xii. 1; saedeo Matth. xx. 30; Mark 
x. 46 only: saeniorum ibid. vii. 5 only; vadae Matth. xiii. 14: like every other Latin manuscript! 
d invariably has caelum: so faenum always (five times): faenus and faenero four times, fenero 
Luke vi. 34 semel: cena is read 13 times, coena never: jajuno &c. occurs 7 times, jejuno &c. 15, 
in Matth. ix. 14, 15 varying in consecutive verses: (alantum is found in Matth. xxv. twelve 
times, talentum thrice (both occur v. 28): anticus (like secuntur and locuntur named above, p. xlii) 
Luke ix. 8 only; thus £nicus Luke xvi. 10; 11; xxiii 41: morus ibid. xii. 53 bis: thensaurus in 
all eleven places and temptatio in all nine: forsitam Luke xi. 20; xx. 13; Acts xi. 18; xii. 15; xviii. 
14 &c.: jenuam Mark xi. 4 only: abraam Matth. iii. 9 bis; John viii. 33; Luke xiii. 28; xvi. 27, 
but abraham 27 times: istrahel &c. always except in Luke xxiv. 21: patriaarcha Acts ii. 29 only 
(compare rerpaapyno in Codd. Sinaiticus, Ephraemi and others): santus Acts i 8 (not wv. 2; 5); 
iv. 30; vii. 33; xv. 29: passares Luke xii. 6 (not v. 7); carcare &c. Luke iii. 20; xxi. 12 only, but 
carcere &c. 28 times: clodus in ten places, claudus John v. 3 only: cludo and clusum in all eleven 
places. Under this head may be brought the familiar practice of writing Att, Ais for ht, his, and 
the contrary habit of putting füi 44 times for the gen. sing. or nom. pl of filius (yet not in 
Mark xiii 12; Acts iii. 25), and more rarely fiis for the dative or ablative plural. 

(7) The abbreviations usual in the Greek text have been enumerated already (966 p. , xviii): 
in the Latiu the chief are ihs (Cod. Laud. 35 has thesus, but Au hiesum Acts xix. 5), ape", de, dme, epe, 
and their several cases (ihn John xii. 9; Luke v. 12 for thm is rare) as is usual in documents of 
the oldest class. Deus and spiritus (dominus Matth. xiii. 27; Acts xiii. 10) are sometimes written 
in full, the former often retaining the mark of abridgement (—) notwithstanding, as is likewise the 


1 "(Coelum is a spurious form, invented about the * On the tomb of that illustrious scholar Isaac 
beginning of the sixteenth century, in conformity with Casaubon [d. 1614] in! the S. W. aisle of the transept of 
a ridiculous etymology." Munro on Conington's Virgil, Westminster Abbey, xpo of the original epitaph bas been 
Journal of S. and C. Philology, 1860. In Cod. ff! coelo- changed by some ignorant stone-cutter into the barbarous 
rum, Matth. xx. 1 must be a mere error either of the | xto. 


editor (Martianay) or of the scribe. 


xliv | INTRODUCTION. 


case in some parts of Cod. Claromontanus, especially about Romans i Thus dei is is met with 122 
times (but never in the Acts), deo 24 times 8 (in the Acts only vii 40; x. 4), deum only in John 
vi. 46; x. 33. For the more usual form dms ἄς, we find dns &c. 16 times in S. Matthew (both 
occur in xxii. 44), in Luke xxiii. 40, and always (84 times) in the ie Acts, except dmi ii. 19: dms 
is the form preferred by Codd. Vercellensis and Claromontanus, dns by Codd. Palatinus, Amiati- 
nus, and Fuldensis. We may possibly think that minute peculiarities of this kind slightly confirm 
the impression of those who deem the translator of the Acts a different person from bim who ren- 
dered the Gospels (see p. xxxiii, note 2)'. Add to this that he alone has dum for dm (60), A Acts 
vi 11; xi 17; xii 5; & form also found in Cod. Palatinus: although in S. Luke we see dom. i: 
16; 46, and in nine other places (besides six in S. John, as also in Cod. Claromontanus); dome 
(vocative) in Luke x. 40. In Cod. Laud. 35 there are no abridgements in the Latin. 

Of compendia scribendi, as distinct from abridged words, the Latin of Cod. Bezae has but 
few. At the end of a line — over the last letter stands for m; in Codd. Palatinus and Claromontanus 
the line stands for m or ^ indifferently: a single point (usually the upper point, but sometimes 
the middle) indicates a termination omitted, e.g. hominib: Matth. x. 33; ossib. ibid. xxiii 27; 
sublatisq. Acts xii. 19. Occasionally an unfinished word has not such point, apparently through 
oversight; e. g. faciem Matth. xxvii. 22 for faciemus (in later manuscripts like the Cod. Augiensis 
-us would be indicated by the apostrophus) AÁwmiiab Luke iii. 5 (see Adnotationes, Fol 194 a). 
The punctuation of the Latin is on the same plan as that of the Greek, described above (p. xviii): 
in Cod. Palatinus (if we may judge by Tischendorf's facsimile page) the single middle point is 
rare primá manu, but more often added by a later pen. 

Some grounds for telieving that this manuscript was written in the region where it was 
eventually found in the sixteenth century were stated in the last chapter (p. xxxi): the following 
philological reasons, so far as they go, would suggest the same conclusion of ite Gallic origin. 

(1): In addition to the unclassical and indeed ungrammatical use of de to express the genitive 
in Actes ii. 30; xx. 17 (see p. xl), we find in the style of d distinct traces of the employment 
of habeo as an auxiliary verb, which is well known to be a notable characteristic of the modern 
languages of Western Europe (of the French as much as any) as distinguished from the Latin 
whence most of them sprung. In Mark xiv. 27 σκανδαλισασθαι (i6. -0e) is rendered scandalizari 
habetis by d, but scandalum patiemini by ac, scandalizabimini by f and the Vulgate. abeo is 
thus used three times to render μελλω, Luke x. 1; xix. 4; Acts i. 5, although the Greek word 
is translated by incipio 25 times (sometimes very awkwardly), 15 times by the future participle, 
three times in other ways (Mark xiii. 4; Acts xvi. 275 xxi. 37). 

Two or three peculiar words, which better scholars may perhaps hereafter add to, point to 
the same conclusion as regards the nationality of the translator. Scholz (W.7. Proleg. p. xxxix*) 


! Besides the instances before given we may notice 
that apxsepeve, which is rendered princeps sacerdotum in 
all places in S. Mattbew (24) and S. Luke (16), in 8. John 


other bad reasoners, he overlays his really effective argu- 
ments by others obviously futile, Thus he urges for the 
Gallic origin of Cod. D (among others) refectio (καταλυμα) 


princeps 4 times, princeps sacerdotum twice, in Mark 
xiv. 47 princeps sacerdos, in the other 19 places of 8. 
Mark summus sacerdos; is in the Acta pontifex iv. 23; 
v. 175; 21; vii. 1; pontefex iv. 6; pontefiz (lepevo) v. 27. 
The reading is tepewo aleo in xix. 14, where alone we 
find sacerdotis. 

* Scholz's examples had occurred to me in complete 
forgetfulness of what he had written long ago. Like 


Mark xiv. 14, though the word is in the Vulgate; side- 
ratus (xvAXos) Matth. xv. 30; 31; xviii. 8 (but in Mark 
ix. 43 debilis with the Vulgate), an expressive term found 
in Pliny (in regard to this word, however, he only follows 
Mill); and natatoria piscina John v. 3, & mere error of 
the translator, who unites the two separate words used 
by the Vulgate for rendering κολυμβηθρα in the places 
where it is found (v. 2; 4; 7 piscina ; ix. 7 ; 11 natatoria). 


INTRODUCTION. xlv 


and others have noticed sonits (μεριμναισὴ in Luke xxi. 34 only, for which ae have solicitudinibus, 
bf cogitationibus, c and the Vulgate curis. That sontus, which is not a Latin word at all, is 
connected with soinus and the French soin is plain enough, and Ducange cites from one Latin 
and Greek Glossary “somnium φροντὶς ἰδιωτικώς,᾽ from another “somnior pepiysva,” whence was 
corrupted sonius, thence soinus and soin (Nisi competens soinus eum detineat" Leges Henr. 1. 
Regis Angliae cap. 29 in Ducange Medii Aevi Latinitas, sub voce Sunnis). 

Less certain is the inference drawn from involet as a translation of xAejg in John x. 10 only, 
all the other versions having furetur in that place. Jnvolo is rendered by Ducange per vim auferre, 
and compared with the French voler, but Servius the Commentator on Virgil, in the 5th century, 
says “Vola dicitur media pars manis...unde et involare dicimus, quum aliquid furtim volá manüs 
subtrahitur.” The best classical example of this use of the word (certainly a very rare one) is 
Catull Carm. xxv. * Remitte pallium mihi, meum quod involásti." 

Of applontat (pacce«) Mark ix. 18, another of Scholzs examples I find no notice in Fac- 
ciolati, Ducange, or other such books. It must be connected with planta, supplanto. Bentley, who 
read applantat in his hasty fashion, adds “et hoc est allidit humo” (Ellis, Bentl. Crit. Sacra, p. 9). 

Such forms as sconspectu Acts vii. 46, and yet more scoriscatio Matth. xxiv. 27 ; scoruscus Luke 
xvii 24; scorusco xvii. 24 bis; xxiv. 4 (ἀστραπὴ and acrparrw, but fulgur Matth. xxviii. 3; Luke 
x. 18) savour more of the initial impure 8 of the Italian, which plainly sprung from the Latin ez, 
e. g. sbarcare, scarnare. 


CHAPTER IV. 
ON THE CHARACTER OF THE GREEK TEXT OF CoDEX BEZAE. 


IT resulta from our investigations respecting the parallel version in this manuscript, that although 
replete with philological interest as & specimen of vernacular Letin just before it merged into the 
mediaeval language of the South of France, very little weight can be given to its readings even 
in those places (comparatively so few) in which it differs from its Greek original The purpose 
of the scribe (or at any rate of his immediate predecessor) was simply to copy on the one page of 
an open leaf and to translate on the other, a very ancient and curious book, arranged to his hand 
in verses OF στίχοι, whose present loose and inartificial divisions shew that it must itself have 
been derived from older documents wherein the στίχοι had been distributed on an elaborate and 
regular system, which the carelessness of the writer of the immediate prototype of Codex Bezae 
has gone far to break up and obscure (see p. xvii) In this the last Chapter of our Introduc- 
tion we shall aim at proving that the text of Codex Bezae, as it stands at present, is in the main 
identical with one that was current both in the East and West as early as the second century 
of our aera. It may very well have been brought into Gaul by Irenaeus and his Asiatic com- 
panions about A.D. 170: in some of its most characteristic features it resembles the Syriac versions 
made at one extremity of Christendom, the citations of the Latin Fathers at the other. Whether 
Codex Bezae (D) and its allies approach nearer to the verity of the inspired writings than do some 
of our chief authorities whose extant vellum may be a little older, such as Codd. Sinaiticus (M), 
Vaticanus (B), Alexandrinus (A) and Ephraemi (C), is too large a question to be entered upon in 
this place, even if we were in possession of materials for arriving at a definite conclusion, which 
there is much cause to fear we are not and perhaps never may be. If the high antiquity of the 


xlvi INTRODUCTION. 


text be once established, its claim on our respectful attention must be admitted as & necessary con- 
sequence, even by those who most hesitate to assign to it prevailing and paramount authority’. 

I. And as regards mere matters of spelling and grammar we shall see little or no difference 
between the practice of Codex Bezae and the other oldest manuscripts. Those instances of pseu- 
dography, as he calls it, which Kipling accumulates (Praef. x111. xiv.) to prove that its writer could 
not be & native Greek, would enable us to demonstrate the same thing in respect to every other 
manuscript of the N. T. now existing, which has any semblance of great antiquity. Its ifacisma, or 
changes of one vowel or diphthong for another are actually fewer than in Cod. N and one or two 
more, and the errors of transcription, especially in the Greek, are not by any means so numerous. 
The principal vowel changes, as usual, are εἰ for 4 € for a, and vice versá: vis put for οἱ chiefly in 
σοι and the various forms of ἀνοίγω, v and ἡ are transmuted principally in the cases of pes ‘and 
υμεις : itacisms so harsh as κε for και John vii. 47; Acts xviii 2; « for the article ac Luke iii. 0 ; σοι 
for ov John vii. 52; erepa for erape Matth. xxii 12; xxvi. 50 (not xx. 13) are not at all frequent. 
The changes so very common in later writing between o and «, « and ἢ are rare (such as εξηλθη 
Matt. xii. 43; cf. John vi. 3): those between εἰ, ἡ and « (even nace Matth. xxiv. 43), ov and ὦ (in 
the third person plural of verbs) are more familiar. The accommodation of spelling to pronuncia- 
tion in vy, vk and vx for yy, yx and yx, e.g. ἡνγικεν Matth. ii. 2; avyeXov ibid. xi. 10; xiii. 39 
(not v. 41); ἀνκιστρον xvii. 27 (so Luke ii. 28 avkaAac); εσπλανχνισθη ibid. ix. 36 (not xiv. 14), 
especially the last, occurs perhaps more often than in other copies*; but the orthography presents 
no other peculiarity worth notice. 

Of the forms usually ascribed to the Alexandrian dialect Codex Bezae contains the following : 

(1) The accusative singular of the third declension of nouns ends in -ay for -a: Matth. xxvii. 
28 (not v. 31); John vi. 54; Mark vi. 27; vii. 30; 32; Acts xiv. 12; xvii 6: and the neuter of 
-vs in -vv Matth. xix. 4; Mark x. 6; Acts xvii. 27. This v is sometimes added in verbs, ἐπλήρουν 
(sing.) Acts xiii. 25. 

(2) The second person plural of the second aorist terminates in are: Matth. xi. 7; 8; 9; 
xxv. 96; xxvi 55; John vi. 26; vii 45; Luke vii 24; 25; 26; xi 52; xix. 30; xxii 52; Mark 
xiv. 48; Acts ii. 23; xvi. 39 (imper.); the first person plural in -apev: Matth. xxv. 39; Mark ix. 
38; Acts iv. 20; the imperative in -arw Matth. vi. 10; xxvi. 39; Mark xiii. 15; and the second 
aorist middle in -aro Luke xxii 50; Acts vii 10; 21; xii. 11. 

(3) Also the third person plural of the second aorist in -ay: Matth. xiii. 48; xvii. 6; xxi. 16; 
39; xxii 10; 22; xxvii 21; John iv. 52; vi. 10; 60; vii. 52; viii. 33; 39; 41; 48; 52; 53; 57; 
ix. 23; 24; 28; 34; 40; xi. 46 bis; xii. 9; 21; xviii. 6 bis; 7; xxi. 5; 8; Luke 59; 61; v. 33; 
vil. 20; viii 34; 42; ix. 13; xiii. 31; xvii. 5; xx. 16; 39; xxii. 9; 35; 38; 49; 71; xxiii 33; 
xxiv. ; Mark ii. 16; iii 8; iv. 4 bes; 5; vi. 33; x. 4; 37; 38; xii. 7; 12; 165; xvi. 8; Acts i. 11; 
24; ii 37; iv. 23; 24; vii. 57; x. 23; 39; xii. 7; 10; xiii. 46; xiv. 24; xvi. 19; 31; 37; 40 (ειπαν 
44 times); or in -ocav: Mark viii. 11; ix. 9; 33. We find also εἰπα Acts xi. 8; xxii. 10; and 
the participle εἰπασ Acts vii. 27; 37; 40; xx. 36; xxii. 324. So even the imperfect in -av: Matth. xxi. 
9; John vii 31; 41; viii. 22; ix. 16 semel; x. 24; xi. 56; xv. 22; 24; Luke iv. 40; xxiii. 35; 
48; xxiv. 10; Mark viii. 7; 16; Acts xiv. 19; xvi. 7; 19; xvii. 6; xix. 14; or in -ocav: Mark i. 
32; vi 14; Acts xvii. 5 semel. 


1 In the present chapter no notice is taken of the 3 So even vurgiov Matth. ix. 15, though γυμφιοσ is 
readings by later hands; the rather aa the early changes found twice in the same verse, 
niade in this manuscript seldom affect the sensv. 


. INTRODUCTION. xlvii 


(4) On the other hand we find -« for -a in the first aorist: Matth. xi. 25; xviii. 15; xxv. 22; 
John xx. 15(1); Luke xxi 37; Mark i 35; xii. 32(1); xiii. 16; Acte i. 11; xix. 19: so eyevoov 
Acts v. 4. 

(5) For -acc in the third person plural of the perfect we have -av in John xvii. 6; (so v. 7, as 
in the received text); xx. 13; but eAgAvOov John viii. 42. 

(6) In verbs in -ow and -ωμι the termination οὐ is used for w in John xi. 57; xiii. 2; 29; 
Luke xii. 99; xvi 4; xix. 15; xxii 4; Mark iv. 29; v. 43; ix. 30; xiv. 10; 11. Other infrequent 
forms are κατασκηνοιν infin. Matth. xiii 32 (not Mark iv. 32); and the optatives ψηλαφησαισαν, 
evpocay Acts xvii. 27. 

(7) There is a frequent transmutation of verbs in -aw or -w into -ew, in -ew into -ow, and 
corresponding changes in verbs in -j, which are sometimes formed like regular verbs. Such we 
see in Matth. ix. 2; 5; xv. 23; John vi. 33; xi. 33 (not v. 38) ; xviii. 2 (not v. 5); xxi. 20; Luke 
viii. 53 (not Mark v. 40); Mark iv. 36; vi. 56; vii. 10; x. 16; xiv. 42 (not v. 44); xv. 47; Acts 
iv. 35; vii. 25; xii. 6; xvii. 24; xviii. 5; 26; xx. 21. Add αφεωνται for αφιενται John xx. 23. 

(8) The inflections of the future of λαμβανω and its derivatives invariably retain p: Matth. x. 41; 
xix. 29; xx. 10; xxi. 22; John v. 43; xiv. 3; xvi. 14; 24; Luke i. 31; ii. 21; ix. 51; xvii. 35; 36; 
xx. 47; Mark x. 30; xi. 24; xii. 40; Acts i 2; 8; 11; 22; ii. 38; x. 16. 

(9) Some verbs lack the augment, Matth. xi. 20 plup. (not e. 21); xiii 2 plup.; John vii. 37 
plup.; vii. 38 (wpaxa) semel; ix. 1; xviii. 5 plup.; Luke ii. 20 (see vv. 17, 26); v. 2; vii. 5; ix. 32; 
xi 52; xii. 13; xx. 33; xxiv. 29; Mark v. 33 plup. (also xv. 7; xvi. 9; Luke vi. 48; Acts xiv. 
8 with the received text); xv. 44 plup. semel; xvi. 8; Acts ii. 28; 31; iv. 22 plup.; vii. 10; 34; 
47; xii. 36; xix. 6; perhaps xxi. 12. A few double it, awexareorafy Luke vi. 10; xxii. 51 only; 
Acts vil. 56: or prefix it to a preposition, Matth. xi. 13; Mark vi. 19; vii. 6; Acts xix. 6. Some 
want the reduplication, as οἰκοδομηται Luke iv. 29. The diphthong ev is unaltered by the augment 
in Luke xxii. 41; Mark x. 16; Acts xii. 24; xx. 36, where the received text is gv, which Cod. 
Bezae has against the fextus receptus in Matth. xiv. 19; John vi 11; Luke ii 28; xxiv. 30; 50. 

(10) Some nouns are found in different genders from those in common use: φωσ masc. 
Matth. iv. 16; Sevdpov masc. ibid. xii. 33 semel; o8oc masc. Luke vii 27; xii. 58 (not xiv. 23); 
δαιμόνιον fem. ibid. ix. 1; δεῖπνον masc. xiv. 16; λειμοσ fem. xv. 14 (not iv. 25; Acts xi. 28); 
Tov εφεσου Acts xviii 21; rov apqdodov Mark xi. 4; but ro apdodoy Acts xix. 28: or of dif- 
ferent declensions: ἠρωδουσ Matth. ii. 1 only; «Xeoo accus. ibid. ix. 13; xii. 7 ; xxiii. 23; αμφιβλη- 
στροσ accus.iv. 18; Ἰωαννουσ gen. xi 12; rov πλουτουσ xiii. 22; ofov xxvii 48; ygpe Luke i. 36; 
θαμβου gen. ibid. v. 26 (masc. in iv. 36); paxaipy xxii. 49 only; opov gen. Acts vii. 30. 

(11) The aspirate and lenis spiritus are interchanged in οὐκ and ovy, Matth. xxvi. 60 bis; 
Luke xiii. 7; Mark vi 3; 19; Acts ii. 7; v. 22; xix. 23 (not v. 24): also in prepositions, whether 
in composition or before a case, Matth. xiv. 23; xvii. 19; Luke i. 25; vi. 35; Mark iv. 34; vii. 6; 
viii 14; Acta ii. 26; iii. 24; iv. 29; v. 28; x. 28; xi 4; xiii 25; xviii 23. Thus also μαθθαιος 
Matth. ix. 9; x. 3, and in the titles or headings throughout that Gospel; Luke vi. 15; Mark iii. 18; 
Acts i. 13: χειθωνασ Matth. x. 10; δικασαι ibid. v. 35; μαθηθευθεισ ibid. xii. 52: σῴφυριδασ xv. 
37; xvi. 10; Mark viii. 20; exOpoo Matth. x. 36; xiii. 25; xxii. 44; Luke i. 74 (not v. 71); Acta 
ij. 35; xiii 10; cf. Mark xii. 36: μασθοσ Luke xi. 27; xxiii 20: πανδοκει ibid. x. 35: συνηκθησαν 
Mark ii. 2: διανυκθητι ibid. vii. 34: σφογγον ibid. xv. 36: αθενισασ Acts xi. 6: emaraora tbid. xix. 
25: κατήκησαν tbid. xxi. 21 (not v. 21). 

(12) Three times we find A used for v, AvyAce John v. 35 (-ov errore); Luke xii. 35; πλέοντα 
ibid. e. 55. The article is used for the relative in Matth. xxiv. 38; Luke i. 4; Mark iv. 24; 


xlvii INTRODUCTION. 


viii 19; Acts ii 45; xvii. 27. Cther unusual forms in nouns are adefw Acts xx. 29; βυβλω 
Luke xx. 42; Mark xii 26 only: γενεχλιοισ Mark vi. 21; γενημα Matth. xxvi. 29; Luke xii. 18; 
xxiL 18 only; Seppyv Mark i. 6; exarovrapyno Matth. xxvii. 54; Acts x. 22; xxi. 32; xxii. 25; 26, 
but -xoc Luke vii 6; xxiii 47; ζμυρνα Matth. ii. 1] (so John xix. 39 secundá manu ; and in Cod. 
Sinaiticus even σζμυρνησ)ὴ; θυρουροσ John x. 3; Mark xiii. 34; «ax always (nine times); ἵστραηλ 
John xii 13; Luke ii 32; iv. 25; Mark xii. 29; ἵστραηλιται Acts xiii. 16; xxi. 28 (but in the 
Latin tstrahel in 26 other places, tstrahelitae in 3 others, see p. xliii); νησσοσ Acts xiii. 6; 
odayoo and odayew Matth. xv. 14; Luke vi 39 only; ορνιξ Luke xiii 34 (not Matth. xxiii 37); 
sometimes παρησια &c. (Acts xiv. 3), sometimes with pp (ibid. xiii. 46); πλημυρασ Luke vi. 48; 
πτυμα John ix. 6; σκωλησ Mark ix. 48 (not vv. 44, 46); (xara) τυχα Luke x. 31; ψιχων Luke xvi. 
21; Mark vii 28 (ψειχων Matth. xv. 27). In adjectives we find aveyAurrov Luke xii. 33; apecrova 
Mark vi. 13; evaroo Matth. xxvii. 45 (not v. 46 or xx. 5); Luke xxiii 44; Mark xv. 34; Acts 
ii 1; x. 30; evernxovra Matth. xvii. 12; Luke xv. 4; 7; pew masc. sing. Matth. xviii 1; 
ομοιοιπαηθεισ Acts xiv. 15; ovÜev Acta v. 36 only; πλεονα John vii 31; τεσσερακοντα Acts i 
3 only (never τεσσερεσῚ)ὴ; τουτοσ John xvii 25; Acts xxi. 20. In verbs, ἀαναπαεσθαι Mark xiv. 
41; aroxrevvovres or -roy Matth. x. 28; Mark xii. 5; amoxrevovrey Luke xii 4; even αποκτεινειτε 
Jut. Matth. xxiii. 34; ἐκχυννομένον Matth. xxvi. 28; Luke vi 38 (tmepexy.); xi 50; but eyxvvvo- 
μενον Matth. xxii. 35; Mark xiv. 24; «purro Luke xvii 2; «o0« Luke vii 33; 34; x. 7 (not 
v. 8); xx. 47 (κατεσθ.); xxii. 30 only; ἔβεννυμι Matth. xii, 20; xxv. 8 only; sAaro John xxi 7; 
ἡμφιασμενον Matth. xi. 8; npyafero Acts xviii. 3; npyacaro Matth. xxv. 16; xxvi 10; Luke xix. 
16 (xpoonp.); Mark xiv. 6; opyafopevoo (irascor) Matth. v. 22. Other anomalies are αφειναι Luke 
v. 21 (aduva« v. 24); επηρηαζοντων ibid. vi. 28; προσερηξεν vi. 48; συνερηξεν vi 49: αμφιεζει xii. 
28; erepupay xix. 35; περιτεθεντεσ xxii 37; αποστελη Mark iii. 14; εξεσταται ibid. v. 21; «£«aravro 
vi. 51; συνιτε vii 14; ηἡτοιμαθαι x. 40; ηπισσαμαι xiv. 68; ὡμασεν Acts iL 30; εξολεθρευθησεται 
ibid. iii. 23; «0«evro v. 18; ανεωξαν v. 19; ανεθραψατο vii 21; συνηλλασσεν vii. 26; eopaxey vii. 44; 
αφηθησεται viii. 22; σνυναξαντεσ xiv. 27; καταστανοντες xvii. 15; παρεσχειν xvii. 31; συνχυννεται xxi. 
31. Add azo with accus. Acts x. 23; pera “with” governing accus. Acts vii. 45; perhaps xviii. 17 ; 
cvy with gen. Acta iii 4; iv. 14; δεηθητε Tov xv Matth. ix. 38 ; κατηγορήσω ὕμασ John v. 45; 
qyayro avrov Mark vi. 56; emewav τω οχλω tbid. xv. 11 (see p. xlii. The Greek article is per- 
petually left out, where no native would have dispensed with it (see pp. xxxiii, liv). 

(13) In ovrwo the weak c is always retained before a consonant (40 times in all); as is the 
appended v or v épeAxvorixoy for the most part (e.g. in all except 28 out of 211 instances in the 
Acts)'; and the last letter of ev, συν, and παλιν is scarcely ever changed in composition. 

When we compare the foregoing list of Alexandrian forms (if such it be proper to term 
them) with those in the corresponding portion of Codex Sinaiticus (see Scrivener’s Introduction to 
Cod. Sin. pp. liv—lvi), we shall find amidst much diversity in the particulars cited so considerable 
a resemblance in their general character, as to assure us that the documents which respectively 
exhibit them are nearly of the same age, and that the anomalous inflections are due to the same 
causes (whatever they may be) both in the Sinai manuscript and in that of Beza. 

II. We now pass on from these smaller yet not insignificant matters to discuss the character and 
value of that remarkable text, which has proved so fertile a cause of perplexity to Biblical critics, 
and made the document which contains it a legitimate object of general curiosity. When Kipling’s 
edition was first published he was blamed, as well for faults of omission wherewith he was justly 
chargeable, as for neglecting to subjoin to his work a collation of Cod. Bezae with the received text, 


1 The absence of » leaves an hiatus in a few places: e.g. Luke xxiii. 53 (eost) ; Acts xx. 35; xxi. 34. 


INTRODUCTION. xlix 


such as Woide had annexed seven years before to his edition of Codex Alexandrinus, and both 
Scrivener and Mr Hansell have lately executed for the Cod. Sinaiticus. Those who censured Kip- 
ling ought to have observed that they were setting him an almost impossible task : to say nothing 
of the Latin version, so unique and fraught with interest, he could not have given in full the count- 
less variations which abound in every verse of this document without virtually transcribing the whole 
Greck text :—it may (of course) be compared with some standard line by line, but it defies a complete 
collation with any. Such is the extent of the subject to which we must address ourselves, as we 
best can, within the compass of a few pages. - 

(a) The most striking feature of Cod. D is its perpetual tendency to interpolation, by which 
ierm we understand the practice of adding to the received text passages (often of some length) which, 
whether genuine or spurious, are found in this document either alone or in company with a very few 
others. 

MarrH.i 16. The Latin d (the Greek being here lost), besides other variations, inserts virgo 
before maria, which gloss is found also in Cureton’s Syriac, in a. 5. c. g'. k. of the Old Latin’, in 
the Armenian, Aethiopic and three Arabic versions, in Gaudentius and the Opus imperfectum in 
Matthaeum, perhaps of the fourth century, though by some thought much later. 

MarrH. xx. 28. To the end of this verse both D and d append no less than twelve στίχοι, the 
whole bearing internal marks of evident spuriousness, not only in the use of words foreign to S. Mat- 
thew's style (such as ἐλαττων, efexovrac, ενδοξοτεροσ, δειπνοκλήτωρ, ἡττων, avvaye in its technical sense, 
χρησιμοσῚὴ, but even from its tone of rhetorical antithesis in the first sentence, so little suitable to our 
Lord's majestic simplicity of speech. The sentiment of the rest is manifestly borrowed from Luke 
xiv. 8—10, although there is little resemblance in the words. It is read in no Greek manuscript 
except Codex Bezae, yet it is found in Cureton's Syriac, in eleven copies of the Old Latin, besides d 
(a. b. c. e. f σ᾽" λ. m. n); and in at least six copies of the revised or Vulgate Latin (and. em., Brit. 
Mus. Reg. 1 B., Bodl. 857, B. M. Add. 24,142 secundá manu, Reg. A. xviii. in part, the four last 
cited by Mr Westcott) ; in the margin of the Philoxenian Syriac rs cited by Adler from Assemani's 
MS. ii. in the Vatican (with the note “that the paragraph is found in Greek copies at this place, but 
in ancient copies only in Luke κεφ. 53” (ch. xiv. 8 &c.]); in the margin of one Nitrian manuscript 
of the Peshito Syriac (Brit. Mus. Addit, 14,456); in four codices of the Anglo-Saxon version known 
to Marshall (which would prove that it once had a place in the Latin Vulgate): it is recognised by 
Juvencus (a.p. 330), Hilary (354), and Leo the Great (461): Codd. f. 2. of the Old Latin, and all 
others of the Vulgate, do not contain the passage. Those that support it abound in mutual variations: 
οὗ has not the first sentence, σ᾽. πὸ have nothing else. Of the rest the margin of the Philoxenian 
most resembles Cod. D, whose Greek was certainly not rendered from the parallel Latin here, as 
some have imagined: the version d has no connection with the other forms of the Latin, and (as 
Cureton has remarked) the Syriuc versions of the paragraph are independent of each other, being 
separately derived from some Greek source. 

No one has ventured to express a judgement that this passage was written by S. Matthew, at 
least in the form in which it now stands. Yet the general agreement with Cod. D of authorities so 
wide apart as the Syriac and Latin codices compels us to admit with Dr Cureton that “it certainly 
belongs to the most antient times of Christianity” [i e. not necessarily to a date antecedent to the 
second century]; *and the fact of the same advice of our Lord in very similar words being found 


! For an explanation of these necessary compendia place, to be found by means of the Indices at the end 
seribendi I am obliged to refer once for all to my Plain of the volume. 
Introduction, where each of them is described in its proper 


l INTRODUCTION. 


in the Gospel of S. Luke would at least make it appear that it is to be referred ultimately to him, 
whatever might have been the channel through which it has been derived” (Syriac Gospels, Preface, 
p. xxxviii). 

MarrH. xxiv. 41. The addition to this verse of the words δυο ἐπὶ κλεινησ pec x.r.X. presents 
no difficulty, the clause being plainly taken from Luke xvii. 34, and accommodated in phraseology 
to the former part of v. 41. Cod. D is here countenanced by 13. 69 (with which last it has a close 
affinity in many places) ; by the Old Latin a. ὃ. c. f. h., e (but before v. 41), 5.“ (in the room of v. 41); 
by Pope Sixtus’ edition and many of the manuscripts of the Vulgate (tol. gat. mm. &c.); by the Anglo- 
Saxon and both Aethiopic versions ; by Origen (in Latin) clearly, and by Hilary in part. 

MarrH. xxv. l. The addition καὶ rye. νυμφησ (after νυμφιου) is found in D, X primá manu, 1. 
36. 122. 124. 209. 262 (all six except 209 primá manu only), 360, the Peshito Syriac and Philoxe- 
nien with an asterisk (the margin alleging that it is not in all copies, and in particular not in that at 
Alexandria), the Armenian, both Persic, all Latin versions, the Frankish and Anglo-Saxon, Origen (in 
Latin) once, Hilary, Arnobius, Tichonius, the Opus imperfectum which may be of the fourth century. 

Joun vi 56. To the end of this verse Cod. D adds no less than 32 words, which (as we 
have before stated, p. x) were read in Stephens’ fj but no where else, though two Latin codices 
(a. f°) exhibit the latter portion of it, δὲ acceperi homo corpus fü hominis quemadmodum 
panem vitae habebit vitam in eo (ilo f?), and Victorinus (a.p. 393) cites as Scripture, however 
loosely, a sentiment not found in this precise form elsewhere, Viam esse et aeternam vitam sic 
testatur, sic docet, misi acceperitis corpus filii hominis sicut. panem vitae et biberitis sanguinem 
ejus non habebitis vitam in vobis. Here, therefore, Cod. D aud a few Old Latin authorities stand 
quite alone. 

JouN vii. 53—viii. 11. It may seem rash to include this celebrated paragraph in a list of 
interpolated passages, the rather since nearly all critics regard it as a genuine history (so strong 
is the internal evidence in its favour) and even those who are the most powerfully influenced by 
its absence from the oldest and best documents, assign it notwithstanding to S. John as the 
writer, although it was probably not contained in the first edition of his Gospel, but added at 
the time when his last chapter was annexed to what had once been the close of his narrative:— 
xx. 30, 31. It is needless to recapitulate here the authorities which respectively omit and 
contain it’. Codex Bezae is by two or three centuries the oldest Greek manuscript which 
exhibits it, but it appears there in language widely different from what is seen in any other 
copy. In Cod. E at Basle (proximus huic, longo sed proximus intervallo) it is noted by asterisks 
as doubtful. The wituess borne in its behalf by Cod. D would be all the more satisfactory were 
it not for our manuscript's admitted tendency to interpolate from uncanonical sources. 

Joun xii. 28. Cod. D and d stand quite alone among known manuscripts and versions in 
the feeble addition (derived from xvii. 5) which follows ovoza, yet even here we may plead for 
it Latin support; since both Augustine and Jerome describe our Lord as uttering the words 
at the time that sonuit vox de caelo et clarificavi et clarificabo. 

JoHN xvii ll. For the ten words which follow epyopza in Cod. D there is very slight and 
partial authority in Origen (who has only καὶ ovxert εἰμι ev tw κοσμω) and in c exactly to the same 
extent ef jam non sum in hoc mundo. But a adds to what is read in c the words et in hoc 
mundo sunt (not swm), omitting the first clause of the verse καὶ ouxerc expt ev tw κοσμω, while e 
puts ef in saeculo sum after the clause which a leaves out; so that in the characteristic expression 
Kat ev τω κοσμω eu Cod. D has no supporter except e (and a in part) of the Old Latin. 


1 They may be seen at length in Serivener's Plain 7ntroduction, pp. 339—443. 


INTRODUCTION. li 


Luke ii 48. After oSvvwpevor is added καὶ Avrovpevor only in D, Cureton's Syriac, the Old 
Latin a. e. f. g'. 1. q., gat. of the Vulgate, Ambrosiaster and Quaestiones ex utroque Testament. 
(perhaps of the fourth century). 

Luke v. 14. The 32 words appended to this verse after rovro, are derived with a few 
slight variations from Mark i. 45—ii. 1, and are countenanced by no other authority whatsoever. 

Luxe vi. 5. In the room of this verse, which he transfers to a place between v. 10 and 
v. ll, the scribe of Cod. D sets ‘mira quaedam" as Tregelles terms them, a story told in 28 
words, rj αὐτὴ ἡμέρα x«.7.X., which if the antithesis were but less pointed, might be deemed not 
wholly unworthy of the Divine Teacher’. As it stands it is one of the most interesting un- 
canonical sayings imputed to the Lord which tradition has preserved, and is probably derived from 
one of the many διηγήσεις (still surviving when the text of Cod. D was formed) which S. Lake's 
Gospel was designed to supersede. This addition, like the last we noted, must be stated to rest 
on no other authority, for the duo codices vetustissimi alleged in what are culled the Wechelian 
readings, can be none other than Cod. D and its counterpart β' Stephani. 

Luke xi 2. Between orav προσευχησθε and Aeyere Cod. D interposes 16 words in substance 
from Matth vi. 7: no other document has this reading. 

Ibid. v. 30. The 23 words which follow the end of this verse bear, as in the foregoing 
example, a general resemblance to the parallel place of S. Matthew (xii. 40), and are supported 
by e (which is so often found in alliance with D) and, omitting the clause'rpw ἡμερασ και τρεισ 
vuxrac, by a and ff^ also: but e omits the whole of v. 30 up to this point, and together with 7,5 
has in cor (corde ff") terrae at the end. Scholia in Cod. 237 (Matthaei's d) and others countenance 
the same variation. 

Luke xii. 42. After φρονιμοσ we find o ayafoc in D. 157. Lectionaries 60 (D's compatriot, 
see p. Xxxi), 63, Cureton's Syriac, the Old Latin c. e., perhaps the Acthiopic. 

LvkE xvi 19. Before the beginning of this verse Cod. D sets eurev Se καὶ erepav παραβολὴν, 
@ prefix which is of some importance as bearing on the interpretation of the parable of Dives 
and Lazarus But a solitary fragment of the Latin Vulgate, cited by Mill (bodl. of the seventh 
century) is D's only support, for it is no real confirmation of the reading that the Evangelistaria and 
even the uncial codex M in its margin (which is full of liturgical matter) should contain such a note to 
serve (as usual) for the commencement of the Church lesson on the 5th Sunday of S. Luke, just as in 
our own book of Common T'rayer we see in the openings of the Gospels for the 3rd and 4th Sundays 
after Easter, the 6th and 24th after Trinity. Add to this that the Scholiasts in several MSS. 
(36, 37, ἄς.) expressly declare that η rov wAovotov καὶ Tov AaLapov περιοχή παραβολὴ εστι και 
mapaBodixws εἰρηται, εἰ Kat o εὐαγγελιστὴς px προσεθηκε ταυτὴν τὴν προσηγοριαν To διηγήματι I 
should rather infer from this interpolation in D (what is credible enough in itself and not 
devoid of other evidence) that the lessons of the Eastern Church were settled even in that 
early age when the Greek text of our manuscript was formed. Certainly it is remarkable that 
Cod. D should read in Mark xiv. 41 ἀπέχει ro reAoo, where reAoo or ro τελοσ (cf. D in Mark 
iii. 26) seems plainly a marginal note, obtruded into the text to the detriment of the sense, 
having been first designed to indicate the end of the lesson for the 3rd day of the 2nd week of 


1 I know not what may be said to the remark of a fact it usually is. He had never heard of the book or 


learned and most intelligent Greek ecclesiastic, the Archi- the story before, but after à moment's thought he said: 
mandrite Philippos Schulati of Kustandje, to whom I This cannot be; the Lord cursed no man. 


recently shewed Cod. Bezae open at this passage, as in 


hi INTRODUCTION. 


the Carnival (v. 42). Yet D's error is here shared even by the Peshito Syriac (Ms Also), 


by a. c. f. ff^. q. (sufficit finis 9, exactly with our d) of the Old Latin, by the Philoxenian Syriac, 
by the Persian of the Polyglott, Erpenius’ Arabic, the Slavonian, and partly by the Armenian. Of 
Greek cursive MSS. it is found in 13. 47. 54. ὅθ. 61. 69. 124. 346. 2». ο΄, w'". marg., but 
56 reads ἐπέχει, 61 επειχε, as if in perplexity as to the meaning. 

LUKE xix. 27. Here again Cod. D adds to the end of the verse 19 words taken from the parallel 
passage (as it might seem to the scribe) Matth. xxv. 30. As in Luke v. 14; xi. 2, it is countenanced 
in this place by no other manuscript, version, or ecclesiastical writer. 

ibid. v. 38. εὐλογημένος ο βασιλευσ is placed between xv and euwvy in D (which omits the 
preceding βασιλευσὶὴ a. c..f*. i. and the Aethiopic. Cod. 157 (which has not o) and the Philoxenian 
Syriac (with an asterisk) add wpayA to these words, but the latter states in the margin that the clause 
is not found in all copies. Tischendorf, after Mill but not Tregelles, cites the Aethiopic for 
ισραηλ also. 

tbid. v. 45. The Philoxenian version makes a similar statement while it supports Cod. D in adding 
to ayopafovrac the 13 words derived from mingling the parallel Gospels Matth. xxi.12; Mark xi. 15; 
John ii, 15. Cod. A anl its kindred MS. 262, a. c. e. ff". g*. 1, the Aethiopic, the Armenian in part, 
Ambrose, contain them with some slight variations. 

Luke xxii 61. Here again py edevar pe is added to the verse from v. 34 of this chapter in D 
(μη εἰδεναι only in 71 or ρ΄“), partly confirmed by the Armenian and a. b. The Latin d does not 
recognise this addition. 

LUKE xxiii. 37. To this verse Cod. D and c (imposuerunt autem) add περιτεθεντεσ (tnponentes d) 
avro και axavOwov orepavov, very much out of place, since the scene of this act of mockery, as assigned 
by the other three Evangelists, is Pilate's Praetorium. So also Cureton’s Syriac, only that 0001 QSaq90 
might be fairly (though not necessarily) rendered “now they had set" (“and they had set,” Cureton), 
which would remove all difficulty as regards the sense. 

ibid. v. 40. Here D adds the manifest gloss καὶ ἡμεισ ἐσμεν after κριματι εἰ, but d has e£ nos 
sumus without rendering the preceding εἰ Epiphanius is cited for this addition by Mill (followed 
by Griesbach and Scholz), but the silence of Wetstein and Tischendorf may lead us to suspect that 
the quotation cannot be verified. 

ibid. v. 42. Cod. D alone begins this verse with the words καὶ στραφεισ προσ Tov KV eurey GvTO, 
for which Tischendorf quotes (in substance) the apocryphal Acta Pilati. 

^ $bid. v. 53. To this verse D makes a strange addition, conceived somewhat in the Homeric 
spirit, καὶ θεντοσ avrov (posito eo d, as if he had read τεθεντοσ)ὴ ἐπεθηκεν τω μνημειω λειθον ov μογισ' 
εικοσι εκυλιον: yet this reading is supported by c of the Old Latin and by the Thebaic version, which 
latter however does not render poyw. 

Luke xxiv. 1. The addition to this verse ελογιζοντο δὲ x.r.X., in substance from Mark xvi. 3 
(where reference to Mark xv. 46 is of course implied) is maintained by the same authorities as that 
in ch. xxiii. 53 and by none other. Both glosses were obviously intended to account for rov before 
λιθον in ch. xxiv. 2. 

ibid. v. 31. This verse thus begins in Cod. D, its Latin allies c. e., and once in Origen : Aaffovrov 
Se avrov Tov aproy απ avrov qvvygcav ot οφθ. avrov, but all this is plainly implied in the context: 
in v. 33 again D's gloss Avrovpevor is also supported only by c. e. and the Thebaic version. 

In S8. Mark the interpolations to be detected in Codex Bezae are but few: indeed in this portion 
of the manuscript there is rather a tendency, which Schulz has remarked, to prefer the abbreviated 


INTRODUCTION. hu 


readings that characterise the Codex Vaticanus (B). We notice however evayyeAcoy added to κηρυσ- 
σειν ch. iii. 14 with its Latin allies 5. e. f. ff" g'. ἃ : so am. mt. of the Vulgate, and the Anglo-Saxon. 

In ch. v. 33 διο πεποιηκει λαθρα, a poor comment, is set after rpeuovoa in D. 50. 124. 2”. 6»*. a. 
Jf". i, the Armenian: in v. 41 ραββι follows λέγει αὐτὴ in D only: in ch. vii. 3 aprov is added to εσθει- 
ovow by D. 71 (g*?), by a. b..ff*. i. Armen. Aethiop., and rov aprov by M. secundá manu, 13. Evst. 48 
bis, Z^, and c (panem suum). Nearly the same versions, a. ὃ. c. f. ff *. 4. 1. Armen. join with D, c'*, 
the Sixtine Vulgate and its MS. tol. in adding orav ελθωσιν or some such epezegesis to ayopac in v. 4. 
Similarly in ch. viii 14 ot μαθηταῖι is annexed to ἐπελαθοντο in D alone of the uncials, followed by c 
and a host of cursive copies 28. 35. 37. 76. 77. 108. 218. 252. 282. s** secundá manu, but οἱ μαθηται 
avrov (cf. Matth. xvi. 5) in U. 13. 18. 25. 28. 51. 56. 58. 61. 62. 67. 69. 78. 80. 90. 124. 127. 131. 
226 marg. 238. 241. 245. 246. 247. 262. 271. 282. 346, Scrivener's 1m n q r (w secundá manu) and 
the Slavonic version. 

In ch. vii 26 vraye εἰσ Tov owov cov xat is inserted from ii. 11, with some other slight varia- 
tions by D. 13. 28. 61. 69. 346. 2»*., by a. b. f. 7. g'* ἃ ὦ, and the Vulgate. In ch. x. 5 μωύσησ from 
Matth. xix. 8 follows eypayev in D. σ΄, k. and a MS. of the Peshito (teste T'regelles.) : so b. f. g'. alio 
ordine. In ch. xi. 27 again rov Àaov is added from Matth. xxi. 23 in order to explain πρεσβυτεροι, 
and in ch. xii. 24 odare after rov 6v, both by D oniy: in ch. xii 5, however, the equally needless 
SovAoy after απεστειλεν is also found in a. b. i. g: in ff* and Cod. 435 (which omits aAXoy) it stands 
before αἀπεστειλε. 

In ch. xii. 28 λεγων διδασκαλε of D before ποια (from Matth. xxii. 35) is countenanced by 5. c. f". 
g’. i. k, and partly by gat. of the Vulgate: in v. 38 ποιεισθαι (i. e. ποιεισθε, facitis in d) is added to 
ayopaur by D and that remarkable cursive Muralt’s 2°*: in v. 40 the addition of καὶ ορφανων after 
Χχήρων is better supported, for it occurs as well in 2»* as in 13. 28. 69. 124. 346, in the Jerusalem 
Syriac and in a. ὦ. c. e. ff". σ᾿. i. Nearly the same Latin codices have rov «pov after οικοδομαι with 
D in ch. xiii. 1, derived from Matth. xxiv. 1, viz 5b. c. ff *. σ᾽. k. l. q., with tol. gat. mt. of the Vulgate. 

More considerable is the addition borrowed from John ii. 19 or Mark xiv. 58, annexed in D to 
ch. xiii. 2 και δια tp. ημ. k.r.X. Yet here again we can appeal to the best Old Latin authorities, although 
to none else:—a. b. c. e. ff^. g'. i. k. n. and Cyprian, but not to q or the Vulgate Even the 
feeble expletives τι avayewwoxe in v. 14 are read after vocero in a. σ΄. n (partly), though only in 
D of the Greek: but in v. 28 D's appendage of «v αὐτῇ after φυλλα is common also to 28. 91. 
124. 299. 2», and of the versions to g and the Armenian. 

In ch. xv. l after ampyayoy (which CDG 1. 124. 209. 258. 2», Wake 34 (me teste), the 
Evangelistaria 13. 17. H** semel, Origen and possibly some versions substitute from Matth. xxvii. 
2 for απηνεγκαν), ew τὴν αὐλὴν is annexed from recollection of John xviii. 28 by D a. c. ff*. (k: in 
praetorium) and Origen only. Other additions are v. 38 pepy after δυο with c only; v. 47 τον 
torov oTov (for mov) with c. ff*. g. and the Armenian; ch. xvi 6 o ayyedoo set after avrow 
(sic) from Matth. xxviii 5 with ff* only. 

We have detailed the more fully those lesser interpolations which prevail in S. Mark's 
Gospel, not only because there are none there so extensive or important as in the books of the 
other Evangelists, but in order that the student may clearly discern their character (as mainly 
derived from the synoptic Gospels) and the close connection they manifest between Cod. D and 
the best Latin versions When we turn our view to the Acts of the Apostles we find ourselves 
confronted with a text the like to which we have no experience of elsewhere. While the general 
course of the history and the spirit of the work remain the same as in our commonly received 
text, we perpetually encounter long passages in Codex Bezae which resemble that text only as 


liv INTRODUCTION. 


a loose and explanatory paraphrase recalls the original from which it sprung: save that there 
is no difference in the language in this instance, it is hardly an exaggeration of the facts to 
assert that Cod. D reproduces the textus receptus of the Acts much in the same way that one 
of the best Chaldee Targums does the Hebrew of the Old Testament: so wide are the variations 
in the diction, so constant and inveterate the practice of expanding the narrative by means of 
interpolations which seldom recommend themselves as genuine by even a semblance of internal 
probability. Bornemann’ indeed has adopted Cod. Bezae as the standard to which he would 
make all other authorities bend, and has thus produced a work of which Tischendorf bluntly 
says that ‘“‘saepe dubites per ludumne an serio scripte legas:" with most critics, on the other 
hand, it may be feared that the obvious faults and palpable glosses so especially conspicuous in 
this one book, have engendered a natural but not very reasonable habit of unduly disparaging 
our venerable document as a whole. We shall perhaps best exhibit to the student the genius 
of Cod. D in the Acts, if we analyse its readings primd manu, omitting itacisms, in the one 
short chapter previously employed to illustrate the style of its Latin version (see above, p. xxxviii), 
although it is on the whole more free from arbitrary additions than some others It shall be 
compared throughout with Stephens N.T. of 1550 and with the documents to which Cod. D 
_ bears the closest affinity, especially with that very remarkable relique of the end of the sixth 
century, the Graeco-Latin Cod. E of the Acts*. 

Acts vi l. avraw rao ypepao (for raw 7p. 7.) D alone (not even d). — τη (before καθη- 
μερινὴ): no Greek could have thus dropped the article (see above, p. xxxiii) fin. +ev τὴ 
διακονια Tov. εβραιων D alone, a wretched gloss, rejected by a much later hand, but such changes 
we will not notice. v. 2. —& D (not d) with the Thebaic. Ὁ προσ avrovo (after εἰπὸν NDE, 
but evav ABC)D, Peshito Syriac, Thebaic, Cyprian (eis). quer (for nao) CD, Theophylact twice 
(but ἡμασ once) v. 3. init. Ἔτι ovv ἐστιν αδελφοι D alone, from ch. xxi. 22, ovv αδελῴοι being 
omitted after ἐπισκεψασθαι, though d has itaque for ovv. The order of the next words is εξ vuv avrov 
avépac (d not rendering avrov) iu D and Marcus the monk (5th century. -- αγιον NBD (C by a later 
hand), 137. 180, the Philoxenian Syriac (the Peshito reads xvptov instead), the Memphitic, Erpenius’ 
Arabic (made from the Peshito) three MSS. of the Vulgate (am. fuld. the two best, and /ux.), 
Chrysostom, Theophylact in his Commentary, but he has ayiov in his text: N and the Phi- 
loxenian omit the following xat καταστησομεν D with Stephens and NABCE, many cursives 
(eleven out of Scrivener’s twelve), the Syriac, Thebaic, both Aethiopic, Chrysostom and others, 
though all the Latin versions (see p. xxxviii) appear to favour -copev of H and Elzevir. jin. avrgo 
p. m. & mere clerical error for ravrgc (hoc d). v. 4. mpooxaprepyooxey is broken up by D 
into the strong Hellenistic expression «copeÜa προσκαρτερουντεσ, ἐσομεθα being brought up before 
τῇ προσευχη. The later Syriac has the participle only in the margin, and the translator d 
did not understand this idiom, for he renders sumus...perseveramus (see too e and the 
Vulgate. v. 5. +ovroa (after Aoyoo) D, the Syriac, with Erpenius Arabic, the Thebaic and 
Aethiopic, although versions can hardly be trusted on such a point. Twv μαθητων (after 
πληθουσὴ a gloss of D alone. The soloecism wAypyo for πληρη is found in NAC*DEH, many 
cursives (six of Scrivener's) but apparently not in B. νικορα (nicanorem in d) seems a mere error for 


1 Acta Apostolorum ad Cod. Cantabrigiensis fidem Th. Hearne in 1715, is announced for republication by 
recensuit, Frid. Aug. Bornemann, Grossenhainae, 1848. Tischendorf in the course of the present year. In the 
Pars prior (Textum contineus). following pages -- denotes an addition to the received 

3 Laud. 35 in the Bodleian, inaccurately edited by text, — an omission of some portion of it. 


INTRODUCTION. lv 


vixavopa (by ttacism Nixavwpa B' secundá manu E. e* - 133), The small final v in rappeva (permenan 
d) does not look like the work of the original scribe, though it possibly may be such. v. 6. 
ovrot ἐσταθησαν D alone for ove «orgcav, even d agrees with e in reading quos statuerunt. 


The Peshito (akon coy, Erpenius Arabic, the Thebaic have hi steterunt : «ϑιτινεσ' for και 
here and v. 10 initio is also peculiar to D; d has que v. 6, qui v. 10. v. 7 «v for Ó«ov is 
in DE. 180, the Philoxenian Syriae, the Vulgate (but not am.), Chrysostom (text, not Com- 
mentary): αὐτὴ for ry (corrected secundá manu) is a mere clerical error. v. 8 χαριτοσ (for 
πιστεωσὴ NABD (C has lost three lines here) k*. 5. 7. 8. 13. 15. 18. 27. 29. 33. 34. 36. 40. 
66**. 69. 96. 100. 105. 163, the Vulgate, both Syriac, Erpenius’ Arabic, Thebaic, Memphitic, 
Armenian, with Didymus, Basil Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom, Augustine, Gaudentius, Proclus, 
Oecumenius, and others, no doubt , orrectly : E has χαριτοσ καὶ πιστεωσ, a conflate ? reading. 
fn + δια Tov ονοματοσ (ev 7 tw ov. E) xv KV up χρυ χρυ DE. k™. J. 13, 24. 33. 34. 43. 81. 180 (rov Kv κυ E. k*, 

. 13. 24. 33: without xv 34; vrep for Su, without κυ 43), Thebaic, Augustine Bede’s Greek 
copy so nearly allied to E, and (omitting m Xv) the later Syriac with an asterisk, which very 
often stands almost alone with D in maintaining glosses of this kind. v. 9. -- καὶ aowo AD 
Apost. Lection. 12 only: our corrector B adds the words (Facsimile Plate III, No. 3) v. 10 
Ἔτη ovo: ev avro (after copia) DEL r0 ayw (after TV) DE, Bede’s Greek (almost constantly 
with E), bodl. of Vulgate. At the end of v. 10 comes the largest interpolation we have yet seen, 
supported only by DE, the margin of the Philoxenian or later Syriac, am. of the Vulgate 
secundá manu, some Latin MSS. known to Erasmus, and the Bohemian version, wbich puts it 
after v. 9. The variation in the diction between D and E (including Lede's Greek) is great, 
and may be regarded as a token that the several forms extant were separately translated from 
some document now lost. δια ro ἐλέγχεσθαι avrovo (Store ἡλεγχοντο E) ew (ur E. Syr. marg.) avrov 
μετα πασὴσ wappyciag μὴ δυναμενοι ov(v autem d) avropOadpew (επιδὴ ovk ἡδυναντὸ αντιλεγειν E) τὴ 
adyGea. v. ll βλασφημιασ (for βλασφημα) & (at first, but changed immediately by the first hand) 
D. 137. the Vulgate only: noteven d. μωΐσην NABCDH (even e has mousem, but E μωσην with 
the received text and am.), very many cursives (including six of Scrivener’s), the Vulgate and other 
versions: this is indeed in most places (cf. v. 14 textds recepti) the approved orthography. [v.12 
tni. D has not the gloss of Ee καὶ ravra eurovrec, nor has avy other authority whatever]. 
v. 13 και eornoav (for ἐστῆσαν re) D, possibly also the Vulgate (see p. xxxviii): e (autem) seems 
to read δὲ with H and others, against its own Greek, as in v. ll. - xara avrov (after ψευδεισ)ὴ D 
alone. — βλασφημα NABCD (Aad. ρημ. NBC) 27. 29. 81. 105. 142. 163. both Syriac, Erpenius' 
Arabic, the Thebaic, Memphitic, Vulgate, Chrysostom, Proclus once. — rovro» NADEH (habent 
BC), eight of Scrivener's and some 40 other cursive manuscripts, the Vulgate (except ¢ol.), Memphitic, 
both Aethiopic, Armenian, a MS. of Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom in his Commentary (not in 
his text), Damasus, Theophylact once (he has rovrcv twice), even the Complutensian edition: no 
donbt correctly. νυ. 14 ναζοραιοσ for vafwp. D alone here; but with C in ch. iii. 6; a corrector 
we have named B places w over o in ναζοραιοσ or ναξορηνοσ Luke iv. 34; Mark x. 47; Acts 
vi. 14; xxii. 8 (ii. 22 is later), but ναζωραιοσ is written primá manu Matth. ii. 23; xxvi. 71; John 
xvii. 7; Luke xxiv. 19; Acts iv. 10. After oAAafe d renders ra «09 by tterum, unless we 
say with Bentley (Ellis, Critica Sacra, p. 23) «09 accepit pro eo quod est ἔτι," drawing from 


1 Thus both Mai and Rulotta testify. Tischendorf, however, after Birch, notes -wpa as by the first (not by a later) 
hand, which indeed is more likely. 


lvi INTRODUCTION. 


the blunder the inference we have already tried to establish (above, p. xxxi—xxxv) “N.B. non 
correxisse Graeca ad Latina" v. 15. The resolution of ατενισαντεσ into καὶ yrevifoy renders it 
necessary to read xat before «iov. Cod. D primá manu stands alone here, and in hundreds of 
examples of the same construction: Kipling cites a few (Praef. p. viii). Its perpetual resolution 
of the participle and verb into two verbs has been urged by Bp. Middleton to prove (what we 
need not dispute) that the text as we now have it was not arranged by a native Greek, by 
reason of its exhibiting “a balder and more clumsy phraseology than the other manuscripts:” 
“41 mean," he adds, “to a person moderately conversant with Greek; for to any other it might 
appear the more obvious and natural" (Doctrine of the Greek Article, Appendix, p. 479, 3rd Ed.). 

Again, we find in v. 15 avro for ew avrov (δὲ omits ec) in D alone: wavreo (for απαντεσὴ in 
NABCDE. c*. 100. 105. 163. 180. Apost. Lection. 6, Theophylact once (απ. twice) and Cramer’s 
Oxford Catena (1838). καθημενοι (for καθεζομενοι) D. c". 18. 137. 180. Lastly, to the end of 
the chapter D alone annexes the frigid gloss ἐστωτοσ ev peow avrov. Such interpolated clauses of 
D in the fifteen verses of ch. vi. amount to ten, certainly not more than the average in the Acts. 

But if the deviations of Cod. D from the ordinary text in Acts vi be less marked than 
in some other parts of that book (e.g. capp. xii. xvi), we yet discover in them abundant means 
for judging of the genius and general aspect of the manuscript. Discarding from notice mere 
blunders of transcription, t¢acisms and such like trifles, we note several instances where its agreement 
with other principal authorities helps to point to the true reading of S. Luke's autograph (e.g. 
καταστήσομεν, perhaps also—aytov, v. 3; χαριτοσ v. 8; μωῦσην v. 11;—rovrov v. 13): others where 
D stands quite solitary in exhibiting variations of no intrinsic excellency (e.g. the glosses in 
vv, 1; 3; 5; 13; 15), and these, so far as they go, rather damage the witness that vouches 
for them: others, again, far more interesting and instructive, where D accords with one or 
two out of a few very ancient documents derived from remote and diverse regions of Chris- 
tendom, which serve to prove that the Syrian Churches, the Old Latin translator, and the 
Western Fathers, were acquainted with a state of the text which, though not so pure as that 
of the oldest Greek copies, was extensively spread and received by them with credit. We will 
close the branch of our discussion which relates to the interpolations of Codex Bezae, by citing a 
few more specimens of the two latter cases from the first five chapters in the Acts, (1) that in 
which D stands alone, and (2) that wherein it is countenanced by the oldest and most primitive 
versions and ecclesiastical writers. It would require a volume to exhaust this suggestive and 


fertile theme. 

(1) We know of no other documeat which supports D in any of the following glosces, 
scarce one of which seems worthy of the sacred writer. Acts i 14+ καὶ rekvow: (after γυναιξιν); 
ii, 1 1 ἐγένετο ev ta wpepawr εκειναισ (before rov συνπληρουσθαι); v. 2  εἰδον (before eyevero); 
v. l4-- peroc (after exnper), though Cod. E has sporepov after avrov; v. 37 + καὶ τινεσ εξ avrov 
(before εἰπαν), a very strained precaution; v. 42+ ev ἱερουσαλημ (after αποστολων)ὴ, so tol. at the 
end of the verse; iii 1 + τὸ δειίλεινον (after iepov) ; iv. 5 + ἡμέραν (after avpvov) ; 9. 24 + καὶ επιγνοντεσ 
τὴν TOV óv evepyeav (after ακουσαντεσ); v. 5 + παραχρημα (before πεσων), though E has παραχρημα 
in v. 6 after avacravres δε; v. 18 fin. + καὶ emopev?g εἰσ εκαστοσ εἰσ ta ἴδια (see John vii. 53); 
v. 21 + εγερθεντεσ to mpwi (after avro); v. 36 + avroo δι avrov (before καὶ ravrec), even d omitting the 
words; v. 38 + εἰσὶν adeAdor (after ra vvv, d not rendering εἰσιν. Add to these the following notable 
omissions or variations, met with only in D: Acts ii. 14 dexa for evdexa; v. 19 — αἱμα και πυρ koi 
arpida xarvov; v. 30 καρδιασ (praecordia d) for ordvoc; v. 31 mpoibwv ἐλαλησε περι tho (one στίχος) 
is dropped in Dd, apparently in error: see above p. xviii; v. 47 κοσμον for Àaov; iv. l — και 


INTRODUCTION. lvii 


o στρατηγοσ του tepov; v. 12 — ἡ σωτήρια only (though several Western authorities reject the first 
eight words of the verse); v. 19 — xa: ἰδιωται; v. 16 gaveporepov ἐστιν elegantly for φανερὸν (but 
manifestum est in d), cf. x. 28 in D; 2 Tim. i. 18; v. 18 xara ro for ro xaÜoAov, but d has omnino, 
v. 20 — μη, so in ch. v. 26 — ov Dd. Many other of D's lectiones singulares, which ar3 of less 
moment, we have passed by unnoticed. 

(2) The following characteristic additious, variations, and omissions in the same five chapters 
are also countenanced by the few faithful allies of Codex Bezae, by one or two or several at once: 
readings more widely supported (e.g. i. 14; ii. 40; 42; iv. 25; 33; v. 24) it is beside our present 
purpose to enumerate. Acts i 2 --xat exeAXevoe κηρυσσειν To ευαγγελιον (after εξελεξατο) with the 
margin of the Philoxenian Syriac (which we shall denote by syr. p. mg.) Augustine thrice, partly 
by the Thebaic, Vigiiius [or Idacius], and /uz. of the Vulgate. v. 4 Ὁ φησιν δια rov στοματοσ (before 
pov) with the Vulgate (ux. both Aethiopic editions, Hilary, Augustine, Jerome (but d, am. fuld. 
omit φησιν); v. 5 - καὶ o. μελλεται λαμβανειν (after βαπτισθησεσθαι) with tol, Hilary, Augustine, 
Idacius, Maximus Taurinensis; ibid. fin. --eoc tno πεντηκοστησ with the Thebaic and Augustine 
thrice; v. 1l — ew rov ovpavoy secund. with 33 primá manu, tol, Augustine once, Vigilius [Idacius], 
Avitus; v. 21 fin. + Xp? with the Philoxenian Syriac, both Aethiopic, Augustine. 

Ch. ii. 6 rai γλωσσαισ (for τη du διαλεκτω) with the Peshito Syriac version, and syr. p. mg.; 
Augustine has both expressions, but d. e. and the Vulgate lingudé sud; v. 12 +m tw yeyovore 
(before καὶ [D] Aeyovrec) syr. p. mg., Augustine once; v. 14  αποστολοισ (after evdexa [δεκα D, 
supra, p. lvi]) with the uncial Lectionary Apost. 12, or Evst. 60 (see page xxxi) the Peshito Syriac, 
Augustine; v. 16 -- ιωηλ with Irenaeus (Latin), Hilary, Augustine, the treatise of the fourth 
century de Rebaptismate; v. 18 — «v raw ἡμεραισ εκειναισ and καὶ προφητευσουσι with the same 
treatise and with Jerome; v. 20 -- καὶ ert$ayy with N (Cod. Sinaiticus) alone; v. 37 + rore παντεσ 
οἱ συνελθοντεσ καὶ (before axovcavreg) with syr. p. mg.; ibid. — λοιπουσ with 104, the Memphitic 
and Aethiopic, if Mill may be trusted (JN. T; Proleg. ὃ 440), Augustine twice, the treatise of the 
fourth century de Promissionibus ; ; ibid. fin. -- ὑποδειξατε ἡμεῖν with E, syr. p. mg., Bede's Greek, 
tol. v. 38 -- rov κυ (before | up) with E. 60. 69. 100. 163, both Syriac, Erpenius’ Arabic, (the Peshito 
and Erpenius, without χρυ), the Thebaic, Armenian, Basil, Cyril, Epiphanius, Theodoret, and nearly 
all the Latins, Cyprian, Hilary, Lucifer of Cagliari, Ambrose, Augustine, Vigilius; v. 4l πιστευ- 
cayreg (for αποδεξαμενοι), but + καὶ πιστευσαντεσ after avrov syr. p. mg., Augustine; v. 45 oco 
κτήματα exov (for ra krypara) with the Peshito Syriac only, without even Erpenius' Arabic; ibid. 
+ καθημέραν (after avra) with Memphitic, according to Mill. 

Ch. iii 2 «δου (before rw) with the Peshito and Erpenius Arabic; ibid. — vrapywy with 
Lucifer of Cagliari and perhaps the Oriental Versions, but their evidence is hardly available in 
such a case; v. 3 + ovrog ατενισασ Tow οφθαλμοισ avrov (before oc [καὶ D] (wv) only with reg. 
5367 of the Vulgate, which stands with D also in v. 7 + εἐσταθη και (before εσταιρεωθησαν) ; v. 8 
+ xaipou.evog. (after mepierare) with E (xatpwv) ; ibid. — περιπάτων καὶ adAopevoo with reg. and both 
Aethiopic; v. 11. This verse opens vith exzopevop.evov Se Tov merpou kat ioavov συνεξεπορευετο x. T. À. 
in D reg. only; v. 13 + χρν (after a) with Pell Platt's Aethiopic only; ibid. +«o κρισιν (after 
wapedwxate) E (xpernptov), syr. p. mg., Irenaeus in the Latin; ibid. avrov of the received text rests 
en the support of DE among the uncials, the Thebaic, both Syriac versions, Chrysostom and the 
mass of ‘cursive copies, against NABC lo* (or p**, the best cursive copy of the Acts), some other 
cursives, and a host of other authorities, which omit the word; ibid. the confused expression in 


the last two στίχοι of this verse (which d rather explains than translates, see p. xxxiii) bears some 
À 


lviii INTRODUCTION. 


resemblance to Irenaeus in the Latin (cwm remittere eum vellet), to Jerome, to Chrysostom (who 
seems to have read θελοντοσ in one place) and to the loose paraphrase of both Aethiopic editions; 
v. 14 εβαρυνατε (for npvyoacbe) with only Irenaeus (aggravastis): v. 17 + avdpeo (before adeAdor) 
DE only; tbid. + wovnpov (after expagate), but ro wovgpov 34 (Cod. Montfortianus), syr. p. mg., 
Irenaeus in Latin, Ambrosiaster, Quaestiones ex utroque Test. (of the fourth century) ; v. 21 — ar 
awoc with 19, the Armenian, Irenaeus in Latin, Tertullian, Cosmas Indicopleustes (of the sixth 
century). 

Ch. iv. 1 + ro. ρηματα ravra (after Aaov) DE. c*, Peshito Syriac, Erpenius’ Arabic (a version 
from the Peshito, it will be remembered) syr. p. mg., reg. Theophylact once and Lucifer, with some 
variation in the order; v. 9 +ad vmor (after ἀνακρεινομεθα) DE, the Peshito and Erp. Arab., Platt's 
Aethiopic, reg., Irenaeus in Latin, Cyprian; v. 14 + ποιῆσαι ἡ (before avrurew) with reg., even 
against d; v. 18 D begins συνκατατιθεμενων δὲ avrov τῇ Ὑγνωμὴ φωνήσαντεσ (for Kat kaXecavrec) 
with syr. p. mg., reg. Lucifer; v. 31 fin. - παντὶ tw θελοντι πίστευειν, with E, Bede's Greek, 
Irenaeus in Latin, also Augustine (omitting πιστενυειν); v. 32 { καὶ ovk ἣν διακρισισ εν avrois. οὐδεμια 


(after uu) with E (whose words are x. o. ἣν χωρισμοσ ev avrow Tw), Bede's Greek, Cyprian twice 
(discrimen), Ambrose, Zeno. 


Ch. v. 10 + evvereAavreo (before εξηνεγκαν καὶ with the Peshito (amaco, not the same 
word as in v. 6) and Erpenius’ Arabic, against even d; v. 12 + ev rw tepw (after amavrec) with 
E partly (ev ro vaw συνηγμενοι), 42, the Thebaic, both Aethiopic editions; e. 15 jin. + απηλλασ- 
covro yap απὸ πασὴσ acbeviag wo εἰχεν exacroc avrov. Here E has nearly the same sense ex- 
pressed in as different words as possible, καὶ ρυσθωσιν απὸ T. a. yo «xov, while Lucifer, the Vul- 
gate and some of its manuscripts am., demid., &c. (not fuld. tol.) support either D or E, but none 
g» beyond ασθενειασ: thus am. and Lucifer render ef liberabantur, the printed Vulgate et libera- 
rentur, some add omnes, some have infirmitatibus, others end with suis or sud. This variation 
detracts much from the weight of their evidence. «v. 22 + καὶ ανυξαντεσ τὴν φυλακὴν (after rapaye- 
vopevot) with the Philoxenian Syriac with an asterisk, and the Vulgate; e. 31 δοξη D only with the 
Thebaic and Latin of Irenaeus (d corrupts claritate into caritate); fin. + ev avro with the Thebaic, 
Roman Aethiopic, and Arabic of the Polyglott, Augustine; v. 35 rove ἀρχοντασ και trove συνεδριουσ 
(for avrovo) with the Thebaic only ; v. 36 +eyay (before «avrov) D, but after eavrov in A secundá manu 
(which is of little consequence) E, Scrivener’s ko, 5. 6. 15. 18. 32. 33. 34. 36. 49. 43. 45. 57. 69. 180., 
the Peshito Syriac, both Arabic and some later copies of the Slavonic versions, tol., Origen, Cyril, 
Jerome, even the Complutensian edition, and the first two of Stephens, which much depended on 
it; v. 38 + μὴ μιαναντεσ τασ χειρασ (before or) with 34 (Cod. Montfort), E and Bede's Greek 
havihg the clause in substance with the variation py μολυνοντεσ rac χειρασ vpgov; v. 39. Before 
μήποτε D, the Philoxenian Syriac with an asterisk, and demid. (nearly) have ovre ὕμεισ ovre 
βασιλεισ ovre rvpavvoc (thus far E and Bede's Greek: ovre ὑμεισ ovre ot apxovreo vov) απεχεσθαι 
ovv απὸ των ἀανθρωπων rovrov: 33 marg. 180 contain only the last clause ἀποσχεσθε (eyxparevere 33) 
ovv aro TOv ayÓ. (avÓpev Syr. 180) τὸ Tovr.; v. 41 t ἀπόστολοι (after ov) with 180 and the Philoxe- 
nian Syriac; v. 42 fin. cov ἂν cy χρν (for w τὸν x») with the Peshito (nearly) Thebaic and 
Plats Aethiopic only: but there is much fluctuation in this passage. 

From the foregoing analysis of al/ the various readings found in Acts vi, and of the characteristic 
peculiarities of Cod. D in Act. i. —v., the reader will easily judge for himself of its interest and im- 
portance. Its chief auxiliaries are Cod. E, though with much difference in the words ; Codd. 33, 34 
(Montfort.), 137, 180; the Peshito Syriac (but not in D's larger interpolations, nor D in its own, 


INTRODUCTION. lix 


e.g. ch. iii. 2); the later or Philoxenian Syriac, especially the Greek manuscript cited in its margin'; 
the Thebaic (occasionally too the Memphitic) and Aethiopic versions, the Vulgate Latin and some 
of its manuscripts (especially reg. tol. demid.); the Latin Fathers in full troop (but rather Cyprian, 
Lucifer and Augustine than Jerome, who was much conversant with Greek codices) and the Old 
Latin interpreter of Irenaeus, who in his citations may have followed Western versions rather than 
the Greek that lay before him. When Bcrnemann, whose partiality for Cod. D we have before 
mentioned (p. liv), first considered this strange text with a view to form some estimate of its value, 
he was led to adopt a notion better suited to account for the glosses found in the later than in the 
earlier chapters of the Acts. “Fuit igitur quum omnes istas additiones codicis D sumptas esse ex 
commentariis et ephemeridibus suspicarer, quas Lucas ipse de rebus ab Apostolis Pauloque gestis 
quovis die vel hebdomade privatum in usum literis mandaverit," such a diary having been found in 
after times “in ecclesiae cujusdam sacrario," and inserted in a few copies of his book by the διορθωταί 
(Act. Apost. Praef. p. x). It is obvious, however, that such supplemental matter would consist pretty 
exclusively of minule Jacts (such as S. Mark delights in), which S. Luke might have overlooked as 
superfluous in writing his work, yet would afterwards be supposed to give life and vraisemblance to 
his narrative. It may be safely said that we meet with no additions of this character in the chapters 
we have examined, with but very few elsewhere (the best example I notice is xii. 10 κατεβησαν 
TOU .U BaGpove ; others may be viii. 24; x. 25 [cf. Mark x. 50 Codd. NBDLA]; xi. 2; xiii. 41; 
xiv. 2; xvii 15; xix. 9; xx. 18%; xxi 1): the glosses we have had to deal with are mere 
rhetorical expansions, which dilute the spirit of the narrative without iu the least improving 
the sense: if they were not condemned, as in fact they are, by the consentient testimony 
of all the best Greek manuscripts, whether uncial (NA BC) or cursive (e.g. lo“ or p'"*; 31 at Lei- 
cester or m'", which much resembles D in the Gospels), their own intrinsic emptiness would suffice 
to bring them into grave suspicion. Bornemann afterwards came to think these additions so good 
in themselves, as to have been worthy to form a portion of S. Luke's original history, though some 
of them (e.g. iv. 32; v. 15; 18; x. 41; xvi 37; xxi 1) were subsequently dropped by copyists 
through the besetting fault of ancient scribes and modern printers, the /7omoeoteleuton, or omission 
of a whole clause because it ends in the same letters as the clause preceding it. But this source of 
transcriptural error must not be appealed to over frequently, and the student is quite as competent 
as Bornemann or myself to decide upon the main point at issue between us, the internal excellence or 
feebleness of the passages for whose absence in the vast majority of documents he has to account. 

(b If we have seemed to linger over our discussion of the interpolations of Codex Bezae, it is 
because the true character of its text, as well as its relation to other main critical authorities, whether 
manuscripte, versions or ecclesiastical writers, can best be learned from forming a correct estimate 
of their nature and extent. The inferences we have hitherto drawn respecting its origin and value 


1 The Greek margin of the Philoxenian Syriac sup- 
ports the additions of Cod. D in just 60 places in the 
Acts, yet we need not suppose with Wetstein (V. T. 
Proleg. 1. p. 28) that it was the very copy used by Thomas 
of Harkel at Alexandria A.D. 616. Not only is there 
reason for thinking that Cod. Bezae never was in the 
East, but it is quite arbitrary to suppose that there existed 
uo Greek manuscript much resembling it in text. Add to 
these considerations, those readings of the Philoxenian 
margin which are met with in E and other authorities, 
though not in D: viz. ii. 8(E); 411; iv. 10 (E); 17 (E); 
30!; vii. 17; 18; 25; 60; x. 16 (E nearly); 16 iterum; 


19 (E) ; 22; 30; xi. 21; xii. 7; 9; xiii. 4; xiv. 2 (partly) ; 
5; 6; τὸ (partly); 19; 22; xv. 1; 5 (partly); 6 (E 137); 
18; 23 (partly); 41 (partly); xvi. 4 (partly); xvii. 26 
(137); 27; xvii. 2 (partly); 5; 21; xix. 6; 18; xxii. 
7; 7 iterum (E): 40 places, so that D agrees with the 
Philoxenian margin in but three cases out of every five. 
Scholz’s Cod. 137 (Ambros. 97 at Milan) often accords 
curiously enough with DE and syr. p. mg, as may be 
seen above, aud in viii. 23; 24; Xiv. IO; xvi 11; 35; 
xvii. 17; xviii. s. Like most other of Scholz'a copies, it 
seems very ill collated. 


Ix INTRODUCTION. 


will be abundantly confirmed even by the very short review our space will permit us to take of the 
principal omissions and textual variations exhibited by D. 

MaTrH. i. 18. Here, though the Greek of D is lost, d has epi autem generatio, omitting 
ihu. We know by this time too much of D’s Latin version to lay any great stress upon it as indi- 
cating for certain the reading of the parallel Greek (see above p. xxxix), but in the present instance 
d is supported by so many authorities which usually ally themselves with D, that we may 
safely assume the absence of ἰήσου from its text. It is wanting in Cureton's Syriac, in a. b. c. f. 
ff, in the Vulgate and its secondary versions, the Anglo-Saxon and Frankich, in Wheelocke's 
Persic, and thrice in the Old Latin of Irenaeus, who grounds an argument upon the reading, 
though his Greek in one place representa a qu: thus too Augustine, manuscripts of Theophylact, and 

a few others, Cod. B. reads tov δε xv w: Cod. 7 4, the Polyglott Persic and a Persic manuscript, 
with Maximus, have rov δὲ uv only. 

Matra. v. 4, 5. These verses are transposed by nearly the same authorities D and y" 
one Greek MS, the important cursive 33, Cureton’s Syriac (that close ally of D), a. c. ff'. 

h. k. L, the Vulgate, the Frankish, Clement of Alexandria, Origen expressly (once, but once 
tacitly the other way), Eusebius in arranging the.Ammonian sections, Tertullian, Jerome, (Hilary 
and Chromatius both ways) Gregory Nyssen, Ambrose, Juvencus, perhaps Basil and Primasius. 

Marra. vi 1. δικαιοσυνὴν for ἐλεημοσυνὴν, a synonymous word for which internal evidence 
pleads strongly, is maintained by NBD 1. 209. 217., manuscripts appealed to in scholia to 41, 
238., the Peshito Syriac (Lon), that of Jerusalem, the Philoxenian, but not Cureton’s (lA2c1a50), 
though it stands with the Peshito in giving the better word in v. 2 ΔΩ»), a. 5. c. 5". φ'. ^. L, 
the Vulgate, Origen and Hilary, Isidore of Pelusium, Jerome (justitiam, hoc est, eleemosynam 
vestram). 

MarrH. x. 2. Our version d has ef before tacobus zebedaei with only NB, the Peshito and 
margin of the Philoxenian, against D and all the rest. 

Matra. xxi 31. αἰσχατοσ (ie. ἐσχατοσ)ὴ for πρωτοσ deserves notice as one example (Matth. 
vi. 13 being another) out of not many that may be cited, wherein D and the Latins a. b. e. 
{σ΄ kh. L, the best manuscripts of the Vulgate (am. fuld. tol. for. harl. primá manu), though 
not the Clementine edition, Hilary and Jerome (in part) are opposed to Cureton's Syriac as well 
as to the great mass of authorities. For a fuller discussion of this passage see Plain Introduction, 
pp. 426—8. - 

Matra. xxvi 39. D has προσελθων (for προελθων), but d accedens here, though in Mark xiv. 
35; Acts xii. 10 (where also προσ stands for προ) it more correctly translates by procedo. This con- 
fusion of the two prepositions doubtless arose from their having been once indicated by the same 
symbol $ which, though common in the Herculean papyri, was getting out of use when Cod. Sinai- 
ticus was written. Even the later manuscripts retain some traces of this corruption, but its frequent 
occurrence in any copy must be regarded as a proof that it was derived from a very old exemplar. 
See Cod. D in Mark alone, i. 19; ii 26; vi. 45; x. 32; xi. 9, where it seems to stand abso- 
lutely unsupported. 

MaTrH. xxviii. 19. Tregelles alone among the editors adopts βαπτισαντεσ in the room of βαπτι- 
ζοντεσ on the authority of BD, against all other manuscripts (including N) and the Latin versions, 
including d. In common consistency he ought to have read with Lachmann ἐνδυσάμενοι (for exóv- 
cap.evoc) in ch. xxvii. 28, which is countenanced not only by BD, but by 157 and an early corrector 


of N (quod mireris), as well as by a. b. c. d. f *., by Origen in Latin, and one or two manuscripts 
of Chrysostom. 


INTRODUCTION. Ixi 


JoHN i 4. «orw for the first ἣν is found only in ND, Cureton’s Syriac, a. b. c. e. f. f *., two 
second-rate manuscripts of the Vulgate (gat. mm), the Thebaic, Irenaeus, Clement, Hippolytus, copies 
known to Origen, MSS. of Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, Vigilius, the Quaestiones (see p. li): Augustine 
and Victorinus have both. 

JoHN v. 29. For εἐκπορευσονται D alone reads efeAevcovra. We have here a fair example 
of that striking tendency observable in Cod. D to substitute for one Greek word another entirely 
unlike in form, but nearly or quite identical in sense, so that no version shall shew the dif- 
ference. Bp. Middleton (Doctrine of the Greek Article, p. 447), who cites ομματων for οφθαλμων 
Matth. ix. 29, would infer from this habit that the Greek of Cod. Bezae is & retranslation from 
the Latin, at least in parts. Such a supposition would quite fail to account for many of its 
peculiarities, and afford a disparaging estimate of its worth, but the /act should be borne in 
mind however it may be accounted for. Thus in Mah. xxi 31 D has awyarog (i.e. ἐσχατοσὶ, 
where others (which yet do not agree with it in sense, see p. lx) have vorepoo; in Luke v. 7 
we see βοηθειν for συλλαβεσθαι ; ibid. xiv. 5 προβατον for ovoo ; and in S. Mark D, mostly with 
no other Greek document to second it, has i. 10 ηνυγμενουσ for σχιζομενουσ; ibid. v. 40 eporov 
for παρακαλων; iii 5 vexpwre for rwpwoe; ibid. v. 34 εἰπεν for λέγει, with several others (so 69); 
iv. lo λαοσ for οχλοσ; vi 36 eyywra for κυκλω; vii 2 κατεγνωσαν for ἐμεμψαντο; ibid, v. 6 ayama 
for τιμα (remarkable, but hardly to the point); e. 19 εἰσέρχεται for εἰσπορενεται, efepxerac for ex- 
wopeverat, and oxerov for αφεδρωνα; viii. 10 opu for pepy (so Wake 34, me teste); ix. 2 avaye for 
avapepa (this with 27); v. 43 ἀπελθειν for βληθηναι (so v. 47 even iu Wake 34), with several 
others; xii 24 γεινωσκοντεσ for edorer:—these may suffice to shew our meaning, without adding 
24 other examples from the same Gospel. 

JOHN xvii. l. For rev κεδρων, which is well supported, many good authorities have rov 
κεδρων, which there can be little doubt is the true reading, κεδρων (κενδρων is the form found in 
K. o'*, 192 and a few others) being a Hebrew Proper Name. Codd. ND, however, alone of the 
MSS, coincide in upholding rov x«5pov, which seems to be meant in a. b, the Thebaic, perhaps 
too in the Memphitio and Aethiopic. Tischendorf notices that the affinity of Codd. ND is closer in 
S. John's Gospel than elsewhere (Synopsis Evangel. p. liv, 2nd edition). 

Luke iii 22. Ὁ alone among the Greek manuscripts, supported only by a. b. c. ff". (primá 
manu), L, instead of ov εἰ o vc pov o ayar. «v σοι ηυδ. (virtually the same as in S. Matthew), 
reads woc pov € ov eyw σήμερον γεγεννήκα σε from Psalm ii. 7. A variation thus feebly supported 
by extant codices cannot be genuine, yet it is a remarkable fact (very instructive as shewing the 
importance of D in throwing light on the history of the text) that Justin Martyr, citing rà ἀπομνη- 
poveópara τῶν ἀποστόλων (so that he may mean S. Matthew), Clement of Alexandria, Methodius, 
Hilary, Lactantius, Faustus in Augustine, Juvencus, the Ebionite Gospel in Epiphanius, have the 
same reading. Augustine says that nonnulli codices habent secundum Lucam, but not the more 
ancient ones. 

Luxe iii. 23—30. We can but indicate in this place the utter discrepancy between D and all 
other authorities of every class in regard to the genealogy of our Lord in the line between his reputed 
father and David. The scribe seems to have tried to reconcile them by the rough process of substi- 
tuting for S. Luke's list of names that which he had already given in S. Matthew, the order being 
inverted. We see from Fol. 3a that such was actually done in the case of the first twelve names, and 
there can be little question that the five names (waxeip, ἐλιακειμ, apagiov, vag, οχοξιου), not found 
(except waxe) in any extant copies of S. Matthew, were actually read there in Cod. D. I 
know no other passage in Cod. Bezae so open to the charge of wilful alteration, —the very worst 


xii INTRODUCTION. 


fault a manuscript can have: that it should find a place here of course diminishes the weight 
of D's testimony when it omits rov xaivey in v. 36 initio, which none others are known to do. 

LUKE vii. 3 — προσ avrov D. 13. 69, a. b. c. e. ff*. g*. 1, the Armenian. The resem- 
blance of the Leicester MS. 69 to D is well known, but since it supports few or none of D's 
longer additions, it is of course less nearly allied to it than the Old Latin and Cureton's, or the 
margin of the Philoxenian, Syriac versions D and 69 however are much together: e.g. Luke 
vii. 1; 33; xii. 5 (with δὲ. 66. 71 or g'*. 157 prima manu. 254. 258. a., and the Peshito, as also the 
Persic of the Polyglott); Mark vi 17; vii. 28; viii 24; 26; ix. 10; xi. 14 (so Wake 34, me 
teste); xiv. 14 ; 37 :—the last four with Cod. 1, and mostly with a or others of its class. 

LUKE xxii. 4 — και row στρατήγοισ D, Lectionary 31 (another of D's allies), Cureton's Syriac, 
the Latin a. ὃ. c. e. f£ *. 3. 1. ¢., the Aethiopic. Scholz, who collated it, adds X ; but Tischendorf and 
Tregelles who followed him and compared their work, do not cite X here. 

Luke xxiii. 34. The first part of this verse (down to ποιουσι) is omitted by BD. 38. 435., a. 
b., the Thebaic and a Memphitic MS. only, but N has it marked as doubtful by a later hand, 
while the scribe who wrote the Ammonian sections in D (see p. xxvi) is compelled to insert the 
clause, in order to keep the numerals correct. 

LUKE xxiv. 51 — καὶ avedepero «wr τον ovpavoy ND, with a. b. e. ff*. L., Augustine (de wuntate 
ecclesiae c. 10), against all the rest (hiat Syr. Cureton). In v. 53 all these authorities (together 
with the Memphitie and gat. bodl. of the Vulgate) unite with D in omitting καὶ evAoyovvrec, only that 
δὲ (agreeing with B. C primá manu. L) rejects αἰνουντεσ καὶ instead. 

Mank ii. 26. D. 271 stand alone here among the Greek authorities in omitting ewe αβιαθαρ 
Tov apxiepewo, as if thus to get rid of a difficulty; a. b. e. 7.3. 4. of the Latin versions, however, 
countenance a variation which the silence of the parallel Gospels would encourage. The affinity 
of e (Cod. Palatinus) with our manuscript is very close at times; e.g. Luke xx. 20 (ro ἡγεμονι, 
with Cureton's Syriac only); xxi. 38; xxii 2; xxiv. 42; Mark i. 26 (see also p. xxxv, note 1). We 
have before noted the inclination of D to omit clauses, in S. Mark chiefly, but not exclusively (see 
p. lii. Out of about sixty-six such places to be noticed in this short Gospel, in most of which 
D is supported by other good witnesses, observe iii. 20 — εἰσ rov awva with 1. 22. 28. 209. 2». 
a. b. e. ff*. g'., Cyprian and Athanasius; xiii 37 eyw δὲ Aeyo üpew yp. simply, D. a alone, but 2”, 
Jf*. €. nearly ; xiv. 30 — de D with NC (primá manu), 238. a. c. ff*. 4. k., with the Armenian, 
Aethiopic and tol. (p. m.) prag. of the Vulgate. ' 

MARE xi. 1. Origen expressly declares that Bethphage is named by S. Matthew [xxi. 1], Bethany 
by S. Mark [xi. 1], both places by S. Luko [xix. 29]. Accordingly D. a. ὃ. c. 9.3. g'. (Ὁ ik L., the 
' Vulgate (except em.) and Jerome leave out βηθφαγη καὶ in this place, although Origen himself, pro- 
bably through inadvertence, once cites the disputed words Their omission is approved by Lachmaun 
and Tischendorf, though I know not what the latter means when he states (Cod. Sinait. Prolegom. 
p. xxxv, edit. min.) "omnium graecorum codicum soli ND istam scripturam fideliter tradiderunt." 
Cod. N certainly inserts εἰσ before βηθανιαν, but in Tischendorf's edition it also reads ew βηθφαγη και 
before it. Scrivener’s y omits καὶ βηθανιαν only. 

Mark xiv. 72 fin. D alone among manuscripts has ἡρξατο κλαίειν for ἐπιβαλων εκλαιε, which 
looks more like an explanatory scholium than a various reading. Jt is found in the Peshito and 
Philoxenian Syriae, in all the Latin versions, in Wheelocke’s Persic, the Thebaic, (Memphitic 
Tischendorf.), Gothic, and Armenian: facts which are very suggestive. 

Mark xv. 25. Mill (W. 7. Prolegom. $1276) has noticed the violent expedient resorted to by 
D in this verse, “ Evangelicae veritatis studio," in substituting e$vAaccov for ἐσταυρωσαν, in order to 


INTRODUCTION. lxiii 


reconcile wpa y here with John xix. 14, which of course it does very effectually. It is supported 
by ff*. k. n. only. With εφυλασσον Tregelles compares ἐτήρουν, Matth. xxvii 36. This case too 
much resembles Luke iii 23; Mark ii. 26 supra. 

Acts xiii. 33 ro poro ψαλμω for ro ψαλμω τω Sevrepw is read by D alone of the manuscripts 
(46 p. m. omits the numeral) by Erasmus in his N. T. (who pleads the authority of some 
codices which omit the number and of Jerome) very expressly by Origen, Hilary, Eusebius, 
Jerome, Latin copies known to Bede, Euthymius (who all take pains to explain the difficulty), by 
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, manuscripts of Cyprian, Petilian in Augustine, Cassiodorus: Wetetein illus- 
trates the subject by shewing that the Rabbinical writers reckoned the first two Psalms as but one. 

At the end of this verse the citation from Psalm ii. 7 is needlessly carried into v. 8 (αιτησαι 
παρ αἰμου k.T.A.) by D and syr. p. mg. only. Codex D never elsewhere falls into the familiar error 
of many copies, in thus enlarging quotations from the Old Testament. It even abridges them in 
Matth. iv. 4; xv. 8; John xii. 40 (by opotoréAevrov?); Luke iv. 18; Acts ii. 17—20. 

Acts xv. 20, 29. Here xat rov πνικτου or και πρικτου is omitted by D alone among the Greeks 
(all the versions containing the clause), and in Latin by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, 
Pacian, Jerome (who speaks of it as found in monnullis exemplaribus) Augustine Gaudentius, 
Fulgentius Eucherius; Ambrosiaster (who may possibly have lived in the third century) ventures 
to say that the Greeks adulterarunt scripturas quartum mandatum addentes. In ch. xxi. 25 also 
και πνικτὸν is omitted by D, the Thebaic, Jerome and Augustine only. It does not much matter 
that in the Peshito Syriac, Erpenius' Arabic, and Platt’s Aethiopic, the order of the words is ropvetav 
καὶ πνικτὸν καὶ Guia. The gloss of D in vv. 20, 29 of ch. xv. is upheld (in substance) in one or 
both places by 7. 25. 27. 29. 32. 42. 57. 60. 69. 98 marg. 105. 106. 137., in Scrivener’s abeo, 
the Thebaic, both Aethiopic, the Slavonic, Irenaeus in Latin and Cyprian: in v. 29 by the later 
Syriac (with an asterisk) and the Complutensian edition. 

Acts xxi. 16. The elegant but not very simple construction ayovreo παρ ὦ ξενισθωμεν μνασωνι 
τινι κυπριω is found with little or no variation in all other manuscripts (only that N has iacow 
for the hosts name, with the Memphitic, Sixtine Vulgate and demid.; B. 1. 18. g'*, pvacw; 34 
pracco ; κ᾿ μνασσωνι; D fuld. tol. νασωνι), but D inserts a whole clause, the Latin of which may 
be seen on p. 409, but the Greek (now lost) must be recovered from the several collations set 
down in our Adnotationes. The sole support of Cod. D is derived from syr. p. mg., which (if 
our collators may be érusted, see p. 446) varied from the words of D, though not from its sense, in 
adding to ξενισθωμεν + Kat mapayevop.evot εἰσ τὴν πολιν εἐγενομεθα παρα x. T. X. According to this 
account Pauls company must have rested ¢wice on the road from Caesarea to Jerusalem (full 
60 miles, see Smith's Dictionary of the Bible under Caesarea and Antipatris), on the second occasion at 
Mnaso's, on the first with one or more persons unknown (apud quem in d, but προσ ovo in D 
primá manu, on Wetstein's evidence). 


We may now draw our general conclusion from this prolonged investigation. Credner 
(Bettrdge, 1. p. 466) has well observed that the strong contrast between the excessive freedom of the 
Greek text and the anxious strictness of the Latin betokens for their respective births different ages, 
actuated by very different principles of criticism. Bitter experience had taught the men of tho 
fourth and fifth centuries a lesson which the Fathers of the second (we may name Justin Martyr as 
a conspicuous example) had yet to learn, that it is not safe to neglect the letter of Scripture, satisfied 
if only we abide by its spirit; or to mingle the sacred text with glosses from the parallel Gospels or 
with narratives (however edifying they may sem) drawn from uncanonical and uninspired writings. 


Ixiv INTRODUCTION. 


While we assign therefore to the Latin version of Codex Bezae a Western province (most probably 
Gaul) as its native country, and a date not higher than the fifth century, we must further confess 
that the manuscript now in our possession, as well by reason of the errors of transcription lying 
under the present text (see p. xxiii), as from its not following all the corrupt readings of the Greek 
as it now stands (see p. xxxiv, note 1), is removed one step from the actual translator, who need 
not, however, have been other than a contemporary of the scribe whose work is yet extant. The 
Greek text, on the other band, we believe to bear distinct traces of an origin far more remote. 
Itself immediately derived from a manuscript whose stichometry was arranged just like its own 
(see p. xxiii), it must ultimately be referred to an exemplar wherein the verses, now so irregular 
and confused, were first distributed according to an orderly system (see p. xvii), and such an original 
would most likely belong to the third century at the latest. In respect, moreover, to its rare and 
peculiar readings, the close resemblance of Codex Bezae to the text of the Syriac versions (with 
which it could hardly have been compared later than the second century) and to that of the 
Old Latin, yet unrevised by Jerome, as employed by Cyprian and Augustine in Africa, by the 
translator of Irenaeus, by Hilary and Lucifer and Ambrose in the North-west,—such resemblance 
(far too constant to be the result of chance) persuades us to regard with the deepest interest this 
venerable monument of Christian learning; inasmuch as the modification of the inspired writings 
which it preserves, whatever critics may eventually decide respecting its genuineness and purity, 
was at once widely diffused and largely received by the holiest men in the best ages of the 
Primitive Church. 

P.S. George Dyer's Prologue on Ignoramus, pp. 18—21 (1797) may be added to the hostile notices of Kipling's 
edition mentioned in p. xiii, note 2. Dyer is especially severe on the Latinity of the Preface, which indeed is faulty 
enough. 

° At p. xxxii, l. 14, after ellada ibid. xx. 2; add tristego ibid. xx. 9; 


ADDENDUM. 


I wouLD fain crave the reader's indulgence for a brief expression of private feeling, which, 
in mere gratitude, I cannot suppress. My other labours relating to the textual criticism of the 
New Testament have been carried on chiefly in à remote corner of Cornwall, whither the liberality 
of their owners has permitted me to bring many manuscripts for thorough and leisurely examination. 
Since it was not right to remove so precious a volume as Codex Bezae from its place in the 
University Library, I have enjoyed during the last three years the privilege of being much at 
Cambridge, after having ceased to reside there for more than a quarter of & century. This pleasing 
necessity has proved to me a source of deep satisfaction; it was like.the renewal of youth to partake 
again of opportunities for improvement once too lightly prized; while my daily toil was sweetened 
by the good will of not & few who were pleased to esteem me for my work's sake, and by the 
generous Lospitality, the unwearied kindness of a friend, whom I know not how to thank, 
the Rev. G. Williams, B.D. Senior Fellow of King's College. 

To the officers of the University Library also I am largely indebted: to the Rev. A. W. Hobson, 
M.A. Assistant Librarian, and (more recently) to the Rev. J. E. B. Mayor, M.A., now the Principal 
Librarian. I could not easily tell how much my work owes to H. Bradshaw, Esq. M.A. Fellow 
of King's College, bo:h for his readiness to aid my progress to his own serious inconvenience, and 
for the varied instruction which no one who is so happy as to converse with him can fail to derive, 
save through his own fault. 


S. MarrHAEI Cap. 1. 


[Desunt folia duo priora.] 


12 


14 


15 


17 


18 


ao 


SEC 


Sony 


Tl 


ATTH 


post transmigrationem autem babylonis 
iechonias genuit salathiel 
salathiel autem genuit zorobabel 
zorobabel autem genuit abiuth 
abiuth autem genuit eliecib 
heliacib autem genuit azor 
azor autem genuit sadoc 
sadoc autem genuit achim 
achim autem genuit heliut 
heliut autem genuit heleazar 
Eleazar autem genuit matthan 
matthan autem genuit iacob 
iacob autem genuit ioseph 
cui desponsate uirgo maria 
peperit xpm ihm 
Omnes ergo generationes - ab abraham 
usque ad dauid ‘generationes sunt xiili 
Et a dauid 
usque ad transmigrationem babylonis 
generationes sunt. xiili 
Et a transmigratione babylonis 
usque ad xpm generationes sunt xiii 
xpi autem generatio sic fuit 
desponsata enim maria ioseph 
antequam conuenirent 
inuenta est in utero habens de spu sancto 
ioseph autem uir eius. cum esset iustus 
et nollet eam praepalare 
uoluit clam eam dimittere 
ipso ea cogitante 
ecce angelus dni per uisum 
apparuit ei dicens 
ioseph fili dauid ne timeas 
(Fol. 3 a.) 


Cap. I. 124—230. 


— = — Sate, 
KATA MA®@@AION 
— ax, — — 


παραλαβεῖν μαριαμ τὴν γυναικα σου 
To yap ev avro γεννηθεν εκ πνσ αγιον ἐστιν 
τέξεται δε ὕιον 
και καλεσεισ TO ονομα GUTOV uy 
avroo yap σωσει Tov Àaoy αὐτου 
απὸ των ἀμαρτιων avrov 
Tovro δε oXov γεγονεν 
ἵνα πληρωθὴ τορηθεν ὕπο κυ 
δια noaiov rov προφητον Aeyovroa 
ἵδου ἡ παρθενοσ ev γαστρι εξει 
και τεξετε ὕιον και καλεσεισ TO ονομα avTov 
ενμανονὴλ 
o ἐστιν μεθερμηνευομενον μεθ μων o 83 
διεγερθεισ δε o ιωσηφ᾽ απὸ του ὕπνον εποιησεν 
wo mpogeratey avro o αγγελοσ κυ 
και παρελαβὲεν τὴν γυναικα avrov 
καὶ OUK €yvo αυτὴν 
€WO OV ετεκεν TOV UtoV αὐτὴσ 
TOV πρωτοτοκον 
καὶ ἐκαλεσεν TO ὀονομα αντου a 
του δε τὴν γεννηθεντοσ 
«v βηθλεεμ τησ Ἰονδαιασ 
εν ἤμεραισ ἡρωδουσ του βασιλεωσ 
εἰδου μαγοι απο ἀνατολων παρεγένοντο 
εἰσ Ἱεροσολυμα λεγοντεσ' 
ποῦ ἐστιν οτεχθεισ βασιλευσ των Ἰουδαιω 
ειἰδομεν yap avrov τον αστερα εν Τὴ ανατολη 
και ἤλθομεν προσκυνησαι avro 
ακουσασ δε o βασιλευσ npwdno εταραχθη 
κα ἱεροσολυμα μετ QvTOV 
καὶ συναγαγὼν παντασ 
τουσ ἀρχιερεισ 


καὶ γραμματεισ Tov Xaov επυνθανετο 


(Fol. 35.) 


24 


BEC MATTHAE 


— -- 


suscipere mariani uxorem tuam 


. . — 
quod enim in ea natum est de spo sancto est 


pariet autem filium 
et uocavis nomen eius ihm 
ipse enim saluauit populum suum 


de peccatis eorum 


hoc autem totum factum est 


ut inpleretur quod dictum est a dmo 
per esaiam prophetam dicentem 

ecce uirgo. in utero habebit 

et pariet filium . et uocabit nomen eius 
inmanuel 


quod est interpraetatum ‘nobiscum deus 


Exsurgens autem ioseph de somno fecit 


sicut praecepit ei angelus dmi 
et suscepit uxorem suam 

et non cognouit eam 
quousque peperit filium 
primogenitum 


07 
et uocauit nomen eius ihm 


— 
ihm autem nato 


in bethleem iudaeae 

iu diebus herodes regis 

ecce magi ab oriente uenerunt 

in hierosolyma dicentes 

ubi est qui natus est rex iudaeorum 
uidimus enim eius stellam in oriente 


et uenimus adorare ei 


audiens autem rex herodes turbatus est 


et hierosolyma cum ipso 

et congregans omnes 

principes sacerdotum 

et scribas populi interrogabat 
(Fol. 4a.) 


Capp. I. 21—IT. 4. 


f ey 


— 
ἐγ 
— 


KAT MA@@AION 
— —S — 


— 


om, 
που 0 χρσ yevvaras : ot δε εἰπον avro 
«v βηθλεεμ τησ Ἰουδαιασ' 
ουτωσ᾽ yap yeypamrat δια του προφητον 


και συ βηθλεεμ rgo Ἰονδαιασ "μη ελαχιστήει 6 


εν TOW ἤγεμοσιν ἴουδα 
€x ov yap εξελευσεται ἡγουμενοσ 
οστισ ποιμεένει. TOV Aeov μὸν TOV icpanr 


:rore ηρωδησ λαθρα- καλεσασ rove μαγουσ' 


nxpetBarev παρ avrwy τον χρονον 
TOV φαινομενου αστεροσ 


καὶ πεμψασ avrovg eur βεθλεεμ᾽ eurev avtae 


πορευθεντεσ εἐξετασαται ἀακρειβωσ 

wept Tov παιδιον - oray δε evpyre 
ἐπαγγειλαται μοι 

οπωσ' Kao ελθων προσκυνήσω avro 

οι 9e akovcay rov βασιλεωσ επορευθησαν 
και ov oagryp ον €iov εν τὴ ανατολη 
προῆγεν avrova - enc ελθων ἐσταθη 


€rayvo TOV παιδιου 


i&ovrea δε roy αστερα exapnoay 


xopav μεγαλην σφοδρα 


και ἐελθοντεσ εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν 

ειἰδον τον maida. 

pera μαριασ THE μήτροσ avrov 

και πεσοντεσ προσεκυνῆσαν avro 

και ανοιξαντεσ Tove θηνσαυρονυσ avrov 
προσήνεγκαν avro δωρα 

χρυσον και λιβανον και ἔμυρναν 

και χρηματισθεντεσ κατ ovap 

py ἀνακαμψαι προσ ηρωδὴν 

P d οὗου ἀανεχωρησαν 


εἰσ τὴν χωραν avrov 


avruy δε αναχωρησαντων - eov ἀαγγελοσ κυ 


(Fol. 45.) 


© 


1I 


12 


13 


SEC MATTHAEUM 
—— — — 
ubi xps nascitur ‘qui autem dixerunt ei 
in bethleem iudaeae 

sic enim scriptum est per profetam 

et tu bethleem iudaeae- non minima es 
inter principes iuda 

ex te enim exiet dux 


qui regat populum meum israhel 


tunc herodes occultae. uocans magos 


exquisiuit ab eis tempus 

apparentis stellae 

et mittens eos in bethleem dixit eis 
euntes interrogate diligenter 

de puero. cum autem inueneritis 
renuntiate mihi 

ut et ego ueniens adorem ei 

qui autem audientes regem abierunt 
et ecce stella quam uiderat in oriente 
praecedebat eos - donec uenit et stetit 


supra puerum 


uidentes autem stellam gauisi sunt 


gaudio magno ualde 

et uenientes in domum 
uiderunt puerum 

cum maria matre sua 

et cadentes adorauerunt ei 
et aperientes thensauros suos 
obtulerunt ei munera 
aurum et thus et smyrnam 
et moniti persomnum 

non reuerti ad eroden 

per aliam uiam reuersi sunt 


in regionem suam 


isdem autem recedentibus - ecce angelus dmi 


(Fol. 5a.) 


Cap. II. 5— 13. 


* 


T MA@®AION 
un, un, . omen, 


way, 


φαινεται kar ovap ro iwond λεγων IL | , spparuit in uisu ioseph dicens 

εἐγερθεισ παραλαβε rov παιδα surgens suscipe puerum 

καὶ τὴν μήτερα αὐτου. καὶ φευγε εἰσ αἰγυπτον et matrem eius. et fuge in aegypto 

και εισθι exet- eoo ay σοι εἴπω et esto ibidem quousque tibi dicam 

μελλει yap ηρωδησ Crrev Toy παιδα incipit enim herodes. querere puerum 

TOV ἀπολεσαι avrov ut perdat eum 
O de διεγερθεισ rapeXa Bev rov maida 14 | quiautem exsurgens accepit puerum 

και THY μητερα avrov νυκτοσ et matrem eius per nocte 

και ἀανεχωρησεν εἰσ GUJVTTTOV - και ἣν εκει 15 et secessit in aegypto ‘et erat ibi 

εωσ THE τελευτὴσ ἡρωδου «ἵνα πληρωθη usque ad mortem herodes ‘ut conpleretur 

vo prev ὕπο κυ δια τοῦ προφητου quod dictum est a dmo per prophetam 

Aeyovroc - ef εγυπτον ἐκαλεσα rov ütoy μου" dicentem de aegypto uocaui filium meum 
Tore pono ἴδων :6 | tunc herodes uidens 

ort ενεπαιχθὴ ὕπο των μαγων quia delusus est a magis 

εθυμωθη λειαν. και αποστειλασ iratus est ualde et mittens 

avetAey παντασ Trove παιδασ interfecit omnes pueros 

rove ev βεθλεαιμ qui erant in bethleem 

και εν πασιν TOLO οριοισ αντὴσ etin omnibus finibus eius 

απὸ διετειασ Kat kao Kara TOV Xpovoy a bimatu et infra: secundum tempus 

ov ἤκρειβασεν παρα rov μαγων quod exquisierat ἃ magis 
rore ἐπληρωθὴ τορηθεν ὕποκυ 17 | tunccompletum est. quod dictum est a dmo 

δια npepuov του προφήτου Xeyovroa per hieremiam prophetam dicentem 
φωνὴ ev papa ἠκουσθη 18 | uox in rama audita est 

θρηνοσ και κλαυθμοσ ploratio et planctus 

Kat οδυρμοσ πολυσ pax et ululatus multus rachel 

κλαιουσα ra, τεκνα αὐτὴσ plangens filios suos 

και ovx θελησεν παρακληθῆναι. orc ovk εἰσὶ et noluit consulari . quia non sunt 
τελευτήησαντοσ δε του npwoov- idou ayyehoo KV 19 | defunctoautem herode ecce angelus dmi 

Qauvera kar ovap Tw iwond paruit in somnis ioseph 

ev αἰγυπτω λεγων - eyepÜewr παραλαβε 20 in aegypto dicens surgens accipe 

Tov παιδα και THY μήτερα avrov puerum et matrem eius 

kat Topevoy eur γὴν ia pax) * reÜvikaagy yap et abi in terram israhel : mortui sunt enim 

ot ξητουντεσ τὴν ψυχὴν του παιδιου qui quaerunt animam pueri 

(Fol. 55.) | (Fol. 6a.) 


Car, II. 13—20. 
* 


— es — — 
KAT MAGOAION 
— 


O δεδιεγερθεισ παρελαβεν rov παιδα 


II. 21 


και THY μήητερα avrov * Kat 9ÀÜ«v εἰσ τὴν Ἰσραὴλ 


ακουσασ δε ort apyiAaog βασιλευει 
ἐπι THO Ἰουδαιασ 
αντι ἤρωδου του πατροσ αὐτου 


εφηθὴη εκει απελθειν χρηματισθεισ δὲ κατ ovap 


ανεχωρησεν εἰσ τὰ μερὴ THE γαλιλαιασ" 
και ελθων κατωκησεν 

εἰσ πολιν λεγομενὴν ναζαρετ 

σπωσ πληρωθη ro ρηθεν δια των προφητω 
ort ναζωρεοσ κληθησεται 


fe 


: Ey rao ἡμεραισ exewaug παραγεινεται Ἰωαννησ 


HI. 
I 


οβαπτιστὴησ κηρυσσωνεν T9 €pyju THE Ἰουδαιασ 


καὶ Aeyoy peravoere 
ἤνγικεν yap ‘7 βασιλια Tov ουρανων 
— 
ἢ : ovroc yap ἐστιν ορήθεισ 
— 
δια ησαΐον τον rpodyrov λεγοντοσ 
φωνὴ βοωντοσ εν τὴ «popu 
ως 
ετοιμασατετὴν οδον κυ 


ευθειασ ποιειτετασ τρειβουσ avrov 


[9] 


: avrog δεϊωαννησ εἰχεν το ἐνδυμα avrov 
απο τριχων καμηλλου και ζωνὴν δερματεινὴ 
περι τὴν oc vv αὐτου" ἢ Se rpody nV avrov 
ακριδεσ και μέλι a-ypuoy 
τοτε eCeropevero προσ avroy 
ἱεροσολυμα Kat πασα ἡ ιονδαια 
και πασα ἡ περιχωροσ Tov ἴορδανον 
και εβαπτιζοντο εν τω ἴορδανη Vir avrov 
εξομολογουμενοι Tac αμαρτιασ avrov 

« :ἴδων δεπολλουσ roy φαρισαιων 

και TAOOOUKALWY ἐερχομενουσ' 

erc το βαπτισμα avrov εἰπεν avrowr 


γεννήματα εχιδνων rw υπεδειξεν υμειν 
φυγειν 
(Fol. 6 δ.) 


[Folium 7, unà cwm caeteris a posteriore manu 
scriptis, huic volumini Appendicis loco subjicie- 


Capp. IT. 241— III. 7. 


S. MaATTHAEI. CAP. ΣΙ. 


HS TEE 
a futura ira: facite ergo 

fructum dignum paenitentiae 

et ne putetes. dicere intra uos 

patrem habemus abraam : dico enim uobis 
quia potest ds de lapidibus istis 

suscitare filios abraae 

iam autem securis. ad radices arborum 
posita est omnis ergo arbor 

non faciens fructum bonum 


exciditur et in ignem mittitur 


Ego quidem baptizo uos aqua in paenitentia 


qui autem uenit fortior me est 

cuius non sum idoneus calciamenta 
portare-ipse uos baptizabit 

in spu sancto et igni. cuius uentilabrum 
in manu eius 

et purgabit aream suam 

et congregauit triticum suum 

in horreum : paleas autem conburet 


igni inextinguibili 


---- 
tunc aduenit ihs de galilaea 


ad iordanen . ad iohannen 

baptistam . ut baptizaretur ab eo 

qui autem prohibebat eum iohannes dicens 
ego abs te opus habeo baptizari 


et tu uenis ad me 


espondens autem ihs. dixit ei sine modo 


sic enim decens est nobis 
mplere omnem iustitiam 
nc dimisit illum et baptizatus est ihs 
ascendit mox de aqua 
et ecce - aperti sunt ei caeli 
et uidit spiritum del 
(Fol. 8a.) 


. Car. HI. S—16. 


— "αὶ — — — — —— — — 
KATA MA®@AION SEC MATTHEUM 
— :.. — — — Sy — 


—_ 


καταβαινοντα ex rov ovpayov II. descendentem de caelo 
WO περιστεραν καὶ ἐρχομενον eur avTov Sicut columbam et uenientem super eum 
και ἴδου φωνὴ ex των ovpayay λεγουσα 17 et ecce uox de caelis dicens ad eum 
προσ GUTOV σὺ εἰ 0 Vlog μον O ayarnToT tu es filius meus dilectus 
ev wevdoxnca in quo beneplacui 
D :Toreo - ανηχθὴ ew τὴν ερημον ὕπο του ave ) tunc ihs delatus est in desertum a Spiritu 

πειρασθηναι viro rov διαβολου ut temptaretur a diabolo 
και γηστευσασ ἡμερασ. μ- 2 et iaiunans dies xxxx 
και τεσσαράκοντα VUKTAT ei.xxxx noctes 
υστερον επεινασεν postera esuriit 

και προσηλθεν avro o πιραζων και εἰπεν avro 3| Etacceasit ad eum qui temptabat et dixit ei 
εἰ ὕιοσ εἰ rov bv evre ἵνα ot λιθοι ovrot aprot γενὸ si filius es del dic-ut lapides isti panes fiant 

αποκριθεισ Se o - ειπεν γεγραπται εὖ respondens autem ihs dixit Scriptum est 
ovk er apro μονω (serat o ανθρωποσ non in pane solo uiuet homo 
αλλ ev παντι ρήματι θυ sed in omni uerbo del 

Tore TapaAag ave avroy o διαβολοσ' 5 | tuncsuscepit eum diabolus 
εἰσ τὴν αγιαν πολιν" και ea T0 €v avrov in sanctam ciuitatem et statuit eum 
ἐπὶ TO πτερυγιον TOV lepov και λεγει avro 6 supra pinnam templi "οὐ dicit ei 
εἰὕιοσ εἰ bv 6v. Bode a«avrov κατω si filius es del mitte te deorsum 
γεγραπταῖι yap ‘ort row ἀγγελοισ avrov scriptum est enim: qui angelis suis 
€yreAevra περι σου mandauit de te 
και €T €, χειρων αιρουσιν G'€ - μήποτε et in manibus tollent te*ne quando 
προσκοψὴσ προσ λιθον roy ποδα σου offendas ad lapidem pedem tuum 

ed» avro o ine παλιν γεγραπται 7 | aitei ihs-iterum scriptum est 
Ov πειρασεισ xy rov ὃν σου non temptavis dnm din tuum 

παλιν rapodap Bare. avrov o διαβολοσ 8 | iterum suscepit eum diabolus 
eg οροσ ὕψηλον λειαν καὶ εδειξεν avro jn montem altum nimis et ostendit ei 
πασασ rag βασιλειασ Tov Koo pou omnia regna mundi 
και THY δοξαν avra - και evrey avro 9 et gloriam eorum et dixit illi 
ravre παντα σοι δωσω haec omnia tibi dabo 
cay πεσὼν προσκυνησὴσ μοι si cadens adoraueris me 

τοτελεγει avro 0 ine ὕπαγε οπισω μου 10 | tuncdicitei ihs uade post me 
σατανα" γεγραπται yap satana scriptum est enim 

(Fol. 85.) (Fol. 9a.) 


Capp. III. 17—IV. το. 


ey — 
KATA MA@@AION 


ome, ta, 
xv τὸν Oy cov προσκνυνησεισ 


καὶ GUTO povw λατρευσεισ 


τοτε αφιησιν avrov οδιαβολοσ 


και ἴδον αγγελοι προσηλθον 


και διηκονουν avro 


:akovgag 0€: oru ioayygo παρεδοθη 


avexupnoey εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 


: και καταλείπων τὴν ναζαρεθ 


ελθων κατοικησεν εἰσ καφαρναου p. 

τὴν παραθαλασσιον - ev οριοισ ζαβουλων 
και νεφθαλειμ 

ἵνα πληρωθὴ το ρηθεν 

δια ἡσαΐου του προφητον rov λεγοντοσ 

yn ζαβουλων και νεφθαλειν . οδον θαλασσης 
πέραν του topóayov γαλιλαιασ των εθνων 

o λαοσ o καθημέενοσ ev τὴ σκοτεια 

edov φωσ μεγαν 

ot καθημενοι εν χωρα σκεια θανατου 


φωσ ανετειλεν avrowr 


---- — 
K :αποτοτεγαρ ἤρξατο ino «κηρυσσιν και Aeyew 


sas 


[8 


,μετανοειτε ἤγγικεν yap 


7 βασιλεια των ονρανων 


παραγων δεπαρατὴν θαλασσαν Tyo γαλιλαιασ 


ειδεν ὃνο adeAgove 


σιμωνα τὸν λεγομενον πετρον 
καὶ ανδρεαν τον αδελῴον avrov 


βαλλοντασ αμφιβληστροσ εἰσ τὴν θαλασσα 


σαν yap asec : και λεγει αυτοισ 
δευτε οπεισω μον καὶ ποιήσω ὕμασ 
γενεσθαι αλιεισ ανθρωπων 


Οιδε ευὐθεωσ αφεντεσ τα δικτυα 


ηἠκολουθησαν avro : καὶ προβασ εκειθεν 
edev αλλουσ vo αδελῴφουσ 


(Ful. 9 5.) 


IV. 


14 


17 


21 


SEC MATTHAEUM 


dmn dm tuum adorabis 


et ipsi soli seruies 


tunc dimisit eum diabolus 


et e* cce angeli accesserunt 

et ministrabant ei 

audiens autem ‘quia iohannes traditus est 
secessit in galilaeam 

et relinquens in nazareth 

ueniens habitabit.in cafarnaum 
maritimam -in finibus zabulon 

et nephalim 

ut conpleretur quod dictum est 

per esaiam prophetam dicentem 

terra zabulon et neptalim . uiam maris 
trans iordanen galileae gentium 
populus qui sedebat in tenebris 
uiderunt lumen magnum 

qui sedebant in terra umbra mortis 


lumen ortum est eis 


Exinde enim coepit iha. praedicare et dicere 


paenitemini . adpropinquauit enim 
regnum caelorum 

transiens autem secus mare galilaeae 
uidit duos fratres 
simonem qui dicitur petrus 
et andream fratrem eius 
mittentes retiam in mari 
erant autem piscatores. et dicit eis 
uenite post me. et faciam uos 


fieri piscatores hominum 


qui autem mox relinquentes retiam 


secuti sunt eum . et progressus inde 
uidit alios duos fratres 
(Fol. 10a.) 


Cap. IV. 10— 21. 


JQ 


“ὃ 


ERI 


— καὶ καὶ — 
KATA MA®@AION 
— 


taxwBov rov Tov ζεβεδαιον IV. 


kat ωαννην roy αδελῴον avrov 
ev τω TAU - μετα ζεβεδαιου rov πατροσ avro 
xarapri{ovrac * τα δικτνα avrav 
καὶ ἐκαλεσεν avrova 
ot δε εὐθεωσ αφεντεσ ro πλοιον 22 
καὶ TOV πατερα avro "ἠκολονθῆσαν avro 
: και περιηγεν ome *oAnv τὴν γαλιλαιαν 23 
διδασκων εν Taso συναγωγαισ avro 
καὶ κηρυσσων το ἐναγγελιον rgo βασιλιασ 
και θεραπευων πασαν νοσον 
καὶ πασαν μαλακειαν εν Tw λαω 
και ἀπῆλθεν avrov ἡ axon εἰσ ολὴν τὴν συριαν 24 
και προσήνεγκαν GUTO παντασ 
τουσ κακωσ ἐχοντασ ποικειλαισ νοσοισ 
καὶ βασανοισ συνεχομενουσ 
και δαιμονιζομενουσ "και σεληνιαζομενουσ 
και παραλυτικουσ᾽ καὶ παντασ εθεραπευσεν . 
και ἠκολονθησαν avro οχλοι πολλοι 25 


axo Tyo γαλειλαιασ και δεκαπολεωσ' 
και ἸἹεροσολυμων και ἰουδαιασ 
και repay του topdavou v. 
: wv 5¢ rove oxAova - aveBy εἰσ To οροσ ι7 


και καθισαντοσ αὐτου προσηλθον avro 


: οἱμαθηται αὐτου και ανοιξασ τοστομα αὐτοῦ 2 
εδιδαξεν avrovo λεγων 

:μακαριοι Ot πτωχοι avi" Ort αὐτῶν ἐστιν 3 
3 βασιλεια τῶν ουρανων 

:μακαριοι οἱ πραεισ OTL αντοι 5 
κληρονομήσουσιν τὴν nq | 

: paxaptot οἱ revOouvrer 4 
ort avrot παρακληθήσονται 

: paxaptot οἱ πεινωντεσ καὶ διψωντεσ τὴν διαο — 6 

oun 
(Fol. 10 5.) 


SEO" MATTHEUM 
aa -- 
iacobum zebedaei 
et iohannen fratrem eius 
in naui.cum zebedaeo- patre eorum 
concinnantes retias suas 
et uocauit eos 
qui autem mox relinquentes nauem 
et patrem suum - secuti sunt eum 
et cireumibat ihs totam galilaeam 
docens in synagogis eorum 
et praedicans euangelium regni 
et curans omnem languorem 
et omnem infirmitatem in populo 
Et abiit opinio eius in totam syriam 
et obtulerunt ei omnes 
male habentes uariis infirmitatibus 
et tormentis correptos 
et daemoniacos - et lunaticos 
et paralyticos . et omnes curauit 
et secutae sunt eum * turbae multae 
de galilaea et decapolim 
et hierosolyma et iudaea 
et trans iordanen 
uidens autem turbas. ascendit in montem 
et sedente eo *accesserunt ad eum 
discipuli eius: et aperiens os suum 
docuit eos dicens - 
beati pauperes spu quoniam ipsorum est 
regnum caelorum 
beati mites: quoniam ipsi 
hereditabunt terram 
beati qui lugunt 
quoniam ipsi consolabuntur 


beati qui esurientes ‘et sitientes iustitiam 


(Fol. 11a.) 


Carp. IV. 21—V. 6. 


10 ‘KAT MA®@AION 


ort avrot χορτασθήσονται 
— 
À :paxaptot ot eXexgpovea * ort avrot ελεηθησονται 
-- 


μακαριοι οἱ καθαροι τη καρδια 
ort avro, rov Ov οψονται 
μακαριοι ot ειἰρηνοποιοι 
ort ὕιοι Ov κληθήσονται 
μακαριοι οι δεδιωγμενοι ενεκεν δικαιοσυνησ 
ort avroy eae ἡ βασιλεια των ουρανων 
μάκαριοι ἐστε oray διωξουσιν Up 
και ονιδισουσιν" και εἴπωσιν καθ υμων 
παν trovnpov ενεκεν δικαιοσυνὴσ 
χαιρεται και ἀγαλλιασθαι.οτι o μισθοσ ὕμων 
πολυσ᾽ ἐν ro ουρανω 'ουτωσ yap εδιωξαν 
vovg προφητασ'τουσ προ ὕμων ὕπαρχοντων 
-Ὕμεισ COTE ro AAR THT yo 
«ay 0€ ro αλασ μωρανθη 
ev τινι αλισθησεται. εἰσ ουδεν ἴσχνει 


Se) 


«t μη βληθηναι εξω" και καταπατεισθαι 
ὕπο των ανθρωπων 

λβ ὝΜμεισ «oe To φωσ του κοσμου 

D ov δυναται πολισ κρυβηναι eravw opove 
κειμενη οὐδε καιουσὶιν ÀAvxvov 
και τιθεασιν avrov ὕπο rov μοδιον 
αλλα ext τὴν λυχνίαν" καὶ λαμπιπασιν 
TOUT εν τὴ οικια 

Ovroc λαμψατω ro φωσ μων 

evrpoaÓev των ανθρωπων 
οπωσ educw ὕμων τα καλα epya 
και δοξασωσιν rov πατερα ὕμων 


τον €V τοισ ουρανγοισ 


151 


:μὴ νομεισητεοτι λθον - καταλυσαι τὸν νομον 
ἡ Tove προφητασ - ovk nAGov καταλυσαι 


[8 


αλλα πληρωσαι : αμην yap λεγω ὕμειν 
(Fol. 115.) 


V. 


7 


17 


quoniam ipsi saturabuntur 
beati misericordes. quia ipsi miserabuntur 
beati qui mundo sunt corde 
quia ipsi dm uidebunt 
beati pacifici 
quia del fili uocabuntur 
beati qui persecutionem patiuntur. propter iustitia 
quia ipsorum erit regnum caelorum 
beati estis - cum persequentur uos | 
et inproperauerint. et dixerin aduersum uos 
omne malignum - propter iustitiam 
gaudete et exultate quia merces uestra 
multa in caelo ita enim persecuti sunt 
prophetas. qui ante uos fuerunt 
uos estis sal terrae 
8i enim sal infatuatum fuerit 
in quo sallietur.ad nihilum ualet 


. nisi ut proiciatur foras. et conculcetur 


ab hominibus 


uos estis lumen mundi 
non potest ciuitas abscondi ‘super montem 
posita - nec incendunt lucernam | 
et ponent eam ‘sub modium 
sed supra candelabrum ‘ut luceat omnibus 
qui in domo sunt 
sic luceat lumen uestrum 
coram hominibus 
ut videant uestra bona opera 
et glorificent patrem uestrum 
qui in caelis est 
nolite putare quia ueni dissoluere legem 
aut prophetas: non ueni dissoluere 
sedinplere: amen enim dico uobis 
(Fol. 12a.) 


Cap. V. 6—48. 


— 
de 
— 


KAT MA®® AION 
— 


P €— € — 


εὡσ ay παρελθη - o ovpavog καὶ ἢ yy 


UsTa ἐν - 1) μια κεραια 


ov μὴ παρελθὴ azo rov νομου 


€wo Gy yevyras ray Ta. 


:Oc ovy λυσει μίαν των ἐεντολων τουτων 


ἐλαχίστων και διδαξη τουσ ayÜporrova 
ἐλαχιστοσ κληθησεται 


εν τὴ βασιλεια των ουρανων 


᾿ Hxovaare ort ερρηθητοισ ἀρχαιοισ 


o 
4 


[Al 


ou Qovevaciwr oc: Gay dovevo 
εἐνοχοσ' ἐστε TH κρισει 

€yo de Acyw dpe ort zac o οργαζομενοσ 
Tw ἀδελφω avrov eun 
€VOXOG εσται τὴ κρισει 

Oo day eur τω αδελῴω avrov paxa 
€voxoc «c T€ Tw συνεδριω 
og Say ec pope 
€VOXOT ἐσται εἰσ τὴν γεενναν TOV TVpOG" 
ἐαν ovv προσφερὴσ ro δωρον σου 
ere. τὸ θυσιαστηριον και exe μνησθησ᾽ 
ort o αδελῴοσ cov εχειτι κατα σον 
αφεσ exec τὸ Swpov σου 


19 


21 


22 


23 


24 


ἐγπροσθεν rov θυσιαστηριον. και ὕπαγεπρωτο 


καταλλαγήθι ro αδελῴφω σου" καὶ rore ελθων 


προσφερεισ ro δωρον σου 
tober evvowy τω αντιδικω σου ταχὺ «ur 

OTOV εἰ μετ αὐτου εν TH οδω 

μήποτε σεπαραδωσει. o αντιδεικοσ 

TO κριτὴ" και O κριτὴσ σεπαραδωσει 

Tw ὕπηρετη" και εἰσ φυλακην βληθησει 
ἀμὴν λεγω σοι. ov μὴ εἐξελθησ εκειθεν 

éwo αν ἀποδωσ τον ἐσχατον κοδραντην 
ἤκουσατε ort ἐρρηθη ov μοιχευσεισ 


(Fol, 12.) 


25 


26 


27 


"SEG TTHAEUM 
— -- om — — 


donec transeat ‘caelum et terra 
iota unum ‘aut unus apex 
non transiet a lege 


donec fiant omnia 


quicumque enim soluerit unum de mandatis istis 


minimis ‘et docuerit homines 
minimus uocabitur 
in regno caelorum 
audistis quia dictum est antiquis 
non occides‘quicuinq - enim occiderit 
reus erit iudicio 
Ego autem dico uobis. quia omnes qui irascitur 
fratri suo sine causa 


reus erit iudicio 


qui autem dixerit fratri suo raccha 


reus erit conuenticulo 
qui autem dixerit fatue 
reus erit in gehennam ignis 
si ergo offeres munus tuum 
ad altare.et ibi rememoreris 
quia frater tuus *habet aliquid aduersum te 
dimitte ibi munus tuum 
ante altare ‘et uade prius 
reconciliari fratri tuo ‘et tuno ueniens 
offeres munus tuum 
Esto beniuolus aduersario tuo cito 
quandiu es cum illo in uia 
ne quando te tradat. aduersarius 
iudici.et iudex te tradat 
ministro‘et in custodia mitteris 
amen dico tibi non exiens inde 
donec reddas nobissimum quadrantre 


audistis quia dictum est ‘non moechaueris 


(Fol. 13 a.) 


Car. V. 18— 27. 


11 


12 


KAT MAGGAION 
—— —— ᾿Ξ-. 
eyo de Xeyo ὕμειν orc πασ 
o βλεπων γυναικα 
προσ To επιθυμησαι αντὴν 
ηδὴ ἐμοιχευσεν αντὴν εν Τὴ καρδια avroy 
Ex δεο οφθαλμοσ o δεξιοσ σον 
σκανδαλιζει σε εἐξελε avroy 
καὶ Bade aro σου συμῴφερει yap σοι 
ἵνα ἀπολητε εν των μελων σου 
καὶ μη ολον TO σωμα σὸν 
απελθὴ eur γεενναν 
Eppy Fy δε 
og αν απολυσὴ THY yuvaixa αὐτου 
Sorw αὐτὴ αποστασιον 
eyo δε Xeyo ὕμειν 
og αν απολυσὴ τὴν γυναικα αὐτου 
παρεκτοσ Noyou πορνειασ 
ποίει αὐτὴν μοιχέυθηναε 
παλιν ἠκουσατε 
ort ερρηθὴ τοισ ἀρχαιοισ' * ovk ἐπειορκησισ 
αποδωσεισ De Tw ko τουσ ορκουσ σου 
€yo de λεγω ὕμειν py ομοσαι oec 
μῆτε εν To ovpayo 
ort θρονοσ ἐστιν του ϑυ. parre ev τὴ yg 
oT. ὕποποδιον ἐστιν των ποδων avrov 
pyre ew ἵεροσολυμα ort πολισ ἐστιν 
pare ev τὴ κεφαλὴ aov ομοσὴσ 
ort ov δυνασαι ποιειν 
τριχα μειαν λευκὴν ἡ μελαιναν 
Caro δεο λογοσ ὕμων 
vot ναὶ + OV ov 


To δεπερισσον τοντων - EK TOV ?TOVY)pOV ἐστι 


ἡκουσατε ort epp: οφθαλμον avri οφθαλ 
pov 


(Fol. 136.) 


V. 28 


49 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


SEC 


— 


TTHEUM 
- — — 
ego autem dico uobis. quoniam omnes 
qui uidet mulierem 
ad concupiscendum eam. 
iam moechatus e&t eam in corde suo 
δὶ autem oculus tuus dexter 
scandalizat te erue eum 
et mitte abs te. expedit enim tibi 
ut pereat unum membrorum tuorum 
et non totum corpus tuum 
eat in gehennam 
dictum est autem 
quicumque dimiserit uxorem suam 
det ei repudium 
ego autem dico uobis 
quicumque dimiserit uxorem suam 
excepta ratione adulterii 
iterum audistis 
quia dictum est antiquis. non peiurabis 
reddes autem dno iuramenta tua 
Ego autem dico uobis: non iurare omnino 
neque in caelum 
quia sedis est dei neque in terram 
quia subpedaneum est pedum ipsius 
neque in hierosolyma 
quia ciuitas est 
magni regis 
neque in caput tuum iurabis 
quia non potes facere 
capillum unum album aut nigrum 
sit autem sermo uester 
etiam etiam non non 
quod autem amplius his de malo est 
audistis quia dictum est - oculum pro oculo 


(Fol. 144a.) 


Cap. V. 28—38. 


)3) 


sas 


f* f 


ΓΕ! 


οδοντα avrt οδοντοσ' v. 
Eyw δελεγω ὕμειν μὴ αντιστήναι 39 
: Tw πονήρω : αλλ οστισ σεραπεισει 

ἐπι τὴν a'uxyova σου. στρεψον avro 

Kas τὴν ἀλλην. και o θελων σοι κριθηναι 40 

Kat Tov xevrova gov λαβειν 


αφησεισ avro καὶ TO ειἰματιον 


: καιοστισ σεαγγαρευει μειλιον εν 41 


ὕπαγε pet avrov ert ἀλλα δυο 
Tw atrouvret oe Soo 42 


καὶ Tw θελοντι Savurac Gas? μὴ αποστραφησ 


ἡκουσατε ort ἐερρηθη 43 
ἀαγαπήσεισ TOV πλησιον σον 
και μεισήησεισ τον εχθρον cov 

:Eyw δε Aeyo ὕμειν «αγαπατε τουσ εχθρουσὕμω 44 
ευλογειτε τουσ καταρωμενουσ ὕμειν 
καλωσ ποιειτετοισ μεισουσιν ὕμασ 
και προσευχεσθαι. ὕπερ των εκηριαζοντω 
και διωκοντων ὕμασ 
org γενησθε ὕιοι'τουπατροσ ὕμων 45 
TOV εν oupavotg * ort Toy ἥλιον avrov ἀνατελλει 
emt πονηρουσ καὶ αγαθουσ και Bpexet 
emt δικαιουσ και αδικουσ' 

; «ay yap ayarnonras τουσ ἀγαπωντασ ἵμασ 46 
τινα μεισθον εξεται 
OVXL καὶ οἱτέλωναι ουτωσ ποιουσιν 

και «ay ἀσπασησθαι τουσ ἀαδελῴουσ ὕμων 4) 
μονον τιπερίσσον ποίειτε 


ονχι καὶ ot εθνικοι TO avro ποιουσιν 


ἐσεσθε ovy ὕμεισ τελειοι 48 
WOTED o TATHP ὕμων εν ovpayouo 
pp: τελιοσ ἐστιν : προσέχεται VL 1 
n τὴν δικαιοσυνὴν ὕμων μὴ Tovey 
(Fol. 14 à.) 


13 


dentem pro dente 


Ego autem dico uobis non resistere 


malo sed qui te percusserit alapam 

in maxillam tuam. conuerte illi 

et alteram . qui uoluerit iudicio congredi 
et tunicam tuam accipere 

dimittes ei et uestimentum 

et qui te angariauerit:milium unum 
uade cum eo- adhuc alia duo 

qui te petit dat 


,et uolenti mutuari ne auertaris 
audistis quia dictum est 


diliges proximum tuum 


et odies inimicum tuum 


Ego autem dico uobis diligite inimicos uestros 


benedicite maledicentibus uos 

benefacite odientibus uos 

et orate. pro calumniantibus 

et persequentibus uos 

ut sitis fili patris uestri 

qui in caelis est. quia solem suum oriri facit 
super malos et bonos. et, pluet 

super iustos et iniustos 

si enim dilexeritis diligentes uos 

quam mercedem habebetis 


non et publicani sic faciunt 


Et si salutaueritis fratres uestros 


tentum quid amplius facitis 


non et gentiles idem faciunt 


Estote ergo uos perfecti 


sicut pater uester in caelis 

perfectus est adtendite 

iustitiam uestram ‘non facere 
(Fol. 15 a.) 


Capp. V. 38— VI. 1. 


14 


evrpocÜDev rov ανθρωπὼν VL coram hominibus 
προσ To θεαθηναι avrowr - εἰ δε μηγε ut uideamini eis. alioquin 
μισθον ovk exere Tapa To πατριὕμων mercedem non habebitis aput patrem uestru- 
Tw εν ουρανοισ qui in caelis est 

οταν ovv ποιησ ελεημοσννὴν i| cumergofacitis elemosynam 
μὴ σαλπισὴσ ἐνπροσθεν cov noli tuba canere ante te 
ὠὡσπερ᾽ 0L ὕὕποκριται TTOLOUGLV sicut hypocritae faciunt. 
εν TALS συναγωγαισ'᾽" καὶ εν TOL ρυμαισ in synagogis et in plateis 
omo δοξασθωσιν ὕπο rov ανθρωπων ut glorificentur ab hominibus 

αμην Aeyw ὕμειν amen dico uobis 
arexovow rov μισθον avrov perceperunt mercedem suam 
σου δε ποιουντοσ ἐλεημοσυνὴν 3 te autem faciente elemosynam 
BN yvoro ἡ apurrepa cov nesciat sinestra tua. 
τι ποίει ἡ δεξεια σου quid facit destera tua 
OTOG ἡ ἐλεημοσυνὴ σου ἢ εν To κρυπτω 4 ut elemosyna tua sit in occulto 
Kat o πατὴρ cov o βλεπων ev Tw κρυπτω et pater tur qui uidet in occulto 
Gvroc ἀποδωσει σοι ipse reddet tibi 

καὶ OTAY TTDOG €UXT] *OUK €O7 WO οιὕποκριται 5 | etquando oras.non eris sicut hypocritae 
ort φιλουσιν στηναι. ev ταισ συναγωγαισ' quia amant stare in synagogis 
καὶ εν TQ γωνιαισ TOV πλατειων etin angulis platearum 
EOTWTET καὶ TTpOO €UXOJ.€VOL stantes et orantes 
oTwc φανωσιν row ayÜperour ut pareant hominibus 

ἀμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν amen dico uobis 
απεχουσιν Tov μισθον avrov perceperunt mercedem suam 
ov 8e oray προσενχὴ εἰσελθε ew TO 6 tu autem cum oras intra in 
ταμιον σου. καὶ κλεισασ THY θυραν σον cubiculo tuo ‘et cludes osteum tuum 
m poc 'evéat To πατρι Tov εν TW κρυπτω ora patrem tuum in occulto 
Kat o πατὴρ cov-o βλεπων ev To κρυπτω et pater tuus qui uidet in occulto : 
ἀποδωσει got reddet tibi 

hy :προσευχομενοι de μη BAarro aL 7 orantes autem non uana loquimini 
B «ep ot εθνικοι δοκουσιν yap sicut gentes. putant enim 

ort εν T πολυλογια avrov 'εἰσακουσθησονται quia in multiloquio suo. exaudientur 

p ovv ομοιωθητεαντοισ 8 | nolite ergo similare eis 

(Fol. 15 6.) (Fol. 16a.) 


Cap. VI. 2—8. 


— καὶ c — 
KAT MA@@AION 
Hey, ς. | —- 


οιδεν yap o πατὴρ vpav* wy χρειαν exerat 
7po Tov ὕμασ ayou£e ro στομα 
ovroc ovy προσευχεσθαι ὑμεισ 
TATED ἡμῶν 0 εν TOLT ουρανοισ 
αγιασθήτω ro ovopa σον 
eMaro ἡ βασιλεια cov 
γενηθητω το θελημα σου 
εν ουρανω και επὶ THT No 
TOV GpToy ἡμῶν TOV επιουσιον 
Soo ney onpepov’ και αφεσ ἡμειν 
τα οφιλεματα μων -ωσ και ἡμεισ αφιομεν 


VI. 


12 


TOT οφιλεταισ ἡμων᾿ "καὶ py εἰσενεγκησ NPAT 13 


εἰσ πειρασμον 
αλλαρνσαι nao απο του πονῆρου 


pà €av adyre row ανθρωποισ τα WOPATTOPATA QVre. 14. 
— 


αφησει ij ew + καὶ 0 πατὴρ ὕμων ο ουρανιοσ 
eay δε μη αφητετοισ ανθρωποισ 
ovde o πατὴρ vj.oy αφησει ὕμειν 
TO παραπτωματα ὕμων 
με : oray δενηστενητε. μὴ γεινεσθαι 
D wo ot vrrokperrat σκυθρωποι 
αφανιζουσιν yap ra προσωπα avrov 
οπωσ w Tor ἀανθρωποισ νηστενοντεσ 
αμην λεγω ὕμειν ἀαπεχουσιν rov μισθον αυὐτων 
ov δενηστενων αλιψον aov τὴν κεφαλὴν 
Kat TO προσωπὸν σου νιψαι iva μη φανὴησ 
τοισ ανθρωποισ νήστευων 


αλλα τω πατρι σον Tw εν κρυφια 


15 


τό 


17 


και o πατὴρ σου o βλεπων ev κρυφαιω αἀποδωσει co 


μὴ θησανρισεται ὕμειν θησαυρουσ 


ἐπι 170 yo οπου ano και βρωσεισ αφανιζουσιν 


και οπου κλεπται διορυσσουσιν - καὶ κλεπτουσιν 


19 


θησαυριζετε Se vp.ew - θησαυρουσ ove εν ovpayw 20 


(Fol. 166.) 


.CaP. VI. 9—20. 


15 


[Desunt folia octo, tertium Codicis quaterntonem 
complectentia, scribd recentissimo ad pedem folii 
16 b adnotante desunt plurima nempe a versu 
8 6 capitis usque ad 27 versum cap. 8 in ver- 
sione Latina in Graeco textu autem usque ad 
vers. 232 capitis 9°! καὶ ἰδὼν 6 ἰησοῦς τὴν πίστιν 
etc.] 


16 


S. MATTHAEI. CAP. VIIL 


SEC MATTHAEUM 


27 qualis est hic quia et uenti 
et maris obaudiunt ei 
28 | Etueniente eo trans 
in terram gerasenorum 
occurrerunt ei duo daemoniaci 
de monumentis exeuntes - 
pessimi ualde 
ita ut non posset transire aliquis 
per viam illam 
ay Et ecce exclamauerunt dicentes 
quid nobis et tibi ihu fili di 
uenisti hic ante tempus torquere nos 
30 | Eratautem longe ab eis. grex porcorum 
31 multorum pascentium . daemones autem 
rogabant eum dicentes. si eicis nos 
mitte nos.in gregem porcorum 
32 | Etdixiteisite:qui autem exeuntes 
abierunt in porcos 
et ecce inpetum fecit totus grex 
per praeceps im mare 
et mortui sunt in aquis 
33 pastores autem fugerunt 
et abeuntes in ciuitatem 
renuntiauerunt omnia 
de daemoniacis 
34 | Eteccetota ciuitas 
exiit obuiam ihu 
et uidentes eum rogauerunt 
ut transiret de finibus eorum 
ix. 1| Etascendens nauem 
transfretauit et uenit in suam ciuitatem 
i| Etecce obtulerunt ei 
paralyticum in lecto iacentem 
(Fol. 2g a.) 


Capp. VIII. 27—IX. 2. 


[8 


KAT MA@@AION 
— eA — 
καιΐδων ο ino την πιστιν αντων 
εἰπεν To παραλυτικω θαρει τέκνον 
adxovre σοι αἱ αμαρτιαι 
και Sov τινεσ TOV γραμματαιων 
εἰπὸν ἐν «avrei ovrog βλασφημι 
και ev one tag evÜvys ew avrov 
corey avrow iva τι ενγρθυμεισθαι rovnpa 
ἐν ταισ καρδιαισ ὕμων 
τι γαρ ἐστιν εὐκοπωτερον eurety 
αφιονται aov a4 αμαρτιαι 
ἢ εἰπεῖν ἐγειρε και περιπατει 
ἵνα δεῖδητε. οτι οὕιοσ του avOpwirov 
ἐξουσιαν exet emt τὴσ yo 
adtevat apapreug - rore λέγει τω παραλντικω 
ἔγειρε και apoy σου τὴν κλεινὴν 
και ὕπαγε εἰσ TOV OLKQV σου 
και ἐγερθεισ ἀπηλθεν eur rov οἰκον avrov 
εἰδοντεσ δεοι οχλοι εφοβηθησαν 
καὶ εδοξασαν Toy ὃν rov δοντα εξουσιαν 
τοιαντὴν Tour ανθρωποισ 
και παραγων ἐκειθεν o Ὡσ edev ανθρωπὸν 
καθημενον ext τὸ τελωνιον 
μαθθαιον λεγομενον 
και λεγει avro ἀκολουθει μοι 
καὶ ἀναστασ ἠκολουθει avro 
: KQ4 €y€V€TO GUTOU ανακειμενου εν TY] οἰκεια 
ἴδου πολλοι τελωναι. καὶ αμαρτωλοι 
ελθοντεσ -συνεκειντο τω ue 
και TOU. μαθηταισ avrov 
Ειἰδοντεσ δε οἱ φαρισαιοι 
εἰπὸν ror μαθηταῖσ avrov 
δια τι 0 διδασκαλοσ ὕμων 
μετα των apaprwduy και τελωνων εσθιει 
(Fol. 355.) 


or 
dixit paralytico confide fili 
dimittuntur tibi peccata tua 
Et ecce quidam scribarum 
dixerunt intra se hic blasphemat 
et uidens ihs cogitationes eorum 
dixit eis ut quid cogitatis mala 
in cordibus uestris 
quid enim est facilius dicere 
dimittuntur tibi peccata 
aut dicere surge et ambula 
ut autem sciatis quoniam filius hominis 
potestatem habet super terram 
dimittere peccata - tunc dicit paralytico 
surge et tolle lectum tuum 
et uade in domum tuam 
et surgens abiit in domum suam 
uidentes autem turbae timuerunt 
et glorificauerunt dm. qui dedit potestatem 
talem hominibus 
Et transiens inde ihà uidit hominem 
sedentem - super teloneum 
matthaeum nomine 
et dicit. ei sequere me 
et surgens sequebatur eum 
Et factum est ipso discumbente in domo 
ecce multi publicani. et peccatores 
uenientes simul discumbebant cum ihü 
et discipulis eius 
uidentes autem pharisaei 
dixerunt discipulis suis 
quare magister uester 
cum peccatoribus et publicanis manducat 
(Fol. 26 a.) 


Cap, IX. 2—11. 


1 


18 
: IX. 
oy O δεακουσασ p 12 
οιἴσχνοντεσ ἵατρου αλλ οι κακωσ €exovrea 
πορευθεντεσ δε μαθετετι ἐστιν 13 


eAeog θελω και ov θυσιαν" 
ov yap 1AÜov καλεσεδικαιουσ αλλααμαρτωλουσ 


TOT€ TTpog'epxovTa4 avro ot μαθηται iwavov 14 
Aeyovrea δια Te new και 0 φαρισαιοι 
νηστενομεν πολλα 
ot δε μαθηται σου ov νηστευουσιν 
— 
καὶ εἰπεν αὐτοισ O LNG py τι δυνανταὶ 15 


Ot Utot TOV VUVQuov vo r€vew 

ε ocov per avrov ἐστιν ονυμφιοσ 
eXevoovre Se at ἡμεραιοταν apOy απ avrov 
o vuj.duoac "καὶ TOTE νηστευουσιν 


εν εκειναισ ταισ ἡμεραισ 


Ovder δε ἐπιβαλλει. ετιβλημαρακκουσ αγναφου 16 


emi εἰματιω παλαιω..αἰρει yap TO πλήρωμα avrov 


απο TOU ειματειοῦυ - καὶ χειρον σχεισμα γεινεται 


Ουδε βαλλουσιν otvov veoy εἰσ ασκουσ παλαιουσ 17 


ec δε μηγε ρήσσει o οινοσ 0 νεοσ Tove ἀασκουσ 
και 0 οἰνοσ ἀπολλνται και οἱ am Koc. βαλλουσιν δε 


OLVOV V€OV εἰσ ασκουσ καένουσ 


Kat αμῴφοτεροι Τήρουνται 


ταῦτα avrov λαλουντοσ avrow ἴδου ἀαρχων 18 


εἰσ ελθων προσεκυνι avro λεγων 


ἢ Gvyarnp μου αρτι ετελευτησεν 
αλλα ελθων επιθεσ τὴν χειρα σου er αὐτὴν 


και Cyoreras * και ἐγερθεισ - ηκολουθι avro 


19 
και ot μαθηται avrov 

και ἴδον yuvy atpoppoovera SwSexa ern 20 
προσελθουσα οπισθεν ἡψατο 
TOV κρασπεδου του ματιον αὐτου 
ελεγεν yap ev «avr 21 


(Fol. 26 δ.) 


Cap. IX. 


Aue — 
S 
— 


MATTHEUM 
—— OS OS 
qui autem audiens dixit :non necesse habent 
fortes medico - sed male habentes 
euntes autem discite quid sit 
misericordiam uolo et non sacrificium 
non enim ueni uocare iustos sed peccatores 
tunc accedunt ad eum discipuli iohannis 
dicentes.quare nos et pharisaei 
ieiunamus multa 
discipuli autem tui non ieiunant 
Et dixit eis ih» numquid possunt 
fili sponsi iaiunare 
‘in quantum cum ipsis est sponsus 
uenient autem dies. cum tollatur ab eis 
sponsus. et tunc iaiunabunt 
in illis diebus 
nemo autem inmittit :commissuram panni nobi 
in uestimento ueteri tollit enim plenitudo eius 
de uestimento - et peior acissura fit 
nec mittunt uinum nobellum in utres ueteres 
alioquin rumpit uinum nouellum utres 
et uinum perit et utres. mittunc autem 
uinum nouellum in utres nouos 
et utrisque seruantur 
haec eo loquente illis . ecce unus princeps 
ueniens adorabat ei dicens 
filia mea modo mortua est 
Bed ueniens inpone manum tuam super eam 
et uiuet*et surgens ihs sequebatur um 
et discipuli eius 
Et ecce mulier fluxum sanguinis habens. xii annis 
accedens retro tetigit 
fimbriam uestimenti eius 


dicebat enim intra se 
(Fol. 27 a.) 


132—241. 


---- — — — — 
KAT MAG9AION 


eay αψωμαι povoy του ἵματιου avrov IX. 
σωθησομαι.ο δε corn στραφεισ 22 
καὶ εἰδων avryy eurey 


θαρσει θυγατὴρ ἡ πιστισ σον σεσωκεν σὲ 
καὶ ἐσωθὴ ἢ γυνὴ απὸ THT opa εκεινησ 
και ελθων o we "εἰσ THY OLKELAY TOV APXOYTOT — 33 
᾿ καὶ ἴδων τουσ avAyrac - Kat Tov oxXoy 
GopyBoupevor - eXeyev αναχωρειτε 24 
ov yap aTeÜayev ro kopaatoy - adAa καθευδει 
και κατεγελων avroy 
Ore δε εἐξεβληθη o oxyXoa - ελθων ἐκρατησεν 25 
τὴν χειρα αυτήσ.. Kat ἡγερθη ro κορασιον 


και ἐξηλθεν ἡ φημὴ avrov 26 
eur ολην THY γὴν ekeangy 

— — 

o€ :καιπαραγοντι εκειθεν Tw cy 27 


1koXovOscay ὄνο τυφλοι xpaLovrec και Xeyovrec 
ἐλεησον ἡμασ Uu Saved 


KGL ἐρχεται εἰσ Τὴν οἰκειαν 28 
καὶ προσηλθον avre οι δυο τυφλοι 
καὶ Aeyet auTou 0 ine πιστενυετε 
ort δυναμαι rovro ποιῆσαι. λεγουσιν avro ναι xe 
rore ἥψατο των ομματων avrov καὶ eumey 29 
κατα τὴν πιστιν ὕμων γενηθητω ὕμειν 
και yvewyOnoay οἱ οφθαλμοι avrov 30 
και ενεβριμησατο avrow qe λεγων 
ορατε μήδεισ γεινωσκετω 
ot δε εἐξελθοντεσ διεφημεισαν avrov 31 
ev ολη τὴ γὴ εκεινή 
avrov δε εξερχομενων "ἴδου προσήνεγκαν avro — 32 
ayÜpwroy κωφον δαιμονιζομενον 
και εκβληθεντοσ του δαιμονιον 33 
ελαλησεν o kadoc 
και εθαυμασαν ot oxXot λεγοντεσ 
(Fol. 27 5.) 


ral 


SEC MATTHAEUM 19 
— — — 


si tetigero tantum uestimenti eius 
saluabor ‘qui autem conuersus stetit 
et uidens eam dixit 

confide filia fides tua saluabit te 

et saluata est mulier ab hora illa 


. Mm . . . . 
et ueniens ihs.in domum principis 


et uidens synphoniacos. et multitudinem 
turbantem 86. dicebat discedite 
non enim mortua est puella :sed dormit 


et deridebant eum 


quando autem eiecta est turba * ueniens tenuit 


manum eius. et surrexit puella 
et exiit fama eius 
in totam terram illam 


Et transeunte inde ihü 


saecuti sunt duo caeci . clamantes et dicentes 
miserere nostri fili dauid 

et uenit in domum 

et accesserunt ad eum duo caeci 

et dicit eis ihs creditis 


quia possum hoc facere. dicunt ei etiam dne 


tunc tetigit oculos eorum et dixit 


saecundum fidem uestram fiat uobis 
et aperti sunt oculi eorum 

et comminatus est eis ihà dicens 
uidete nemo sciat 

qui autem exeuntes diuulgabant eum 


in tota terra illa 


isdem autem exeuntibus ‘ecce optulunt ei 


hominem surdum daemoniacum 


Et eiecto daemonio 


locutus est surdus 
et miratae sunt turbae dicentes 
(Fol. 28 a.) 


Cap. IX. 21—33. 


20 


JJ 


[3 


f&f 


sas 


— 
τα 
— 


— A oS --- 
KAT ΜΑΘΘΑΙΟ 


ovderrore ουτωσ earn ev ἵσραηλ IX. 


: και περιήγεν o τσ TOO πολισ πασασ 35 


καιτασ Kou . διδασκων εν ταισ συνα avro 
και κῆρυσσων «ro εναγγελιον THe βασιλειασ 
και θεραπενων πασαν vogoy 
καὶ πασαν μαλακειαν 

Suv Se rove οχλουσ ἐσπλανχνισθη 36 
περι AUTWY OTL σαν ἐσκυλμενοι 


και ρεριμμενοι wo προβατα. μὴ ἐχοντα ποιμενα 


:τοτέλεγει Tour μαθηταισ avrov 37 


o μεν θερισμοσ πολυσ οι δε ἐεργαται ολιγοι 
δεηθητε ουν τον Ky TOV θερισμον 38 


οπωσ᾽ exBady epyaraa* εἰσ roy θερισμον avrov 


καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοσ τουσ ag . pabyrac avrov X. 1 


εδωκεν avrour ἐξουσιαν "πνευματων ακαθαρτω 
wore exBadrewv αντα. και θεραπευειν 


πασαν νοσον. Kat πασαν μαλακειαν 


ὅτων t * αποστολων ra. ονοματα ἐστιν ravra. 2 


πρωτοσ σίμων o λεγομενοσ πετροσ' 


και ἀανδρεασ o αδελῴοσ avrov 
taxe loc rov (eB e8eov 
και ἵωαννησ o αδελῴοσ avrov 
φιλιπποσ και βαρθολομαιοσ 3 
θωμασ και μαθθαιοσ o τελωνησ' 
ἵακωβοσ o rov αλφαιον και Xe eoo 
καὶ σιμὼν 0 χαναναιοσ'. και ἵουδασ o σκαριωτὴσ 4 
ο και παραδουσ avrov 
:τουτουσ᾽ rove ιβ’απεστειλεν ο ino 5 
παραγγειλασ avrow Kat λεγων 
Eve o9ov εθνων μη απελθητε 
και εἰσ πολιν σαμαριτανων μὴ εἰσελθητε 
νυπαγετεμαλλονπροσ ra. προβατα τα απολωλοτα 6 
οἰκου εἰσραηλ 


(Fol. 28 δ.) 


numquam sic paruit in istrahel 
Et circumibat ihs ciuitates uniuersas 
et castella *docens in synagogis eorum 
et praedicans. euangelium regni 
et curans omnem languorem 
et omnem infirmitatem 
uidens &u tem turbas. misericordia motus est 
pro eis quia erant fatigati 
et proiecti sicut oues. non habentes pastorem 
tuno dicit discipulis suis 
messis quidem multa. operari autem pauci 
orate ergo dnm messis 
ut eiciat operarios ad messem suam. 
Et aduocans. xii - discipulos suos 
dedit eis potestatem - spirituum immundorum 
ut eiciant eos. et curare omnem 
languorem * et omnem infirmitatem 
xii. autem apostolorum nomina sunt haec 
primus simon qui dicitur petrus 
et andreas frater eius 
et iacobus zebedaei 
et iohannes frater eius 
philippus et bartholomeus 
thomas et mattheus publicanus 
iacobus alfei - et lebbeus 
et simon chananaeus - et iudas scariotes 
qui et tradidit eum 
hos. xii-misit ihs 
praecipiens eis et dicens 
in viam gentium ne abieritis 
et in ciuitatem samaritanorum ne introieritis 
ite magis ad obes perditas 
domus israhel 
(Fol 29 a.) 


Capp. IX. 33—X. 6. 


— eS -Ἤ — 
KAT MA®@AION 
Au 


πορευόμενοι Se κηρυσσεται Xeyovreo 
ore ἤγγικεν ἡ βασιλεια των ovpayov 
f :ασθενουντασ θεραπευσατε. νεκρουσ eyeupare 
D Aempova καθαρεισατε και δαιμονια exBadere 
δωρεαν eAafdere δωρεαν Sore 
px κτησησθε χρυσὸν pyre apyupov 
pyre χαλκον εἰσ raa ζωνασ ὕμων 
porre πῆραν εἰσ o8oy 
parre vo χειθωνασ pyre ὕποδηματα 
pare paBdov * 
afwo yap ἐστιν 0 epyarno THO τροφὴσ avrov 
:9 wedi εἰσ ἣν ay εἰσελθητε εἰσ αὐτὴν 


3! 


εξετασατετισ εν αντὴ αξιοσ ἐστιν 

κακει μεινατε emo αν efeAOyre 
:Εἰσέρχομενοι δε εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν 

ασπασασθαι αντὴν λεγοντεσ 


ειρηνὴ τὼ οἰκω TOUTO 


sas 


Cay μεν ἡ ἢ οικεια afta - ἐστε ἡ εἰρηνὴ 
ὕμων er αὐτὴν. εἰ δε μηγε εἰρηνὴ ὕμων 


προσ ὕμασ επιστραφητω 

πε : καὶ og ay μὴ δεξηται ὕμασ 

7 μῆδε axovoy Tove λογουσ ὕμων 
ἐξερχομενοι efw THT πολεωσ' 


exreua£are rov κονιορτον των ποδων ὕμω 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὕμειν - ayexrorepoy eae 
yn σοδομων και γομορασ' 
EVN "ἥμερα κρισεωσ ἢ τή πολει εἐκειψὴ 
ws :ἴδον eyw αποστελλω ὕμασ' 


J 


wo προβατα ev peow λυκων 
γειψεσθε ovv φρονιμοι wo οἱ odeur 
Kat ἀπλουστατοι WO αἱ περιστεραι 
zi :pocexere ago rav ayÜponrow 
n παραδωσουσιν yap ὕμασ εἰσ συνεδρια 
(Fol. 29 5.) 


X. 7 


8 


II 


14 


SEG MATTHEUM 21 


euntes autem praedicate dicentes 
quoniam adpropinquauit regnum caelorum 
infirmos curate. mortuos suscitate 
leprosos purgate daemonia eiecite 
gratis accepistis gratis date 
ne possideritis aurum neque argentum 
nequae aes in zonis uestris ' 
neque peram in uia 
neque duas tunicas. neque calciamenta 
neque uirgam 
dignus est enim operarius esca Sua 
ciuitas in quacumque introieritis in ea 
interrogate quis in ea dignus est 
et ibi manete donec exeatis 
introeuntes autem domum 
salutate eam dicentes 
pax domui huic 
si enim fuerit domus digna ‘erit pax uestra 
super eam *alioquin pax uestra 
ad uos reuertetur 
Et quicumque non receperit uos 
nec audierit sermones uestros 
exeuntes foras ciuitate 
excutite puluerem pedum uestrorum 
amen dico uobis: tolerabilius erit 
terrae sodomum et gomorrae 
in die iudicii quam ciuitati 111 
Ecce ego mitto uos 
sicut oues in medio luporum 
Estote ergo sapientes sicut serpentes 
et simplices sicut columbae 
adtendite ab hominibus 
tradent enim uos in conuenticulis 
(Fol. 30 a.) . 


Cap. X. 7—17. 


im 


22 


jas 


[3 


3, 


ΓΕ! 


Ξ 


[Ξ|! 


SSS — 

KAT MA®@AION 

Se — 
καιειστασσυναγωγασαυτων μαστειγωσουσινυμασ 
καὶ ἐπι ἡγεμόνων σταθησεσθαι" evexey ἐμου 18 


εἰσ μαρτυριον avrow και Tour εθνεσιν 


:Oray δε παραδωσουσιν üpac * p μεριμνησητε το 


wwe ἡ τι Aadyoyre ov yap ὕμεισ ἐστε 20 
ot λαλουντεσ΄ αλλα τὸ zrya. του πατροσ 
TO λαλουν ev ὕμειν" 

παραδωσει δε αδελῴφοσ adeAdoy εἰσ θανατον 21 
καὶ πατήρ Τέκνον 


καὶ εταναστήσονται τεκνα Et γονεισ 
και θανατωσουσιν avrove 
και ἐσεσθαι μεισουμενοι ὕπο παντων 22 
δια To ονομα pou-o δεὕπομεινασ εἰσ τελοσ 
ουτοσ σωθησεται 

: Oray δε διωκουσιν ὑμασ εν τὴ πολι TavTy 23 
φευγεται ew τὴν αλλὴν . cay δε «v TH αλλη 
διωκουσιν υμασ - φευγετε ew τὴν αλλην 

ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν " 
OV μὴ τελεσητετασ πολεισ Ἰσραὴλ 
«oc αν ελθη οὕιοσ rov ανθρωπου 


:Oux ἐστιν μαθητησ ὕπερ τον διδασκαλον 24. 


ovde δουλοσ ὕπερ TOV KV αὐτου 
ἀρκετὸν τω μαθητη iva τενηται 25 
wo οδιδασκαλοσ αντου. καὶ o δουλοσ wo 0 KJ GVTOU 
:€« rov οἰκοδεσπότην . βελζεβονλ xaXovaw 
o0 « μαλλον τουσ οἰκειακουσ avTov 
:μὴ ovv φοβηθητε avrova 26 
οὐδεν yap ἐστιν κεκαλυμμενον 
o ovx αποκαλυφθησεται 
και κρυπτον 0 ov γνωσθησεται 


:0 Aeyo ὕμειν εν τὴ σκοτία. εἰπατε ἐν To ort 27 


και O εἰσ TO ουσ AKOVETE 


κηρυσσεται eri των δωματων 


(Fol. 30 6.) 


"SEG MATTHEUM 


et in synagogis suis. flagellabunt uos 
et ante praesides stabitis. propter me 
in testimonium illis et gentibus 


Cum autem tradiderint uos. nolite gogitare 


quo modo aut quid loquamini . non enim uos estis 


qui loquimini .sed sps patris uestris 
qui loquitur in uobis 
tradet autem frater fratrem in mortem 
et pater filium 
et insurgent fili in patres 
et mortificabunt eos 
et eritis odio ab omnibus 
propter nomen meum: qui autem sustinebit 
in finem -hic saluus erit 
cum autem persecuti fuerint uos in ciuitate hao 
fugite in altera ‘si autem in alia 
persecuntur uos : fugite in altera 
amen dico uobis 
non consummauitis ciuitates israhel 
donec ueniat filius hominis 
non est discipulus super magistrum 
nec seruus super dominum suum 
sufficit discipulo ut fiat sicut magister 
eius ‘et seruus sicut dominus eius 
si patremfamilias- belzebul uocant 
quanto magis domestioos qius 
ne ergo timueritis eos 
nihil eet enim coopertum 
quod non reuelabitur 
et absconsum quod non scietur 
quod dico uobis in tenebris ‘dicite in lumine 
et quod in aure audistis 
praedicate in tectis 


(Fol. 31 a.) 


Car. X. 17—27. 


fel 


[5 


fe 


[3j 


KAT MAGGAION 


και μὴ φοβηθητε 
απὸ τῶν GTOKTCVVOVTOY TO σωμα 
τὴν δε ψυχὴν μη δυναμενων σφαξαι 

φοβηθητε δε μαλλον τον δυναμενον 
και ψυχὴν kat σωμα απολεσαι εἰσ γεενναν 

ovx: Óvo στρουθια rov ασσαριου πωλουνται 29 
και εν εξ αυτων ov πεσειται ἐπι τὴν γὴν 
ay€v TOU πατροσ ὕμων 
αλλα και at τριχεσ TH κεφαλησ᾽ ὕμων 30 
maces ηριθμημεναι εἰσιν 
μή ovv φοβεισθαι. πολλων στρουθειων 31 
διαφερετεῦὕμεισ 

WALT ουν OTTELT ομολογήσει εν ἐμοι 32 
ἐνπροσθεν των ανθρωπων - ομολογήσω Kayw «vro 
ἐγπροσθεν rov πατροσ μου rov εν ovpayour 

: Oorur Sav ἀρνησητε μεενπροσθεν των αγθρωπὼ 33 
ἀρνήσομαι καγω avrov 
ἐνπροσθεν rov πατροσ μου rov εν ουρανοισ 

:μὴ νομισηται ort ηλθον 34 
βαλειν ειρηνὴν επι τὴν γὴν 
ovx n\Bov βαλειν εἰρην αλλα μαχαιραν 

λθον yap δικασαι ὕιον κατα πατροσ αντον 35 
και θυγατερα κατα τησ μητροσ avrqo 
καὶ νυμφην κατα rho πενθερασ αυτὴσ 
καὶ exOpot του ανθρωπου - ot οἰκιάκοι avrov 36 

:0 φιλων πατερα ἡ μήτερα ὕπερ ej 37 
οὐκ ἐστιν μου αξιοσ 
και οσ ov λαμβανειτον σταυρον avrov 38 
και ακολουθει οπισω μου. ovk ἐστιν μου αξιοσ 

:0 εὐρων τὴν ψυχὴν avrov ἀπολεσει αὐτὴν 39 
o δεαπολεσασ τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 
ενεκεν ἐμου ευρήσει avTyy 
Ὁ Sexopevoo ὕμασ epe δεχεται 40 

(Fol. 31 à.) 


BEC M 23 
— — Ky 
et ne timueritis 
ab his qui occidunt corpus 


animam autem non possunt occidere 
timete autem magis eum qui potest 
et animam et corpus perdere in gehennam 
nonne duo passeres. asse ueniunt 
et unum ex his non cadet super terram 
sine patre uestro 
Bed et capilli capitis uestri 
omnes numerati sunt 
ne ergo timueritis multorum passerum 
superponite uos 
Omnis ergo qui confitebitur in me 
coram hominibus. confitebor et ego 
coram patre meo qui in caelis est 
quicumque autem negauerit me. coram hominib " 
negabo et ego eum 
coram patre meo qui in caelis est 
nolite putare quia ueni 
mittere pacem super terram 
non ueni mittere pacem sed gladium 
ueni enim separare 'filium aduersum patrem suu 
et filiam aduersus matrem suam 
et sponsam aduersus socram suam 
et inimici homines. domestici eius 
qui diligit patrem aut matrem plus quam me 
non est me dignus | 
et qui non accipit crucem suam 
et sequitur post me. non est me dignus 
qui inuenit animam suam perdet eam 
qui autem perdiderit animam suam 
propter me inueniet illam 
qui recipit uos me recipit 


(Fol. 32 a.) 


Cap. X. 28—40. 


^en Ee EE E Βα πε τ nM 


24 


TOV a Toc T€cAavra. με x. 


90 :O δεχομενοσ προφητην -εἰσ ονομα προῴφητου — 41 
--- 


μισθον προφητον λημψεται 


ρ . Καὶ OD αν ποτεισὴ - EVA Τῶν ἐλαχίστων τούτων 42 
— 


ποτήριον ὕδατοσ ψνχρου" ew ονομα ua rov 


apnv λεγω ὕμειν - ov μὴ ἀποληται o μισθοσ avrov 


— 
ς Και ἐγένετο οτεετελεσ y οιησ διατασσων 


SR fs 


XI. 1 


Tour Swoexa μαθηταισ avrov ere exeiÜev 


του διδασκειν και κηρυσσειν 


εν ταισ πολεσιν GUTOV 


eB :O δεϊωαννησ ακουσασ ev Tw δεσμωτηριω 


τα epya rov ojo" repajag δια των μαθητων avrov 


εἰπεν GvTO 
συ εἰ ο ἐεργαζομενοσ ἡ ετερον προσδοκωμεν 
ay 
αποκριθεισ Se o ιησ eurey avrow 


πορευθεντεσ απαγγειλατεϊωαννει 


αακονετε και βλεπετε τυῦλοι αναβλεπουσιν “Ὁ 


λεπροι καθαριζονται. καὶ wot akovovaw 


καὶ νεκροι ἐγειρονται" kat πτωχοὶ ευαγγελιζονται 


και μακαριοσ ἐστιν 


oc ay μὴ σκανδαλισθὴη εν ἐμοι 

Tovrav δε πορενομενων «ἤρξατο ine Aeyew 
TOU οχλοισ περιἴωαννον 
τι ἐξζηλθατε εἰσ τὴν epnpov θεασασθαι 
καλαμον ὕπο avej.ov σαλενομενον 
αλλα τι εξηλθατε ειδειν 
ἀνθρωπον μαλακοισ ημφιασμενον 
edov ot τα μαλακα φορουντεσ 
εν Tour owour Toy βασιλεων εἰσιν 

αλλα ret εξηλθατε ειδειν προφητην 
ναι Aeyo ὕμειν 
και περισσοτερον προφητου 

ey : OVTOG ἐστιν περι OV γεγραπται 


(Fol. 32 5.) 


— 


SEC MATTHEUM 


et qui me recipit recipit eum qui me misit 
qui reoipit prophetam ’in nomine prophetae 
mercedem prophetae accipiet 
et quicumque potauerit ‘unum de minimis his 
calicem aque frigidae in nomine discipuli 
amen dico uobis. non peribit merces eius 
et factum est cum consummasset ihs praecipiens 
duodecim discipulis suis - transiit inde 
docere et praedicare 
in ciuitatibus eorum 
iohannes autem audiens in carcerem 
opera ihu mittens per discipulos suos 
dixit ei 
tu es qui uenis aut alium expectamus 
respondens autem ihe dixit eis 
euntes renuntiate iohanni 
quae audistis et uidetis: caeci uident 
leprosi mundantur ‘et surdi audiunt 
et mortui resurgunt. et pauperes euangelizantur 
et beatus est 
quicumque non scandalizatur in me 
his autem abuntibus : coepit ihs dicere turbis 
deiohanne 
quid existis in desertum uidere 
arundinem a uento moueri 
sed quid existis uidere 
hominem mollibus indutum 
ecce qui mollibus utuntur 
in domibus regnum sunt 
sed quid existis uidere prophetam 
etiam dico uobis 
et amplius quam propheta 
hic est de quo scriptum est 
(Fol. 33 a.) 


Capp. X. 40—XI. το. 


my, Ao 


— -ϑ — 
T MAGO0EON 
— — He -- — 


ἴδου eyw ἀποστελλω τον ἀνγελον μου 
τροπροσωποῦυ σου. οσ κατασκενασει Τὴν οδον cov 
ἐνπροσθεν σου 

:ayaqy λεγω ὕμειν ovx ἐγήγερται 
εν TOUT γεννητοισ των γυναίκων 


μειζων ἴωαννου Tov βαπτιστου 


ΓΘ 


o δε μικροτεροσ ev τὴ βασιλεια των ουρανων 
μειζων avrov ἐστιν 


απὸ rov ἤμερων ἴωαννουσ του βαπτιστου 


SRS 


«oc αρτι ἢ βασιλεια των ovpayov Biaferas 


XI. 


12 


SEC MATTHEU 25 
——— oc uc 
ecce ego mitto angelum meum 

ante faciem tuam ‘qui praeparauit uiam tuam 

ante te 
amen dico uobis ‘non surrexit 

inter natos mulierum 

maior iohanne baptista 
minor autem qui est in regno caelorum 

maior illo est 
a diebus autem iohannis baptistae 

usque adhuc regnum caelorum cogitur 


ka4 ot βιασται aprafovow αὐτὴν et qui cogunt diripiunt illud 
παντεσ yap ou rpodyrat Kat ονομοσ 13 omnis enim prophetae et lex 
ews twayvou ἐεπροφητευσαν usque ad iohannen prophetarunt 
δ᾽ : καὶ εἰ θελεται δεξασθαι 14 et si uultis accipere 
αντοσ ἐστι ἡλειασ o μελλων epyer Gar ipse est helias qui uenturus est 
O €Xwy wra axoverw 15 qui habet aures audiat 
ρὲ τιψι δε ομοιωσὼ τὴν γενεαν ταυτὴν 16 | cui autem similabo. generationem hanc 
B ομοια ἐστιν παιδιοισ Kabypevour ev Ty a'yopa similis est pueris sedentibus in foro 
a προσφωνουντα Tos erepowr λεγουσιν qui respondentes aliis dicunt 
ηὔλησαμεν very * και OUK ὠρχησασθαι 17 cantauimus uobis. et non saltastis 
εθρηνησαμεν καὶ ovk ἐκοψασθαι fleuimus et non lamentastis 
arbev yap Ἰωαννησ 18 uenit enim iohannes 
μητεεσθιων pyre rewvov neque manducans neque bibens 
και λεγουσιν δαιμονιον exet et dicunt daemonium habet 
λθεν o dvor rov ayÜpenrov εσθιων Kar πείγων 19 uenit filius hominis. manducans et bibens 
και Aeyovaty ov ανθρωποσ et dicunt ecce homo 
payor και οινοποτήσ uorax et uinipotator 
τεέλωνων φιλοσ και αμαρτωλων publicanorum amicus et peccatorum 
και εδικαιωθὴ moda. απο Twv T€kvov avrqa et iustificate est sapientia ‘a filiis suis 
P ‘Tore npgaro ονειδιζειν rag πολεισ so | tunccoepit inproperare ciuitatibus 
n εν aur γεγονεισαν.. a. πλεισται δυναμεισ in quibus facti sunt. plurimae uirtutes 
OTL OV perevonmay quia non paenituerunt 
ovat σοι xopofaiy και βεθσαειδα 21 | uaetibichorozain.et betsaida 
(Fol. 33 5.) (Fol. 34 a.) 
Car. XI. 10—21. 


26 


Sas 


SEITE f 


J 


ey 


SB 


KAT MA@@AION 
—— — — 
ort εἰ ev τυρω Kat σιδωνει. εγεγονεισαν ΣΙ. 
αι δνναμεισ - a4 γενομεναι εν ὕμειν "παλαι 
αν εν σακκω καὶ σποδω μετενοησαν 
πλὴν Xeyo üj.ew *rvpo και σειδωνι 22 
AVEKTOTEPOV ἐστε εν ἡμερα κρεισεωσ ἣν ὕμει 
και συ kadapvaovy.* μὴ εωσ ovpavov ὕψωθηση 23 
ἢ «oc adov καταβηση 
: ort εἰ ἐν σοδομοισ ἐγενηθησαν at δυναμεισ 
at γενομεναι εν σοι 
ἐμειναν αν μεχρι THO σήμερον 
πλὴν Xeyo ὕμειν 24. 
oTt γησ σοδομων ἀνεκτότερον erat 
εν ἡμέρα κρισεωσ NV ὑμειν 
: Ey execvw Tw καιρωαποκρειθεισ ouo eurey 25 
efopodoyoupat σοι πατερ Ke TOU ovpayvou 
και THO yno * oTt ekpvi/ao ravra 
απὸ σοφων και συνετων 
και απεκαλυψεσ avra νηπιοισ "ναι o πατὴρ 26 
ort ovrwo €y€vero evdoxera eympoaÜey σον 
: πάντα μοι παρεδοθη ὕπο rov πρσ μου 27 
: καὶ ουδεισ επιγεινωσκει TOV ὕϊον "εἰ μὴ 0 πατὴρ 
ουδετον πατερα TIO επιγεινωσκει" εἰ μὴ οὕιοσ 
καὶ ὦ ay βουληται οὕιοσ αποκαλυψαι 
:δευτεπροσ μεπαντεσ - ot κοπιωντεσ 28 
και πεφορτισμένοι EO TAL: καγω ἀαγαπαύσω ὕμασ 
apare Tov ζυγον μου ες ὕμασ 29 
καὶ μαθεται απ ἐμου ort paio εἰμει 
και ταπεινοσ τὴ καρδια.- 
και ευρήσεται ἀαναπαυσιν ταισ Yuya joy 
o yop ζυγοσ μου χρηστοσ 30 
Kat To φορτιον μον eAadpov ἐστιν 
: Ey exewo Tw καιρω "επορευθὴ o ine caf aa XIL 1 
δια των σποριμων.οἱ δε μαθηται avrov erwaga. 


(Fol. 345.) 


‘SEC MATTHEU 
-- «-- ι. Ke 


quia si in tyro et sidona ‘factae essent 
uirtutes- quae factae sunt in uobis olim iam 
in sacco et in cinere paenituissent 
uerum tamen dico uobis. tyro et sidoni 
tolerabilius erit.in die iudicii quam uobis 
et tu cafarnaum ‘ne usquae ad caelum exaltaueris 
aut usque ad inferos descendes 
quia si in sodomis factae essent. uirtutes 
quae factae sunt in te 
mansissent utique usque in hodiernum 
uerum tamen dico uobis 
quoniam terrae sodomum tolerabilius erit 
in dieiudicii quam uobis 
in illo tempore: respondens ihe dixit 
confiteor tibi pater dne caeli 
et terrae. qui abscondisti haec 
8 sapientibus et sensatis 
et reuelasti ea parbulis. etiam pater 
quoniam ita facta est uoluntas ante te 
omnia mihi tradita sunt a patre meo 
et nemo cognoscit filium . nisi pater 
nec patrem aliquis cognoscit . nisi filius 


et cui uoluerit filius reuelare 


uen  admeomnesqui lauoratis 
estis - et ego reficiam uos 
gum super uos 
ite a me quia mitis sum 
et humilis corde 


et inuenietis requiem animis uestris 
iugum enim meum suaue 
et onus meum leue est 
in illo tempore. abiit ihs sabbatis 
per sata discipuli autem illius esurierunt 
(Fol. 35 a.) 


Capp. XI. 21—XII. 1. 


---  - ὡς ty 
T MA®@AION 
-- κ--- oe — 
xat nptayro rov σταχνασ τιλλειν και αἰσθιειν XII. 
Or 8e φαρισαιοι ἰδοντεσ avrova εἰπὸν avro 2 
ἴδου ot μαθηται cov - rovovoty o ovk εξεστιν 
soc εν caf faro 
O de ecrey avrow ovx aveyvwrat 3 
τι ἐποιῆσεν Saved ore erwacev 
KOL Ot €T GUTOU 
— 
κωσ εἰσηλθεν ew Tov oov Tov Üv- 4 
Kat rovc ἀαρτουσ THe προσθεσεωσ εφαγεν 
o ovx yy efov avro φαγειν 
οὐδε TOLT μετ QUTOV - Et μὴ TOUT ἵερευσιν μονοισ 


: ἢ OUK aveyvwre ἐν ro yoga) 5 


SRS 


ort ev Tour σαββασιν - ot εἰερεισ εν Tw ἵερω 
To ca Barov βεβηλουσιν. και ανετιοι εἰσὶν 

λεγω yap ὕμειν - ort του iepov μειζον ἐστιν whe ό 
ει δε eyvwxerre TL corey 7 
€A«oc θελω και ov θυσιαν 
οὐκ αν κατεδικασατε TOUT αγετιουσ 


— 
ko yap ἐστιντου σαββατον" οὕιοσ του ανθρωπου 8 


pir : καὶ μεταβασ εκειθεν ηλθεν 9 
εἰσ THY συναγωγὴν avrov. και iov ayÜperos 10 
ἣν exe τὴν χειρα exov Enpay 
καὶ exnpwrncay avroy λεγοντεσ 


«t ἐξεστιν row σαββασιν θεραπευσε 


tva. κατηγορησουσὶιν avrov 


O δεειπεν avrow 1 
τι ἐστιν ev υμειν ανθρωποσ 

oc €xet προβατον «v 

και evireav rou σαββασιν ew βοθυνον 

OVX€L κρατει αντο Kat €yetpet 

ποσω ovy διαφερει ανθρωποσ rov προβατου 12 
wore εξεστιν row σαββασιν. καλωσ ποιειν 

tore λέγει To ayÜponro ἐκτεινον τὴν χειρασον 13 


(Fol. 45.) 


Cap. XII. 


"SE 
— 


EC "MATTHEUM 27 
et coeperunt spicas bellere. et manducare 
pharisaei autem uidentes eos dixerunt illi 
ecce discipuli tui faciunt quod non licet 
facere sabbato 
qui autem dixit eis non legistis 
quid fecit dauid cum esuriit 
et qui cum eo 
quo modo introibit in domum di 
et panes propositionis manducabit 
quod non licebat ei manducare 
nec qui cum eo nisi sacerdotibus solis 
aut non legistis in lege 
quia in sabbatis sacerdotes in templo 
sabbatum uiolant.et sine culpa sunt 
dico enim uobis. quia a templo maior est hic 
si autem sciretis quid sit 
misericordiam uolo et non sacrificium 
non condemnassetis innocentes 
dns enim est sabbati filius hominis 
et transiens inde uenit 
in synagoga eorum - et ecce homo 
erat ibi" manum habens aridam 
et interrogauerunt eum dicentes 
si licet sabbatis curare 
ut accusarent eum 
qui autem dixit eis 
qui est in uobis homo 
qui habet obet unam 
et ceciderit sabbatis in gurgitem 
nonne tenet eam et leuat 
quando ergo superponit homo ab oue 
itaque licet sabbatis bene facere 
tunc dicit homini: extende manum tuam 
(Fol. 36 a.) 


1—13. 


98 KAT ΜΑΘΘΕΟΝ SE TTHEUM 
— 


και eLerevvey και αποκατεσταθὴ XIL et extendit et restituta est 
et : ὕγειησ wo ἡ αλλη και eCeMDoyreo * ot φαρεισαιοι 14 salba sicut alia. et egressi pharisaei 
σννβουλιον eXafov kar avrov consilium acceperunt de eo 
oTTOC αὐτὸν απολεσωσιν ut eum perderent 
O de ino yvove ἀανεχωρησεν εκειθεν 15 ihs autem sciens secessit inde 
pai : και ἠκολουθησαν avro oxAot πολλοι et saecutae sunt eum turbae multae 
n και εθεραπευσεν avrova et curabit eos 
παντασ δε ove εθεραπευσεν ἐπεπληξεν avrour 16 | Omnesautem quos curauit. comminatus est eis 
ἵνα μη avepoy avrov ποιήσωσιν ut non manifestarent eum 
wa πληρωθη το ρηθεν 17 ut conpleretur quo dictum est 
δια ἡσαῖου του προφητου Aeyovror per esaiam prophetam dicentem 
iSov οπαισ μον εἰσ ον yperura, o ἀγαπήητοσ μου 18 ecce puer meus quem elegi : dilectus meus 
ev o ηυδοκησεν ἡ vx μον ) in quo conplacuit anima mea 
θησω To χνὰ μον ἐπ᾿ avrov ponam spm meum super eum 
και κρισιν τοισ εθνεσιν απαγγελλει" et iudicium gentibus adnuntiabit 
OUK €puret ovde κραυγασει 19 non contendet neque clamabit 
ovde axovet τισ εν TQ ria eua THY φωνὴν av neque audiet quis in plateis uocem eius. 
ov κατιαξεισ'"και λινον τυφομενον T?" ao non confringes et linum fumigans 
ov μὴ ξβεσει ewo ay exa) εἰσ νικοσ τηνκρισι non extintinguet donec eiciat. ad uictoriam indica 
kat εν ro ovopart avrov - εθνη ελπιζουσιν 21 et in nomine eius. gentes sperabunt 
e? :Tore προσηνεχθὴ avro δαιμονιζομενοσ' 22 | tuncoblatus est ei. daemoniacus 
τυφλοσ και kodoc - kat eÜeposreva'ey avror caecus et mutus. et curabit eum 
wore Toy κωφον λαλειν και βλεπειν it utsurdus loqueretur et uideret 
px : καὶ eGurravro παντεσ ot oxXot* Kat eAeyov 23 et stupebant omnes turbae - et dicebant 
B μῆτι ort ovrog. ἐστιν οὕιοσ Saved numquid hic est filius dauid 
pra Οἱ de φαρισαιοι ακουσαντεσ εἰπὸν 24 | pharisaeiautem audientes dicebant 
n ovrog ovx ἐεκβαλλει τα dat ονια hic non eiecit daemonia 
εἰ μή ev τω BeehLeBovd - apxovri των δαιμονιω nisi in belzebul . principem daemoniorum 
pxB :tOoy Se rac ενθυμησεισ avrwv 25 | uidens autem cogitationes eorum 
B eurey avrow 'πασα βασιλεια μερισθεισα dixit eis: omne regnum diuisum 
ed εαντὴν ερημοντει in se desolatur 
Kal raga, FOALS ἡ οἰκια μερισθισα e eavryv et omnis ciuitas uel domus diuisa in se 
OV στήσεται. εἰ δε Kas 0 σατανασ Toy σαταναν ek 26 non stauit.si autem satanas satanam eicit 
(Fol. 36 5.) βαλλει (Fol. 37 a.) 


Car. XII. 13— 26. 


prs 
— 


KAT MAGGEON' 


ed cavrov εμερισθη XII. 
vg ovy σταθήσεται ἡ βασιλεια avrov 


ει de eyw ev βεελζεβουλ exBadAw τα δαιμονια — 27 


Ot Utot ὕμων ev τινι εκβαλλουσιν 
δια Tovro avrot κριταὶ ἐσονται ὕμων 

Εἰ δὲ εν πὶ Bo epo ἐκβάλλω τα δαιμονία, 28 
αρα εφθασὰν εφυμασ.η βασιλεια τον θυ 

ἢ roc δυναταιτισ ειἰσελθειν 29 


εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν τον LO XUDOV - καὶ τα σκενὴ αὐτου 
Stapracas - cay μὴ πρωτον δηση τον ἴσχυρον 
καὶ TOT€ τὴν οἰκειαν avrov διαρπαση 
O μη ov per ἐμου κατ ἐεμουν ἐστιν 30 
καὶ O μὴ συναγων μετ ἐμου σκορπιζει 
: Ava Tovro λέγω ὕμειν - aa, apaptia 31 
καὶ βλασφημια. αφεθήσεται row ανθρωποισ 
7 δετου xe βλασφημια 
ovk αφεθησεται row ανθρωποισ 
Kat oo ay evn λογον. κατα Tov UvoU 32 
του ανθρωπου. αφεθησεται avro 
og Say eur κατα Tov TVO TOV αγιου 
οὐκ αφεθησεται avro ovre ey Tovro τω αἴωνι 
ovre εν ro μελλοντι 
:ἢ ποιήσαται τὸν δενδρον καλον 33 
καὶ TOV καρπὸν avrov καλον 
ἢ ποιήσατετο δενδρον σαπρον 
Kat TOV καρπὸν αὐτου σαπρον 
ἐκ yap rov καρπου ro δενδρον γεινωσκεται 
Γεννήματα εχιδνων (034 
rox δυνασθαι αγαθα λαλειν 
πονηροι οντεσ 
ἐκ yap του περισσευματοσ THO καρδιασ' 
: τόστομα λαλει αγαθα ἀγαθοσ ἀανθρωποσ 35 
ex rov ἀγαθου θησανρον εκβαλλει αγαθα 
(Fol 375.) 


SEC MATTHEUM 29 


in se diuisus est 
quo modo ergo stabit regnum eius 
si autem in beelzebul . eicio daemonia 
fili uestri in quo eiciunt 
ideo ipsi iudices erunt uestri 
si autem spu di ego eicio daemonia 
ergo praeuenit in uos regnum di 
aut quo modo quis introire poterit 
in domum fortis - et uasa eius 
diripere. nisi primum alligauerit fortem . 
et tunc domum eius diripiet 
qui non est mecum aduersum me est 
et qui non golligit mecum dispargit 
ideo dico uobis - omne peccatum 
et blasphemia. dimittetur hominibus 
Spa autem blasphemia 
non remittetur hominibus 
et quicumque dixerit uerbum . aduersus filium 
hominis remittetur illi 
quicumque dixerit aduersum spm sanctum 
non dimittetur illi. neque in isto saeculo 
neque in futuro 
aut facite arborem bonam 
et fructum eius bonum 
aut facite arborem malam 
et fructum eius malum 
de fructo enim - arbor adgnoscitur 
generatio uiperarum 
quo modo potestes bona loqui 
dum maligni estis 
de abundantia autem cordis 
os loquitur bona bonus homo 
de bono thensauro eicit bona 
(Fol. 38 a.) 


Cap. XII. 26—35. 


Se 0 A — 
30 KAT MA@@AION 


Kat o Trovipog avOpunroc * ex rov πονηρου θησαῦρον 


«xf aAA ec πονηρα 
pxs :Aeyw δεῦμειν ori παν ρημα apyov 
o ÀAaXovaw ox avOpurrot - αποδωσουσιν 
περι avrov λογον - ev ἡμέρα κρισεωσ 
«x yap των λογων σου δικαιωθηση 
ἢ εκ των λογων σου καταδικασθηση 
pxt STOTE απεκριθησαν avro τινεσ των γραμματεω 
και φαρισαιων λεγοντεσ διδασκαλε 
θελομεν απο σου σήμειον ἵδειν 


: οδεαποκριθεισ evrev αντοισ γενεα πονηρα 


[Σ! 


και μοιχαλισ σημεῖον επιζητει 
και σήμιον ov δοθησεται σοι 
ει μη τὸ σήμιον ἴωνα Tov προφητου 
ὠὡσπερι yap ἴωνασ εν τὴ κοιλια TOU κητοὺσ 
τρεισ ἡμερασ και τρεισ VUKTAT 
ουτωσ ἐστε. και οὕιοσ τον ανθρωπον 
εν τή καρδια THE γὴησ - TPE ἡμερασ 
και τρεισ νυκτασ 
ανδρεσ νεινενεται. αναστήσονται εν τὴ κρισει 
μετα THO νεασ ταυτῆσ και κακρινουσιν αὐτῇ 
ort μετενοησαν - εἰσ TO κηρυγμα ιωνα 


και ἴδου πλειον twva ὠδε' βασιλισσα vorov 


ἐγερθησεται εν τὴ κρισει 


μετα THT γένεασ TAUTNO - Καὶ KOTOKDELVL αντή 


ort ἢλθεν ex των περατων THE γὴσ 
ακουσαι τὴν σοφιαν τον σολομωνοσ 
και εἰδον πλειον σολομωνοσ᾽ woe 
— — 
pxÜ :Oray 8e ro axaÜDaprov πνα εξζηλθη 
— 
aro rov avOpwirov 
διερχεται δι ανυδρων τοπων 
ζητουν avamavow - καὶ ovx ευρεισκει 


Tore Neyer - εἰσ τον OLKOV μον ἐπιστρεψω 


(FoL 385.) 


XII. 


36 


37 


39 


40 


41 


42 


43 


SEC MATTHEUM 
— — — 


et malus homo de malo thensauro 
profert mala 


dico autem uobis. quoniam omne beruum uacum 


quod locuntur homines . reddet pro eo 
rationem in die iudicii 
de uerbis enim tuis iustificaueris 


et de uerbis tuis condemnaueris 


tunc responderunt ei . quidam scribarum 


et pharisaeorum dicentes . magister 

uolumus a te signum uidere 

qui autem respondens dixit eis:generatio mala 
et adultera signum querit 

et signum non dabitur ei 


nisi signum ionae prophetae 


sicut enim erat ionas in uentre ceti 


tres dies et tres noctes 
sic erit et filius hominis 
in corde terrae tres dies 


et tres noctes 


uiri nineuitae. resurgunt in iudicio 


cum generatione hac et condemnabunt eam 
quia paenitentiam egerunt in praedicatione ionae 
et ecce plus ionae hio regina austri 
exsurget in iudicium 
cum generatione hac. et condemnauit eam 
quia uenit a finibus terrae 
audire sapientiam solomonis 
et ecce plus solomone hic 
cum autem immundus aps exierit 
ab homine 
circuit per inaquosa loca 
quaerens requiem ‘et non inuenit 
tunc dicit ‘in domum meam reuertar 

(Fol. 39 a.) 


Cap. XII. 35— 44. 


οθεν εἐξηλθον και ελθων ευρεισκει 
Tov oxov σχολαζοντα 
σεσαρωμενον και κεκοσμημένον 
τοτε πορενεται καὶ παραλαμβανει μεθ εαντου 
€NTA ετερα πνευματα. πονηροτερα avrov 
και εἰσελθοντα κατοικει εκει 
και γεινεταιτα αἰσχατα GUTOV 
Tov ayÜponrov εκεινον - χειρον των πρωτων 
ουτωσ ἐστε και TH γενεα ταυτὴ τή πογηρα 
pr ἐλαλουντοσ δε avrov rou oxXow 
ov ἡ μητὴρ και οἱ αδελῴοι avrov 
ειστήηκεισαν efw ζητουντεσ λαλησαι avro 
Εἰπεν δετισ avro Sov ἡ μητὴρ σον 
καὶ οἱ αδελῴοι σου ἐεστηκεισαν εξω 
ζητουντεσ λαλησαι σοι 
O δεαποκριθεισ εἰπεν τω λέγοντι avro 
TW ἐστιν ἡ μητὴρ μου ἡ τινεσ εισιν 
ot αδελῴφοι μου" και ἐεκτεινασ τὴν χειρα 
emt rove μαθητασ avrov εἰπεν 
ἴδου y μητὴρ μον και ot αδελφοι pov 
οστισ yap ποιει- To θελημα Tov πατροσ μον 
TOV εν ουρανοισ' 
avrog μου αδελῴφοσ καὶ αδελφη και μητὴρ eon 
pra :Εσ de rn ἡμερα εκεινὴ εξηλθεν o ine 
καὶ ἐεκαθητο παρα τὴν θαλασσαν 
και συνήχθησαν προσ avrov οχλοι πολλοι 
wore avrov εἰσ To πλοιον ey[javra, 
καθησθαι. και rag o oxXoc 
€v TOV αἰγιαλον ἐστήκει- Kat ἐλαλησεν avrow 
moda - ev παραβολαισ λεγων 
ov ef Bev o a-retpov σπειραι 
Kat εν TW σπειριν AUTO 
α μεν ἐπεσεν Tapa THY οδον 
(Fol. 39 5.) 


XII. 


45 


46 


47 


48 


50 


XIII. 1 


SEC MATTHEUM 3] 


unde exibi- et ueniens inuenit 
domum uacantem 
mundatam et ornatam 
tunc uadit. et suscipit secum 
septem alios spe nequiores 8e 
et introeuntes habitant ibi 
et fiunt nouissima eius *peiora prioribus 
hominis illius ' ita erit 
et generationi huic pessimae 
loquente autem eo turbis 
ecce mater illius et fratres eius 
stabant foris querentes loqui ei 
dixit autem quidam illi. ecce mater tua 
et fratres tui stant foras 
querentes loqui tibi 
qui autem respondens dixit dicentibus sibi 
quae est mater mea. aut qui sunt 
fratres mei. et extendens manum 
super discipulos suos dixit 
Ecce mater mea et fratres mei 
quicumque enim facit "uoluntatem patris mei 
qui est in caelis 
ipse meus frater et soror et mater est 
in die autem illo exiit ihs 
et sedebat secus mare 
et congregatae sunt ad eum turbae multae 
ita ut in naui ascendens 
sederet ‘et omnis turba 
supra litus stabat. et locutus est eis 
multa in parabolis dicens 
Ecce exiit seminans seminare 
et dum seminat 
quaedam ceciderunt secus uiam 
(Fol. 40 a.) 


Carr. XII. 44—XIII. 4. 


32 T 


και λθον ra. πετεινα. Kal κατεφαγεν avra. 
a δεεπεσεν eret ra πετρωδη 
οπον οὐκ εἰχεν γὴν πολλὴν 


και ευθυσ εξανετειλεν 


δια το μὴ exew βαθὸσ γησ 


XIII. 


5 


Tov δεηλιου ανατειλαντοσ -εκαυματισθησαν ό 


και δια το μὴ exe pilav - εξηρανθησαν 


αλλα δε ἐπεσεν εἰσ Tao axavOac 
και ἀνεβησαν at ακανθαι. και exvigay avra. 
αλλα Se ἐπεσεν exe τὴν γὴν τὴν καλην 
και εδιδουν καρπὸν 
ομεν p o8e-£: 08e. X 
O €XWY WTO. GKOU€LV ἀκουέτω 
και προσελθοντεσ οἱ μαθηται εἰπὸν avro 
δια τι ev παραβολαισ λαλεισ avrow 
O δε αποκριθεισ ειπεν avrow 
ort ὕμειν δεδοται γνωναι 
τα μυστηρια tho βασιλειασ Tov ουρανω 
εκεινοισ Se ov δεδοται 
ρὰβ :Ocrur yap exe: δοθησεται avro 
Kat περισσενθησεται 
οστισ Se ovk €xet- Kat o €xet 
αρθησεται am avrov 
ery : Ova Tovro ev παραβολαισ Ace avrow 
ἵνα BAerovreo μη βλεπωσιν 
και AKOVOVTED μὴ ακουσωσιν 
και μὴ CUVOG'W - μὴ ποτε επιστρεψωσιν 
καιτοτεπληρωθήσεται em avrour 
ἢ προφηήτια Tov ἡσαῖον λεγουσα 
πορευθητι και eure ro Naw Tovro 
QKON ακουσεται᾽ Kat OV μὴ συνήῆται 
και βλεποντεσ βλεψεται. και ov μη ἴδητε 


εἐπαχυνθὴ yap ἡ καρδια rov λαοῦ rovrov 
(Fol. 405.) 


10 


14 


I5 


δεῖ Wario 
et uenerunt uolucres et comederunt ea 
quaedam autem ceciderunt in petrosa 
ubi non habeba terram multam 
et continuo exhorta sunt 
propter quod non haberet altitudinem terrae 
sole autem oriente. aestuauerunt 
et quia non habebant radicem harunt 
alia autem ceciderunt in spinis 
et ascenderunt spinae. et suffocauerunt ea 
alia autem ceciderunt.in terram bonam 
et dabant fructum 
quidam " quidam autem .1x.quidam . xxx. 
qui habet aures audiendi audiat 
Et accedentes discipuli eius dixerunt ei 
quare in parabolis loqueris illis 
qui autem respondens dixit eis 
quia uobis datum est scire 
mysterium regni caelorum 
illis autem non est datum 
qui enim habet dabitur ei 
et abundabit 
qui autem non habet: et quod habet 
tolletur ab eo 
ideo in parabolis loquor eis 
ut uidentes non uideant 
et audientes non audiant 
et non intellegant.ne quando conuertantur 
Et tunc conplebitur super eos 
prophetia esaiae dicentes 
uadae et dit populo huic 
aure audietis et non intellegetis 
et uidentes uidebitis - et non uidebitis 
ingrassatum est enim cor populi huius 
(Fol. 41 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 4—15. 


ma ο-ἰ — 
KAT MAGOAION 
—S o — ι. — 


και Tour wow βαρεωσ ἤκουσαν 


Kat Tove οφθαλμουσ αὐτων ἐκαμμυσαν 
μὴ ποτε Wucw τοισ οφθαλμοισ 


και τοισ WOLY ἀκουσωσὶν. και Ty καρδια 
συνωσιψ καὶ επιστρεψωσιν 


και ἵασομαι αυτουσ 


ES 


: ὕμων δε μακαριοι οφθαλμοι. ors βλεπουσιν 
καὶ WTA ὕμων OTL ακονουσὶν 
ἀμὴν yap λεγω ὕμειν 
ort πόλλοι προφῆται και δικαιοι 
εἐπσεθυμησαν ede a βλεπεται 
και οὐκ ἡδυνηθησαν «dew 
καὶ ακουσαι α ἀκονεται- και οὐκ ἤκουσαν 
— 
prc : ὕμεισ ovv ακουσατε 
τὴν παραβολην rov σπειροντοσ 
vavrog ἀκονοντοσ τον Xoyov Tne βασιλειασ 
Kat μη σνυνιοντοσ 
€pxeraa o πονηροσ και aprale 
TO σπειρομενον εν τὴ καρδια αυτων 
ουτοσ ἐστιν 0 παρα τὴν οδον σπαρεισ 
o Se ewet τα πετρωδη arapeur 


OVTOG ἐστιν * 0 TOV λογον axovay 
xat evÜva μετα xapac - Aap Bayov avrov 
OvK exer δε ριζαν εαυτω 
αλλα προσκαιροσ ἐστιν 
γενομενησ δε θλειψαιωσ 
7 διωγμοῦ δια τον λογον 
ευθεωσ σκανδαλιζεται 
O Se «s rac ἀκανθασ σπειρομενοσ 
OVTOG ἐστιν O TOV Àoyyov axovwy 
και ἡ μέριμνα TOU αἰωνοσ 
Kat ἢ ἀπατή TOV πλουτουσ. συνπγειγει τον λογο 
καὶ ἀκαρποσ γεινεται 


(Fol. 41 δ.) 


XIII. 


16 


17 


P 
oo 


19 


20 


at 


SEC MATTHEUM 33 
En na an 
et auribus grauiter audierunt 
et oculos suos cluserunt 
ne quando uideant oculis 
et auribus audiant et corde 
intellegant et conuertantur 
et sanabo illos 
uestri autem ueati oculi . quia uident 
et aures uestrae quia audiunt 
amen enim dico uobis 
quia multi prophetae et iusti 
cupierunt uidere quae uidetis 
et non potuerunt uidere 
et audire quae auditis et non audierunt 
uos ergo audit 
parabolam seminantis 
omnis qui audit uerbum regni 
et non intellegit 
uenit malignus et rapit 
quod seminatur in corde ipsius 
hic est qui secus uiam seminatus est 
qui autem super petrosa seminatus est 
hic est. qui uerbum audit 
et continuo cum gaudio accipit eum 
non habet autem radicem in se 
sed temporali: est 
facta autem tribulatione 
aut persecutione propter berbum 
continuo scandalizatur 
qui autem in spinis seminatur 
hic est qui audit uerbum 
et sollicitudo saeculi 
et seductio diuitiarum simul suffocat uerbu 
et infructuos fit 
(Fol. 42 a.) 


Car, XIIT. 1s—22. 


34 KAT MA@@AION 
om, 


O δε ἐπι τὴν yoy τὴν Kady σπαρεισ 


OVTOG ἐστιν 0 axovwy TOV λογον καὶ συνιεισ 
τοτε καρποφορει καὶ TOLEL 
opev-p-o $e. £- 0 Be. X- 

: aAAyy παραβολὴν παρεθῆκεν avrow λεγων 
ὡμοιωθὴη ἡ βασιλεια Tov ovpaywy 


ανθρωπω σπειροντι..καλον σπερμα 
ev τω ἰδιω aypw 


ET 


Ev 8e ro xabevdery rove ανθρωπουσ 
ἢλθεν avrov o exOpoo - και ἐσπειρεν ζιζανια 
ava. μεσον TOU σειτου “ἀπῆλθεν 
ore δεεβλαστησεν o χορτοσ 
καὶ καρπὸν εποιήσεν «τοτε εφανὴ τα ζιζανια 


XIII. 23 


spore Govrec δε οι δουλοι Tov οἰκοδεσποτον exewov 27 


εἰπὸν AUTW Kvpue 
OVXt καλον σπερμα «dT € peg EV τω OW ἀγρω 
ποθεν ovy exe ζιζανια 

O de εφη avrow .εχθροσ ανθρωποσ 
Touro €Troc]o €y « λεγουσιν avro ot δουλοι 


θελεισ απελθοντεσ συνλεξωμεν avra. 


λεγει avrour ov- μη ποτε συνλεγοντεσ τα ζιζανια 


εκριζωσητε apa Kat TOY σειτὸν συν GVTOUT 

αφετεαμῴοτερα συνανξανεσθαι 

εωσ rov θερισμον. καὶ εν Katpw Tov θερισμου 

«po row θερισταισ 

συνλεξατεπρωτον τα (Lavin 

καὶ δησατε δεσμασ προσ To κατακαυσαι 

τον δεσειτον συνλεγεται εἰσ τὴν αποθὴν μον 
px saAAnv παραβολὴν eXadnoev avrow λεγων 

opow ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια των ovpayay 

κοκκω σιναπεωσ - oy λαβὼν ανθρωποσ' 

ἐσπειρεν EV TW a'ypxo avTOv 

0 μεικροτερον μεν ἐστιν “πάντων σπερματω 


(Fol. 42 5.) 


SEC MATTHEUM 


qui autem super terram bonam seminatus est 
hic est qui audit uerbum et intellegit 
tunc fructificat et facit 
quodam e: quod autem ix. quod autem. xxx. 
aliam parabolam adposuit eis dicens 
simile est regnum caelorum 
homini seminanti bonum semen 
in suo agro 
cum autem dormirent homines 
uenit eius inimicus - et superseminauit zizania 
inter medium tritici et abiit 
cum autem germinasset faenum 
et fructum fecisset. tunc paruit zizania 
accedentes autem serui . patrisfamiliae illius 
dicunt ei domine 
nonne bonum semen seminasti in tuo agro 
unde ergo habet zizania 
qui autem dixit eis. inimicus homo 
hoc fecit . dicunt ei serui 
uis euntes colligimus ea 
dicit eis non . ne forte collegentes zizania 
eradicetis simul et triticum cum eis 
sinite utraque simul crescere 
usque ad messem . et in tempore messis 
dico messoribus 
colligite primum zizania 
et ligate manipulos-ad comburendum 
triticum autem colligite in horreum meum 
aliam parabolam locutusest is dicens 
simile est regnum caelorum 
grano sinapis quod accipiens homo 
seminauit in agro suo 
quod minimum quidem est omnium seminum 
(Fol. 434.) | 


"Car. XIII. 23—32. 


— — 0 — ουὑ.. = 
T MAGOAION 
— — 0 — ἕὄι.. — 


oray δε αυξηση. μειζων roy λαχανων eorw — XIII. 


και γεινεται δενδρον 
wore ελθειν τα πετεινα τον ovpayov 


και κατασκήνοιν ev Tour κλαδοισ avrov 


p : ἀλλὴν παραβολὴν - ojou. ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια 33 


τῶν ουρανων vj 
ἣν λαβουσα γυνὴ "ενεκρυψεν eur ἀλευρον 
σατατρεια 


ews ov εζυμωθη oXoy 


— — 
pro ; TavTa παντα ἐλαληνσεν o ino 34 


«v παραβολαισ τοισ oxXowr* Kat χωρισ παραβολησ 
oux ἐλαλει avrow 

orwa πληρωθὴη τορηθεν 35 
δια του προφητον Xeyovroa 

ἀνοίξω ev παραβολαισ ro στομα μον 

ἐρευξομαι κεκρυμμενα 

απὸ καταβολησ κοσμου 


— . 
pi. : Tor€ αφεισ Tove oxAove nOev εἰσ τὴν οἰκεαν 6 
— 


καὶ προσῆλθον avro ot μαθηται avrov λεγοντεσ 
φρασον ἡμειν τὴν παραβολὴν 
τῶν ζιζανιων του aypou 

O δεαποκρειθεισ ecrev 37 
οσπειρων TO καλον σπερμα 


ear οὕιοσ του ανθρωπου 


o δεαγροσ ἐστιν ο κοσμοσ .τὸ δε καλον σπερμα 38 


ovrot εἰσιν ot wo THO Bao τησ βασιλειασ 


τα δε ζιζανια eurty - ot vtot TOV πονήρου 


o 0e exÜpoc οσπειρασ avra, ἐστιν 39 
o Qu oXoc - o 9« Üepuriog 

συντελεια αἰωνοσ ἐστιν 

ot be θερεισται ἀνγελοι εἰσιν 

womep ovy συνλεγονται τα ζιζανια 40 


KGL πυρι KATAKGLOVTAL . OUTWIT ET TAL 


(Fol. 43 6.) 


cum autem creuerit: maius holeribus est 
et fiet arbor 
ita ut ueniant aues caeli 


et habetent in ramis eius 


aliam parabolam - simile est regnum 


caelorum fermento 
quod accipiens mulier. abscondit in farinam 
mensuras tres 


donec fermentetur omne 


haec omnia locutus est ihs 


in parabolis turbis. et sine parabola 
non loquebatur eis 

ut conpleretur quod dictum est 

per prophetam dicentem 

aperiam in parabolis os meum 
eructuauor absconsa 


ab initio saeculi 


tunc dimittens turbas . uenit in domum 


et accesserunt ad eum discipuli eius dicentes 
narra nobis parauolam 


zizaniorum agri 


qui autem respondens dixit 


qui seminat semen bonum 

est filius hominis 

ager autem est saeculum - bonum autem seme 

hii sunt fili regni 

zizania autem sunt. fili maligni 

inimicus autem qui seminauit est 

diabolus. messis autem 

consummatio saeculi est 

messores autem angeli sunt 

sicut ergo colleguntur zizania 

et igni conburuntur- ita erit 
(Fol. 44 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 32—40. 


36 


KAT MA®® 


εν Tn συντελεια Tov αἰωγοσ 

αποστελει οὕιοσ του ανθρωπου 

Tove ayyeXoue avrov - και συνλεξουσιν 

ἐκ tno βασιλειασ avrov παντα τα σκανδαλα 


και τουσ ποιουντασ τὴν ayopaay 


XIII. 


4t 


και BadAovow αντουσ εἰσ τὴν kapavoy TOU πυροσ 42 


ἐκεῖ carat o κλανθμοσ. και o βρυγμοσ' των οδοντω 


Tore οι δικαίοι λαμψουσιν wo οἡλίιοσ 


εν τὴ βασιλεια του πρσ αὐυτων 


O ἔχὼν WTA AKOVELY AKOVETW 


Ομοια ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια των ουρανων 


θηνσαυρω kexpupuevo εν aypw 
ov ευὑρων τισ ἐκρυψεν 
καὶ απὸ THO χαρασ avTOv -ὕπαγει Kat πωλει 


πάντα OCQ. EXEL’ καὶ ἀγοραζει τον G-ypoy ἐκεινο 


παλιν ομοια ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια των ουρανων 


ανθρωπω evropw 
ζητουντι καλουσ μαργαρειτασ' 


eupoy Se rodvreipov μαργαρειτὴν 
ἀπελθων ἐπωλησεν a. εἰχεν - καὶ ηγορασεν avro 


παλειν opotua ἐστιν ἡ βασιλια των ουρανων 


σαγηνὴ βληθεισὴ εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν 
καὶ €K παντοσ γενουσ συναγαγουσὴ 
ore δε ετληρωθη -ανεβιβασαν avrnv 
ἐπι Toy αἰγιαλον και καθισαντεσ 
σνυνελεξαν τα καλλιστα εἰσ τα αγγια 
Ta δεσαπρα εξω εβαλαν 


οντωσ ἐστε εν τὴ συντελεια του κοσμου 


εξελευσονται οἱ ανγελοι 

και αφοριουσιν rove πονηρουσ 

«x μεσου Toy δικαίων. . καὶ βαλλουσιν avrove 
εἰσ τὴν καμεινον του πνυροσ' 


exe. ἐσται ο κλαυθμοσ' και o βρυγμοσ των o 
(Fol. 44 5.) 


43 


45 


47 


49 


in consummatione saeculi 

mittet filius hominis 

angelos suos et congregabunt 

de regno eius omnia scandala 

et facientes iniquitates 

et mittunt eos in camino ignis 

ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium 
tunc iusti lucebunt sicut sol 

in regno patris sui 

qui habet aures audiendi audiat 
simile est regnum caelorum 

thensauro absconso in agro 

quem quidam inueniens abscondit 

et prae gaudio eius. uadit et uendit 

omnia quae habet. et emit agrum illum 
iterum simile est regnum caelorum 

homini negotianti 

querenti bonas margaritas 

et inueniens praetiosam margaritam 

abit et uindedit quae habebat « οὐ emit eam 
iterum simile est regnum caelorum 

saginae missae in mari 

et ex omni genere congreganti 

cum autem inpleta fuerit . educent eam 

ad litus et sedentes 

collegerunt meliora in uasis 

mala autem foris miserunt 
sic erit in consummatione saeculi 

exient angeli 

et segregabunt malos 

de medio iustorum et mittent eos 

in caminum ignis 

ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium 


(Fol. 45a.) 


Cap. XIII. 40 —50. 


ay 


cvvykare ravra παντα.. λεγουσιν avro ναι 
Acyet avrots- dia Tovro rac γραμματευσ 
μαθηθευθεις"εν τη βασιλεια των ovpayav 
ομοιοσ᾽ ἐστιν ανθρωπω οικοδεσποτη 

οστισ ἐκβαλλει ex του θησαυρου avrov 


καινα καὶ παλαια 


c 
Ρμα : Kas eyevero ore ετελεσεν o tno 


Tac παραβολασ ravrac - pernpev εκειθεν 
kat ελθων eur τὴν πατριδα avrov 
εδιδασκεν avrove ev τὴ συναγωγή avrov 
wore ἐκτλησσεσθαι avrov και λεγειν 
ποθεν rovro 

aca v σοφεια avry και αἱ δυναμεις 

οὐχ OUTOS ἐστιν" του TEKTOVOT ὕιοσ 

ovx ἡ μητὴρ avrov λέγεται μαριαμ 

και οἱ αδελῴφοι avrov ἵακωβοσ και Ἰωαννησ 
και σιμων και ιουδασ "καὶ αἱ αδελῴφαι avrov 
ονχι πασαι προσ ἡμασ εἰσιν 

ποθεν ovy Tovro παντὰα ravra. 


και εσκανδαλιζοντο ev avro 


—À 
: Ὁ δειησ εἰπεν avrow 


οὐκ ἐστιν προφητὴσ ατειμοσ' 


€t μή ev τή πατριδι και εν TH οἰκεια αὐτου 
καὶ OUK ἐποιησεν exer δυναμεις πολλασ 


δια rac απιστειασ avrov 


prey : Ev ἐκείνω δὲ rw kaapo ἤκουσεν nowdys 
a, 


οτετραρχησ τὴν ἀκοὴν ιὴν 

καὶ ELEY TOUT παισὶν αντου 

μὴ Tt ουτοσ ἐστιν warns o βαπτιστησ 
ον eyo απεκεφαλισα 

avrog ἤγερθη amo rov νεκρων 


XIII. 51 


52 


56 


και δια rovro a4 ὄνναμεις ἐναργουσιν ev avro 


ped : O yap ἠρωδησ' κρατησασ τον iaayviy 


(Fol. 45 5.) 


intellexistis haec omnia. dicunt ei etiam 


dicit eis ‘ideo omnis scriba 
doctis in regno caelorum 
similis est homini patrifamiliae 
qui emittit de thensauris suis 
noua et ueteria. 
Et factum est cum consummasset ihs 
parabolas istas migrauit inde 
et ueniens in patria sua 
docebat eos in synagogas eorum 
ita ut mirarentur et dicerent 
unde huic 
omnis sapientia haec et uirtutes 
nonne hic est fabri filius 
nonne mater eius maria dicitur 
et fratres eius iacobus et iohannes 
et simon et iudas et sorores eius 
non omnes apud nos sunt 
unde ergo huic omnia hae 
et scandalizabantur in eo 
ihs autem dixit eis 
non est profeta sine honore 
nisi in patria ‘et in domo sua 
et non fecit ibidem uirtutes multas 
propter incredulitates eorum 
in illo autem tempore audiuit herodes 
tetrarcha opinionem ihu 
et dixit pueris suis 
num quid hic est iohannes baptista 
quem ego decollaui 
hic surrexit a mortuis 
et ideo uirtutes operantur in eo 
herodes enim tenens iohannen 
(Fol. 46 a.) 


Carr. XIII. 51—XIV. 3. 


38 KAT ΜΑΘΘ 
——— — 
ἐδησεν avrov ey rn φυλακὴ XIV. 
δια ηρωδιαδα τὴν γυναικα rov αδελῴου avrov 
ἔλεγεν yap αντω toayvgo * ovk εξεστιν σοι 4 
exe αὐτὴν - και θελων avrov ἀποκτειναι 5 
«of 10: rov oxXov 
ort ὡς προφήτην avrov euxov 
6 


ρμε : γενεσειοισ δε γενομενοισ του ηρωδου 

7 ὠρχήσατο ἡ Ovyarnp avrov ἡρωδιας εν τω μεσω 
και ἡρεσεν ro ἡρωδὴ οθεν μεθ opkov 
ὠμολογῆσεν αὐτὴ δουναι o ay acra grau 


ἡ δεπροβιβασθεισα. ὕπο τησ μητροσ avrqa εἰπε 8 


Soo μοι ὧδε κεφαλην -ἴωαννου του βαπτιστου 
και λυπηθεισ o βασιλευσ δια rove opkova 
και δια τουσ συνανακειμενουσ 
εἐκελευσεν δοθηναι. και πεμψασ 
απεκεφαλισεν τον Ἰωαννὴν ev Ty φυλακη 
και ἡνεχθὴ ἡ κεφαλὴ avrov ext Tw πινακι 
και εδοθη τω κορασιω 
᾿ καὶ ἤνεγκεν ry μήτρι avri 
και προσελθοντεσ οἱ μαθηται avrov 
ἡραν τοπτωμα avrov καὶ εθαψαν avro 
kat ἐλθοντεσ απηγγειλαν τω em 
pps : axovoag δεο ine avexopnav exeev ev πλοιω 
n eur ἐερήμον τόπον κατ εἰδιαν 
και AKOVTAYTET οἱ οχλοι 
ἠκολονθησαν avro πεζη απὸ των πολεων 
και εξελθων edev oxXov πολυν 
και εσπλαγχνισθὴ περι avrov - καὶ εθεραπευσε, 
τουσ ἀρρωστουντασ GUTUV 
pnl : Οψειασ δε yevonerno προσηλθον avro 
ot μαθηται avrov λεγοντεσ 
ἐρημοσ ἐστιν 0 TOT0G - και ἡ wpa ἡδὴ παρηλθεν 
αἀπολυσον τουσ οχλουσ 
(Fol. 46 5.) 


11 


13 


14 


15 


BSEC MATTHEUM 
—— -ς —- 
ligauit eum in carcere 
propter herodiadem uxorem fratris sui 
dicebat enim ei iohannes * non licet tibi 
habere eam - et uolens eum occidere 
timuit turbas 
quia sicut prophetam eum habebant 
natale autem facto herodis 
saltabit filia herodiadis in medio 
et placuit herodi unde cum iureiurando 
promisit ei dare quodcumque petierit 
quae autem docta a matre sua dixit 
da mihi hic caput iohannis baptistae 
et contristatus rex - propter iusiurandum 
et propter conrecumbentes 
iussit dari et mittens 
decollauit iohannen in carcerem 
et adlatum est caput eius supra disco 
et datum est puellae 
et adtulit matri suae 
Et accedentes discipuli eius 
tulerunt corpus eius ‘et sepelierunt illud 
et uenientes renuntiauerunt ihu 
audiens autem ils secessit inde nauigio 
in desertum locum seorsum 
et audientes turbae 
secuti sunt eum pedestri de civitatibus 
Et egressus vidit turbam multam 
et misertus est de eis et curauit 
infirmos eorum 
sero autem facto accesserunt ad eum 
discipuli eius dicentes 
desertus est locus. et hora iam praeteriit 
dimitte turbas 
(Fol. 47 a.) 


Cap. XIV. 3— 15. 


— SS 
KA 


.-- ο΄ 


emt Tov xoprov ἐλαβεν rove πεντεαρτουσ 

και τουσ Ovo ἴχθνασ .αναβλεψασ εἰσ Tov ουρανο 
ηὔλογησεν - και κλασασ εδωκεν Tor μαθηταισ 
Tove a provo ot δε μαθηται row οχλοισ 

Kat εφαγον παντεσ Kat εχορτασθησαν 

και ραν TO περισσευον TOV κλασματων 


— 
tB> κοφινονυσ πληρεισ 


Οιδεαισθιωντεσ σαν 


ανδρεσ wo πεντακισχειλιοι 
χωρισ παιδιων και γυναικων 


: καὶ €uÜeog ἤναγκασεν Tove μαθητασ 


ἐνβηναι εἰσ To πλοιον - καὶ προαγιψ εἰσ TO "repa, 


εωσ ον απολυση τουσ οχλουσ 


«οἷ 
ρμθ και απολυσασ trove οχλουσ' 
— 


— 
pv 
—, 


aveBn εἰσ To οροσ καθ ιδιαν προσευξασθαι 


: οψειασ δε γενομενὴησ μονοσ ἣν exe 
To δεπλοῖιον yy εἰσ μεσον TH θαλασσησ 


βασανιζομενον ὕπο των κυματων 
3] yap ἐναντιοσ οανεμοσ 


teraprno δε φυλακησ Tyo νυκτοσ' 


απηλθεν περιπατων προσ avrova 


eri tno θαλασσησ 


Or δεμαθηται ἴδοντεσ avrov 


em tno θαλασσησ περιπατουντα 
«ταραχθησαν λεγοντεσ ort φαντασμα ἐστιν 
(Fol 47 5.) 


ἵνα ἀπελθοντεσ eur τασ κωμασ XIV. 
ayopagwotw εαντοισ βρωματα 

O δεειπεν avrois: ov χρείαν ἐχουσιν αἀπελθεν τό 
Sore Hues φαγειν αυτοισ" 
ot δελεγουσιν avrw- ovk ἐχομεν woe 17 
€t μὴ πεντε αρτουσ και δνο ἴχθυασ 
o δε eurev φερεται μοι avrove 18 
Kat κελευσασ Tov οχλον ανακλειθηναι 19 


21 


23 


26 


SEC MATTHEUM 
SS 
ut euntes in castella 
emant sibi escas 


qui autem dixit eis . non necesse habent ire 


date uos manducare eis 
qui autem dicunt ei . non habemus hic 
nisi quinque panes et duos pisces 
qui autem dixit adferte mihi illos 
et cum iussisset. turbas discumbere 
super faenum accepit quinque panes 
et duos pisces respiciens in caelum 
benedixit. et frangens dedit discipulis 
panes. discipuli autem turbis 
et manducauerunt. et saturati sunt 
et tulerunt reliquias fracmentorum 
xii - cofinos plenos 

qui autem manducarunt erant 
uiri ad quinque milia 
exceptis infantibus et mulieribus 
et continuo coegit discipulos 
ascendere navem - et praecedere trans 
donec dimitteret tur 

et cum dimisset turbas 
ascendit in montem seorsum orare 
sero autem facto solus erat ibidem 
nauis autem erat in medium maris 
et uexabatur a luctibus 
erat enim contrarius uentus 

quarta autem uigilia noctis 
abit ambulans ad eos 
super mare 

discipuli autem uidentes eum 
super mare ambulantem 
turbati sunt dicentes: quoniam fantasma est 

(Fol. 48a.) 


Cap. XIV. 15—26. 


39 


40 KAT MAO 


Kat aro Tov φοβου expa£ay 
evÜva δε ἐλαλησεν avrow λεγων 


θαρρειτε eyo εἰμει. μη φοβεισθαι 
— — 
pra : αποκρειθεισ Se avro πετροσ ειπεν KE εἰ σὺ et 
κελευσον με ελθειν προσ σε ert τα ὕδατα 
οδεειπεν ελθε 
και καταβασ απὸ τον πλοιον πετροσ 
WEPLEMATHO EY ETL τα ὕδατα 
— 
ελθειν προσ τον inv 
BXerov δετον ἀνεμον ἴσχυρον εφοβηθη 
και apfapevor καταποντιζεσθαι 
— 
expa£ey λεγων κεσωσον με 
Ευθεωσ δε ino. EXTELVAT τὴν χειρα 
ἐπελαβετο avrov και Xeyet avro ολιγοπιστε 
εἰσ τι εδιστασασ' 
p : kat aya Javrov αντων εἰσ To πλοιον 
EXOTAC €V 0 AVELOT 
ot δε «v Tw πλοιω ελθοντεσ 
προσεκυνήσαν avro λεγοντεσ 
αληθωσ ὕιοσ By e av - καὶ διαπερασαντεσ 


ἤλθὸον emt τὴν γὴν εἰσ γεννησαρ᾽ 
ery : καὶ ἐπιγνοντεσ avrov 


ot ανδρεσ TOV TOTTOV εκεινου" 
απεστειλαν eur ολην THY περιχωρον εκειγὴν 


και TPOCYVEYKAY avro Ἰανταστουσ 


κακωσ ἐχοντασ Kat παρεκαλουν αντὸν 
iva. μονον αψωνται 
του κρασπεδου Tov ἵματιον αὐτου 


και οσοι ἡψαντο διεσωθησαν 


XIV. 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


p? : TOTE προέρχονται προσ avrov avo ἱεροσολυμων XY. 1 


φαρισαιοι και γραμματεισ Xeyovrea 

δια τι ot μαθηται σον παραβαινουσιν 

τὴν παραδοσιν των πρεσβυτερων 
(Fol. 48 δ.) 


SEC MATTHEUM 


ony, 


et a timore exclamauerunt 
continuo autem locutus est eis dicens 
fidete ergo sum - nolite timere 
respondens autem ei petrus dixit dne si tu es 
iube me uenire ad te super aquain 
qui autem dixit ueni 
et descendens de naui petrus 
ambulauit super aquas 
ut ueniret ad ihm 
uidens autem uentum ualidum timuit 
et incipiens demergi 
clamauit dicens dme libera me 
continuo autem ihs extens manum 
adpraehendit eum et dicit illi modice fidei 
quare dubitasti 
Et ascendentibus in naui 
quieuit uentus 
qui autem in naui erant uenientes 
adorauerunt ei dicentes 
uere filius dei es tu- et cum transfretassent 
uenerunt in terram gennasar | 
et cum cognouissent eum 
uiri loci illius 
miserunt in uniuersa regionem illam 
et optulerunt ei omnes male 
habentes. et depraecabantur eum 
ut tantum tangerent 
fimbriam uestimenti eius 
et quodquod tetigerunt salbati sunt 
tunc accedunt ad eum ab hierosolymis 
pharisaei et scribae dicentes 
quare discipuli tui transgrediuntur 
traditionem seniorum 
(Fol. 49 a.) 


Capp. XIV. 26—XV. 2. 


OU YAN VUrTOVT€ TAG χειρασ avrov XV. 
orav aprov εσθιωσιν 
O δεαποκριθεισ ειπεν 3 


δια τι και ὕμεισ παραβαιναι τὴν evroXgy του θὺ 
δια τὴν παραδοσιν ὕμων.ο yap Oo εἰπεν 4 
τειμα TOV πατέρα καὶ THY μητερα 
Kat 0 κακολογων πατερα ἡ μήτερα 
θανατω reXevraro : ὕμεισ Se λεγεται 5 
og Say earn Tw πατρι ἡ τὴ μήτρι 
δωρον o Say ef eov ὠφεληθησ 
OV μητειμήσει TOV πατερα avTOU 
καὶ ἠκυρωσατετον λογον Tov bv 6 
δια τὴν παραδοσιν ὕμων 

ὕποκριται. καλωσ ἐπροφήτευσεν περι ὕμων 7 
ησαΐασ λεγων - o *Àaog ovrog 8 
TOL χειλεσιν pe T€uua,* Se καρδια avrov 
Toppw ἐστιν ar enou- parny Se ceBovrat με 9 
διδασκοντεσ διδασκαλειασ᾽ 
ενταλματα ανθρωπων 

και προσκαλεσαμενοσ Tov οχλον εἰπεν avTow 10 
ακονεται και TUVLETE οὅ TAY TO εἰσερχομεο 11 
εἰσ TO στομα. κοινωνι Tov ayÜporrov 
αλλα To ἐκπορενομένον ex TOU στοματοσ' 


exetvo κοινωνεῖ Tov ayÜporrov 


pre : τοτεπροσελθοντεσ οἱ μαθηται 12 
λεγουσιν avrw.odac ort οἱ φαρισαιοι 
ακουσαντεσ TOV λογον ἐσκαν αν 
O δεαποκρειθεισ εἰπεν πασα φντεια 13 
ἣν ovx εφντευσεν o πατὴρ μου | 


am, 


e 


o ουρανιοσ - expo meras 
: acere rove τυφλουσ -τυφλοι εἰσιν oda-yot 14 
τυφλοσ Se rupAov cay odayn 
audorepor ἐνπεσοννται eur BoP pov 
(Fol. 49 6.) 


"BEG ATTHEUM 41 


non enim labant manus suas 
cum panem manducant 
qui autem respondens dixit 
quare et uos transgredimini mandatum det 
propter traditionem uestram: ds enim dixit 
honora patrem aut matrem 
et qui maledicit patri aut matri 
morte morietur. uos autem dicitis 
quicumque dixerit patri aut matri 
munus quod ex me tibi prodest 
non honorauit patrem suum 
et inritum fecistis uerbum dei 
propter traditionem uestram 
hypocritae bene prophetauit de uobis 
esaias dicens populus hic 
labiis me diligit.cor autem eorum 
longe est à mte sine causa autem colunt me 
docentes doctrinas 
mandata hominum 
Et conuocans turbam dixit eis 
audite et intellegite - non omne quod intrat 
in os communicat hominem 
sed quod egreditur de ore 
illut communicat hominem 
tunc accedentes discipuli 
dicunt ei scis quoniam pharisaei 
audientes uerbum scandalizati sunt 
qui autem respondens dixit omnis plantatio 
quam non plantauit pater meus 
caelestis eradicabitur 
sinite caecos. caeci sunt duces 
caecus autem caecum si ducat 
utrisque incidunt in foueam 


(Fol. 50 a.) 


Cap. XV, 2— 14. 


— — 
43 T MAGOAION 
v 


pt : ἀποκριθεισ δε o πετροσ eurey avro 

φρασον ἡμειν τὴν παραβολὴν ταυτὴν 

O δεειπεν axvyy καὶ ὕμεισ ἀσυνετοι ἐστε 
OV VOELTE OTL παν TO εἰσπορενομενον 
εἰσ TO στομα. εἰσ τὴν κοιλειαν χωρει 
καὶ eo αφεδρωνα εκβαλλεται 
Τα δε exrropevopeva εκ rov στοματοσ 
εκ THO καρδιασ εξερχεται 
εκεινα Kotywvet roy ανθρωπον 
€x yap Tho καρδιασ εξερχονται 
διαλογισμοι πονηροι- φονοι 
μοιχίιαι.- πορνειαι. κλοπαι 
ψευδομαρτυριαι. βλασφημεια 
TavTa εἰσιν τα Kowovyovyra. Toy ανθρωπον 
Το δε ανειπτοισ xepaty φαγειν 
ον κοινωνεῖ τὸν avOpwirov 

και εξελθων εκειθεν o ine avexwpnoe 


εἰσ τα μερὴ Tvpov και σειδωνοσ 
ν 


και ἴδου γυνὴ χαναναια απὸ των οριων εκειῶ 


εξελθουσα ἐκραζεν οπισω avrov λεγουσα 
ἐλεησον p e ὕιοσ Saved 
ἢ θυγατὴρ pov κακωσ δαιμονιζεται 
O δεουκ απεκριθη avry λογον 
και προσελθοντεσ οἱ μαθηται avrov 
ἡρώτουν avrov λεγοντεσ «απολυσον αὐτὴν 
ort κραζει οπισθεν ἡμων 
en : O δεαποκριθεισ ecrev ovx απεσταλὴν 
€t μὴ εἰσ Ta προβατα Tavra, 
τα ἀπολωλοτα owov εἰσραηλ 
p? : ἢ δε ελθουσα προσεκυνι avrai λεγουσα 
xe βοηθει μοι-ο δεαποκριθεισ ειπεν 
οὐκ εἐξεστιν λαβειν τον αρτον των τεκνων 
και βαλιν row κυναριοισ 
(Fol. 505.) 


18 


19 


2! 


22 


23 


8 i MATTHEUM 


respondens autem petrus dixit ei 
narra nobis parabolam is iam 
qui autem dixit.adhuc et uos insipientes estis 
non intellegitis quia: omne quod introit in os 
in uentrem cedit 
et in secessum mittitur 
qui autem exeunt de ore 
de corde exeunt 
illa communicant hominem 
de corde enim exeunt 
cogitationes malae. homicidia 
adulteria :fornicati..nes furta 
falsa testimonia blasfemiae 
haec sunt quae communicant hominem 
inlotis autem manibus manducare 
non communicat hominem 
Et exiens inde ihs secessit 
in partes tyri- et sidonae 
et ecce mulier chananaea - de finibus illis 
exens clamabat post illym dicens 
miserere mei dne fili dauid 
filia mea male daemonizatur 
qui autem non respondit ei uerbum 
et accedentes discipuli eius 
rogabant eum dicentes. dimitte illam 
quia clamat post nos 
qui autem respondens dixit.non sum missus 
nisi ad oues has 
quae perierunt domus istrahel 
quae autem ueniens adorabat ei dicens 
dne adiuba me. qui autem respondens dixit 
non licet accipere panem filiorum 
et mittere canibus 
(Fol. 51 a.) 


Cap. XV. 15—26. 


H 8e are ναι κε. καὶ yap τὰ κυναρια XY. 2) 
ἐσθιουσιν ato Toy ψειχων 
των πείπτοντων απὸ THO τραπεζησ 
τῶν κυναριων αὐτων 


Tore ἀποκριθεισ εἰπεν avry γυναι 28 


peyady σον ἡ πιστισ γενηθήτω σοι wo θελεισ 
και ἴαθη ἡ θυγατὴρ avrno - amo THe wpac εκεινὴσ 


pe : καὶ μεταβασ εκειθεν o ino ἡλθεν 29 
παρα τὴν θαλασσαν rgo γαλιλαιασ 
καὶ αναβασ eur To poo exabyro cxet 
και προσῆλθον avro οχλοι πολλοι 30 
exovrec μεθ ἐεαντων 


XoXova - TvjÀovo . κυλλουσ 
καὶ erepova πολλουσ᾽ και epuj/ay avrova 
Uro Tove ποδασ avrov 
και εθεραπευσεν avrova παντὰσ 
wore Tov oxXov θαυμασαι βλεποντασ 31 
κωφουσ λαλουντασ᾽ και κυλλουσ ὕγιεισ 
και χωλουσ περιπατουντασ 
Kat Tove τυφλουσ βλεποντασ 
καὶ ἐδοξασαν τον θν ἵἱσραηλ 
O δε ine προσκαλεσαμενοσ Tove μαθητασ avrov 32 
εἰπεν σπλανχνιζομαι em Tov oxXoy rovrov 
ort non ἡμεραι .γ. εἰσιν "καὶ προσμενουσιν μοι 
καὶ OUK €XOUG' τι φαγωσιν 


Kat ἀπολυσαι avrove νηστεισ ov θελω 
μὴ wore ἐκλυθωσὶιν ev TH odo 
και λεγουσιν avro oc μαθηται avrov 33 
ποθεν ovy ἡμειν εν ἐρημία αρτοι τοσουτοι 
ὡστε χορτασαι οχλον τοσουτον 
om, 
και Neyet αντοισ O LNT ποσουσ aprove ἐχεται 34 


ot δε εἰπὸν avro erra. και ολιγα ἴχθυδια 


καὶ παρανγειλασ τω oxAw ayaegty 35 
ἐπι τὴν γην «ελαβεν rove -(- ἀρτουσ 36 
(Fol. 51 5.) 


SEC MATTHEUM 43 


quae autem dixit etiam die ‘et canis enim 
edent de micis 
quae cadent de mensis 
dominorum suorum 
tunc respondens dixit ei. o mulier 
magna est tua fides. fiat tibi sicut uis 
et sanata est filia eius: ab hora illa 
Et transiens inde ihs uenit 
secus mare galilaeae 
et ascendens in monte sedebat ibi 
et accesserunt ad eum turbae multae 
habentes secum 
clodos. caecos. sideratos 
et alios multos. et proiecerunt eos 
sub pedibus eius 
et curauit eos omnes 
ita ut turba miraretur uidens 
surdos loquentes . sideratos incolumes 
et clodos ambulantes 
et caecos uidentes 
et glorificauerunt dm istrahel 
ihs autem conuocans discipulos suos 
dixit misereor- super turbam hanc 
quia iam dies tres sunt. et sustinent me 
Et non habent quid manducent 
et dimittere eos iaiunos nolo 
et dicunt οἱ discipuli eius 
unde ergo nobis in deserto panes tanti 
ut satientur turbae tantae 
Et dicit eis ihs. quod panes habetis 
qui autem dixerunt septem - et paucos pisciculos 
Et cum iussisset turbas discum bere 
supra terram . accepit septem panes 
(Fol. 52 a.) 


Car. XV. 27—36. 


44 KAT 


και Tove ἴχθνασ και ευχαριστησασ ἐκλασεν XV. 
και ἐδιδου τοισ μαθηταισ οἱ δὲεμαθηται τω οχλω 
και εφαγον παντεσ καὶ εχορτασθησαν 37 


Και ΤΟ Τερίσσευον τῶν κλασματων ἡραν * ^. σφνριδασ πληρεισ 

οἱ δε αἰσθιοντεσ σαν "τετρακισχίλιοι ανδρεσ 

χωρισ παιδιων καὶ γυναικων 38 
---- - 
ρξα : και ἀπολυσασ Tove οχλουσ ἐνβαινει εἰσ To TÀow 39 
Lamy 

xa, n\Oev eur τα opua. THe μαγαδαν 


και προσελθοντεσ οι φαρισαιοι και σαδδουκαιοι XVI. 1 
πειραζοντεσ avrov ετηρωτησαν 
σήμειον εκ του ovpayov επιδειξαι avrour 

O δεαποκριθεισ᾽ eurev οψειασ γενομενὴσ 2 


λεγεται evdera. πυρραζει yap o ουρανοσ 


καιπρωει σήμερον χειμὼν 31 


πυρραζει yap στυγναζων o anp 
TO μεν προσωπον TOV OVpavou 
γεινωσκεταί διακρεινειν 
τα δε aya. των Katpwy ov δυνασθαι 
pep t yevea πονήρα ζήτει anpuov 4 
και σημιαν ov δοθησεται avr 
εἰ μη TO σημίον ιωνα 
και καταλιπὼν αὐτουσ απηλθεν 


καὶ ελθοντεσ εἰσ To repay -επελαθοντο οἱ μαθηται - 


αρτουσ λαβειν 
— — 
pty : O Se eno eurev avrow opare καὶ προσέχετε 6 
azo tho ζυμησ των φαρισαιων 
και σαδδουκαίων 
»ξὸ : tore διελογιζοντο ev εαυτοισ λεγοντεσ 7 
e 
ort aprove ovk eda Boney 


yvova € o ine εἰπεν «τι διαλογιζεσθαι εν exvrow — 8 
ολιγοπιστοι"οτι ἀρτουσ οὐκ EXETAL 
ovrrw νοειτε- οὐδε μνημονεύετε 9 
OTE TOUT TEVTE αρτουσ - TOUT πεντακισχιλείοισ 
και ποσουσ κοφινουσ ελαβεται 


(Fol. 52.) 


ζῶ 


δ᾽ MATTHEUM 


— -— 00 A x= 


et pisces. et gratias agens fregit 
et dabat discipulis. discipuli turbae 
et manducauerunt omnes. et saturati sunt 
et quod superauit fragmentorum tulerunt - vil - sportes plenas 
éxceptisinfantibusetmuleribus Το 
Et mittens turbas. ascendit nauem 
et uenit in finibus magadan 
Et accedentes pharisaei et sadducaei 
temptantes eum interrocauerunt 
signum de caelo ostenderet eis 
qui autem respondens dixit. sero factum 
dicitis serenum ‘rubicundum est enim caelum 
et mane hodie pluuia 
rubet enim triste caelum 
faciem quidem caeli 
scitis iudicare 
signa autem temporum non potestis 
generatio mala signum querit 
et signum non dabitur ei 
nisi signum ionae 
et relinquens eos abiit 
Et uenientes trans. obliti sunt discipuli 
panes accipere 
ihs autem dixit eis. uidete et adtendite 
& fermento farisaeorum 
et sadducaeorum 
tunc cogitabant inter se dicentes 
quia panes non accepimus 
sciens autem ihs dixit. quid cogitatis inter uos 
modicae fidei . quia panes non habetis 
nondum intellegitis. neque meministis 
quando quinque panes. quinque milibus 
et quod cofinos accepistis 
(Fol. 53 a.) 


Capp. XV. 36—XVI. 9. 


ovde Tove erra αρτουστοιστετρακεισχειλειοισ XVI. 


Kat ποσασ σφυριδασ ehaBere 
TOO OV VOELTE OTL 

OV περι αρτοῦυ εἰπὸν Tpogexere 
aro tne ζυμησ των φαρισαιων 
και σαδδουκαιων 


ΤΟΤΕ συν Κα - OTL OUK €LTT€V 


IO 


I1 


12 


προσέχειν απὸ tHe ζυμησ -adAa απὸ Tho διδαχησ 


τῶν φαρισαιων και σαδδουκαίων 

— — 

pte : €dOwv δε o uno εἰσ Ta. μερὴ καισαριασ' 
mo φιλιππον poro. trove μαθητασ Xeyay 
τινα pe ot avOpwrot Aeyovow εἰναι 
BuoP tov ανθρωπου 

Or de ειπον ἵωαννην rov βαπτιστὴην 

αλλοι Se ηλειαν - erepo Se inpeperay 
ἢ eva των προφήτων - λεγει avrow 
ὕμεισ δετινα με λεγεται ειναι 

a, 

pés : αποκριθεισ Se σιμων πετροσ eurey avro 

— — — 
ov €L0 xpo οὕιοσ Tov θν το σωζοντοσ 

αποκριθεισ Be o ine eurev 

μακαριοσ εἰ σιμων Bap wva 
ort σαρξ και ata. ovk απεκαλυψεν σοι 
αλλ o πατὴρ pov 0 εν τοισ Ovpayour 
καγω δεσοι λεγω. ort ov εἰ πετροσ 
καὶ επὶ ταυτὴν THY πετραν οἰκοδομησω 
τὴν ἐκκλησίαν μου. καὶ πυλαι αδου 


ον κατισχυσουσιν αὐτὴσ 
σοι δωσω rac κλεισ THE βασιλειασ των ovpayw 


και o ay Snoyo ert THO γὴσ 
εσται δεδεμεγον εν Tow ουρανοισ 
και o ay Avone ert Tye yno 
core λελυμένον εν Tour ουρανοισ 


ett : TOTE ereretnoey rou μαθηταισ 
(Fol. 535.) 


I3 


14 


17 


19 


SEC MATTHEUM 45 
——— M  -- 
nec septe panes. quattuor milibus 
et quod sportas accepistis 
quomodo non intellegistis quia 
non de panibus dixi attendite 
de fermento farisaeorum 
et sadducaeorum 
tunc intellexerunt.quia non dixit 
adtendite de fermento. sed de doctring 
pharisaeorum et sadducaeorum 
Ueniens autem iha in partes caesariae 
philippi - interrogabat discipulos dicens 
quem me dicunt homines esse 
filium hominis 
qui autem dixerunt iohannen baptistam 
alii autem heliam . alii autem hieremian 
aut unum de prophetis. dicit eis 
uos autem quem me dicitis esse 
respondens autem simon petrus dixit ei 
tu es Xps filius di saluatoris 
respondens autem ihs dixit 
beatus es simon bar iona 
quia caro et sanguis . non reuelauit tibi 
sed pater qui in caelis est. et ego autem. 
dico tibi . quia tu es petrus 
et super ane petram aedificavo 
ecclesiam meam . et portae inferorum 
non praeualebunt ei 
tibi dabo claues regni caelorum 
et quodcumque ligaueris super terram 
erit ligatum in caelis 
et quod solueris in terra 
etrit solutum in caelis 
tunc comminatus est discipulis 
(Fol. 54a.) 


Car, XVI. 10— 20. 


46 KAT MAO 


ἵνα μηδενι εἰπωσιν .0Τι ovrog ἐστιν 0 xpo eg. XVI. 


απο rore npgaro ino Suxvve row μαθηταισ avrov 21 
e 


ort δι avrov «εἰσ ἱεροσολυμα απελθειν 
και πολλα παθειν ὕπο των πρεσβυτέρων 
και ἀρχειεραιων Kat γραμματαιων 
καὶ ἀαποκτανθηναι 
Ka4 μετα τρεισ ἡμερασ αναστηναι 

e& : καὶ mpooAaBopevoe avrov o Terpoo 
ἡρξατο avro επειτειμαν kat Xeyew 
εἰλεοσ σοι Ke ov μὴ €OTE TovTO σοι 


O δεεπιστραφεισ eure Tw πετρω 


23 


νπαγε οπισω μον garavya - σκανδαλον εἰ ἐμοι 


ort ov φρονεισ τα τον θυ-αλλα rov ἀνθρωπου 


e& :TOTE O ing εἶπεν. τοισ μαθήταισ avrov 
εἰ T€ θελει omo μου ελθειν 
απαρνησασθω cavroy 
καὶ ἀράτω TOV σταυρον αὐτου 
και axoXovÜevro μοι. oo yap αν θελη 
τὴν ψυχὴν avrov σωσαι. ἀπολεσει αὐτὴν 
oc Say απολεσει τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 
EVEKEY ἐμου. ευρήσει αὐτὴν 

τι γαρ ὠφελειται ανθρωποσ' 
«ay τον κοσμον ολον κερ δη 
την δε ψυχὴν avrov ζημιωθη 
ἡ τι δωσει ανθρωποσ 
αἀνταλλαγμα THe ψυχὴσ avrov 

e : μελλει yap o Uto Tov ανθρωπου 
ἐρχεσθαι ev τὴ 90$ rov πατροσ avrov 
μετὰ των ayuoy ἀγγελων avrov 
καὶ TOT€ ἀποδωσει ἐεκαστω 
κατα τὴν πραξιν avrov 

αμην heyw ὕμειν 
εἰσιν τινεσ των ὧδε εστωτων 


(Fol. 54 δ.) 


SEC MATTHEUM 
——— x 
ut nemini dicerent. quia hic est ihs xps 
Exinde coepit ihs ostendere discipulis suis 
quia oportet eum - hierosolyma ire 
et multa pati -a senioribus 
et principibus sacerdotum et scribis 
et interfici 
et post tres dies resurgere 
Et suscipiens eum petrus 
coepit increpare eum et dicere 
misereatur tibi dme. non erunt haec tibi 
qui autem conuersus ait petro 
uade post me satana scandalum es mihi 
quia non sapis quae sunt dei.sed que homihis 
tunc ihs dixit discipulis suis 
8i quis uult post me uenire 
abneget seipsum 
et tollat crucem suam 
et sequatur me. qui enim uoluerit 
animam suam saluare - perdet eam 
qui autem perdiderit animam suam 
propter me inueniet eam 
quid autem prodest homini 
si totum mundum lucretur 
animae autem suae detrimentum faciat 
aut quid dabit homo 
commutationem animae suae 
incipiet enim filius hominis 
uenire in gloriam patris sui 
cum sanctis angelis suis 
et tunc red det unicuique 
secundum o pera sua 
&men dico uobis 


sunt quidam de stantibus hic 
(Fol. gs a.) 


Car. XVI. 20—28. 


οἰτιγεσ ov pn γευσωνται Üayarov 


ewe ay εἰδωσιν Toy voy rov avOpwirou 


ἐρχομενον ev Tn βασιλεια avrov 

—— 

poo. : και eyevero pel nuepac ef XVII. 1 
a apa Aag avec o we TOV πετρον 


Kat rov taxwBov’ xa Tov Ἰωαννὴν 
tov αδελῴον avrov: καὶ avayet avrovg 
€w οροσ ὕψηλον λειαν. 
και μεταμορφωθεισ o ine 'eyrpoaÜey avrov 
eAapwey To προσωπον avrov- wo οηλιοσ 
To, δεειματεια avrov 
eyevero λευκα wo xeusy 
και iov ed» avrouwr μωῦσησ 
Kat λειασ per avrov συνλαλουντεσ 
αποκριθεισ δε o srerpoa - eurey τω tU Ke 
KaXov ἐστιν ἡμασ woe eat 
ει θελεισ ποιησωμεν 90€ Tpew σκηνασ 
σοι μειαν - και μωυσει μειαν᾿ καὶ ἡλεια μειαν 
ἔτι avrov AaXovvroc - iov νεφελη φωτεινὴ 
exeoxialey avrove 
και ἴδου φωνὴ ex rgo νεφελησ λεγουσα 
ουτοσ ἐστιν ο ὕιοσ μου οἀγαπητοσ 
ev ὦ ηυδοκησα axovere avrov 
ακουσαντεσ Se οι μαθηται 
ἐπέσαν ἐπι προσωπὸν AUTWY 
καὶ εφοβηθησαν σφοδρα᾽ καὶ προσηλθεν o ue 
καὶ Maro αντων και eurevy 
εἐγειρεσθαι και μη φοβεισθαι 
Exep ντεσ Se rove οφθαλμουσ avrov 
οὐδενα ειδον - εἰ μη μονον TOY ἣν 
poB : και καταβαινοντεσ ek rovop σ 


-. 
ἐνετείλατο αντοισ o ino λεγων 


μῆδενει εἰπητετο οραμα 
(Fol. 555.) 


SEC 
— 


—, 


TTHE 


—, j=, 


SEI 


qui non gustabunt mortem 
donec uideant filium hominis 
uenientem in regno suo 
Et factum est post dies sex 
Suscepit ihs petrum 
et iacobum et iohannen 
fratrem eius. et leuauit eos 
in montem excelsum nimis 
et transfiguratus ihs coram illis 
effulsit uultus eius sicut sol 
uestimentaautem eius — 
facta sunt alba sicut nix 
et ecce paruit eis moyses 
et helias cum eo loquentes 
respondens autem petrus dixit ihu dme 
bonum est nos hic esse 
si bis faciamus hic - tria tabernacula 
tibi unum et moysi unum ‘et heliae unum 
adhuc eo loquente. ecce nubs lucida 
obumbrabat eos 
Et ecce uox de nube dicens 
hic est filius meus dilectus 
in quo conplacui audite eum 
audientes autem discipuli 
ceciderunt in faciem suam 
et timuerunt ualde. et accessit ihs 
et tetigit eos et dixit 
surgite et nolite timere 
leuantes autem oculos suos 
neminem uiderunt nisi solum ihm 
Et descendentes de monte 
praecepit eis dicens ihs 
nemini dixeritis uisum 
(Fol. 56 a.) 


Carp. XVI. 38—XVITI. 9. 


47 


48 KAT MAO — SEC MATTHEUM 
— ------ -- -- 


ews ov οὕιοσ του ανθρωπου XVII. donec filius hominis 
ex νεκρων eyepOy & mortuis resurgat 
poy και emporgeay avrov ot μαθήται avrov Aeyovree 10 | Etinterrogauerunt eum discipuli dicentes 
τι OUV οἱ γραμματεισ λεγουσιν quid ergo scribae dicunt 
ort ἡλειαν Set ελθειν πρωτον quia heliam oportet uenire primum 
O δεαποκριθεισ eurev .ἡλειασ μεν epxerat 11 | quirespondens ait. helias quidem uenit 
αποκαταστῆσαι παντα restituere omnia 
λεγω δεῦμειν οτιἡλειασ 197 nOev 12 | dicoautem uobis ‘quia helias iam uenit 
καὶ οὐκ ἐπεγνωσαν avroy  aÀÀa εἐποιῆσαν avro et non cognouerunt eum ‘sed fecerunt ei 
oca ἡθελησαν quanta uoluerunt 
Tore συνῆκαν οἱ μαθηται 13 | tuncintellexerunt discipuli 
ott wept iwavvou rov βαπτιστου €urey avrour quia de iohanne baptista dixit eis 
ουτωσ KaL0 Uto TOv ayÜporrov - μελλειπασχὶ ὕπαντω sic et filius bominis incipiet pati ab eis 
pot : καὶ ελθων προσ Tov oxXov προσηλθεν avro 14 | Eteum uenisset at turbam adcessit. ad eum 
ἀνθρωποσ γονυπετων homo adgeniculans 
εἐνπροσθεν avrov και λεγων ante eum et dicens 
κε eXenoov μου τον ὕιον ort σεληνιαζεται 15 dme miserere fili mei - quia lunaticus est 
και κακωσ πασχει. πολλακισ yap et male patitur . aliquotiens enim 
πίπτει εἰσ TO πυρ᾽ και ἐνίοτε εἰσ TO ὕδωρ cadit in igne saepius in aqua 
και προσήνεγκα avrov row μαθηταισ σου 16 et obtuli eum discipulis tuis 
και οὐκ ἡδυνηθησαν θεραπευσαι avroy et non potuerunt curare eum 
αποκριθεισ de o - εἰπεν ' γενεα ἀαπιστοῦ — — 17 | respondens autem ihs dixit.o generatio incredula 
και Sterrpappevy- eua Tore μεθυμων ἔσομαι et peruersa - quousque uobiscum ero 
«oc Tore ἀνέξομαι ὕμων - usque quo patiar uos 


φέρετε μοι avroy woe και επετειμησεν αὐτὼ o vo. 18 adferte mihi illum hoc. et increpauit ei ihs 


και ἐξηλθεν ax avrov ro δαιμονιον et exiit ab illo daemonium 
καὶ εθαραπευθὴ o raus απὸ THO ὡρασ εκεινὴσ et sanatus est puer ab illa hora 
e ; TOT€ τροσελθοντεσ ot μαθηται 19 tune accedentes discipuli eius 
τω av καθ ιδιαν evrov δια τι nei ad ihu.seorsum dixerunt: quare nos 
ovx ἡδυνηθημεν ἐκβαλεῖν avro non potuimus expellere illud 
O de Xeye avrowr 20 | quiautem dicit eis 

δια την απιστειαν ὕμων propter incredulitatem uestram 

apayy yap Xeyo ὕμειν eay exyre πιστιν amen enim dico uobis. si habueritis fidem 
(Fol. 56 5.) (Fol. 57 a.) 


Car. XVII. 9— 20. 


KAT ΜΑΘΘ 
—— — 
QU κοκκοσ CLYO.T€OG - EPELTE TW OPEL TOUTW 
peraBn Ge evüey exer καὶ μεταβησεται 
και οὐδεν αδυνατήσει ὕμειν 
τουτο Se To γενοσ οὐκ ἐκπορενεται 21 
εἰ μὴ ἐν προσευχὴ και νηστεια 
ρος :αντων δεαναστρεφομενων ev T7 γαλειλαια 22 
εἰπεν avTou 0 m μελλει ὃ νιοσ Tov ayÜporrov 
παραδιδοσθαι.- εἰσ χειρασ αγνθρωπων 
και ἀποκτείνουσιν αντὸν 23 
και μετα peur ἡμερασ εἐγερθησεται 
και ελνυπηθησαν σφοδρα 
pot : καὶ ελθοντων avrov εἰσ καφαρναουμ. 24 
προσηλθον. ot ra διδραγματα λαμβανοντεσ 
Kat evray Tw 7rerpo* o διδασκαλοσ ὕμων 
ov TeÀe Sedpaypa- λεγει vat 25 
kat εἰσελθοντι εἰσ THY oweuay 
προεφθασεν avrov o we Aeyav 
τι σοι δοκει σιμων "οἱ βασιλεισ THO γησ 
απο τινων λαμβανουσιν -τελὴ ἡ κηνσον 
απο TOV ὕιων αντων "ἢ απὸ των ἀλλοτρίων 
Aeyet avro απὸ των αλλοτριων 26 
Edy avro o wae -apaye eXevÜepot εἰσιν οι ὕιοι 
iva ‘de py σκανδαλεισωμεν avrove 27 
vopevÜew εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν - βαλε ανκιστρο 
καὶ roy ἀναβαντα πρωτον ἴχθυν αρον 
kat αγνοιξασ TO στόμα GUT OU 
ευρησεισ exec στατηρα᾿ execvoy Aa gov 
Soc avrouw - ayrt ἐμον καὶ σον 
pon : Ey exeun τή wpa: προσηλθον ot parat τω την XVII. 
Aeyovreo ‘tis apa μειζω ἐστιν 


ev Tn βασιλεια των ovpavay 


omy 

και προσκαλεσαμενοσ o ino παιδιον ev 2 

εστῆσεν AUTO εν μεσω GUTOV καὶ εἰπεν 3 
(Fol. 576.) 


XVII. 


SEC MATTHEUM 49 


sicut granum sinapis. dicetis monti huic 
transi hic illo “οὐ transiet 
et nihil inpossibile erit uobis 
hoc autem genus non exit 
nisi in oratione et iaiunio 
ipsis autem conuersantibus in galilaea 
dixit eis iha. incipiet filius hominis 
tradi.in manus hominusm 
et occident eum 
et post tres dies resurget 
et contristati sunt ualde 
Et uenientibus eis in cafarnaum 
accesserunt qui tributum accipiunt 
et dixerunt petro. magister uester 
non praestat tributum . et dicit etiam 
Et ingresso in domum ‘praeuenit eum ihs dicens 
quid tibi bidetur simon - reges terrae 
ὃ quibus accipiunt - uectigal aut censum 
a filiis suis. aut ab alienis 
dicit illi ab alienis 
ait illi hs. ergo liueri sunt filii 
ut autem non scandalizemus eos 
pergens ad mare. mitte hamum 
et qui ascenderit primum piscis tolle 
et aperiens os eius 
inueniens illic staterem 
illum accipiens da eis 
pro me et pro te 
in illa hora. accesserunt discipuli ad ihm 
dicentes. quis nunc maior est 
in regno caelorum 
Et aduocans ihs puerum unum 
Statuit illum in medio eorum . et dixit 
(Fol. 58 a.) 


Carr. XVII 20— XVIII. 3. 


50 


3 


T ΜΑΘΘ 


apny Aeyo Ue. eay μη στραφηται XVIII. 
και yevrnode wo τα rade. ov μη εἰσελθητε 
εἰσ τὴν βασιλειαν roy ovpavoy 

Οστισ ovy ταπεινωσεὶ εαυτον 4 
wo TO παιδιον rovro: ουτοσ ἐστιν o μειζων 
εν τὴ βασειλεια των ουρανων 


καὶ oo ay δεξηται" ey παιδιον τοιουτον 5 


ert Tw ovopart μου ene δεχεται 


: Oo day σκανδαλειση : eva των μεικρων TOUT™ 6 


των πιστευόντων ELO €j,€ - TUVPEPEL avro) 

tva κρεμασθη.. μνυλοσ ονικοσ 

ert τὸν τραχήλον avrov 

και καταποντισθὴ ev τω πελαγει THO θαλασσησ 
Ova, Tw koc. oro Toy σκανδαλων 7 

avayKn yap εστιν - eAÜew τα σκανδαλα 

πλὴν 8€- ovat tw ανθρωπω 

t ov ro σκανδαλον epyeras 


: Ec de 7 χει σον ἡ 0 rove σον 8 


σκανδαλιζει σε" ἐεκκοψον avroy 
και Bade aro σου" kaXov σοι ἐστιν 
εισελθειν εἰσ τὴν ζωην᾽ χωλον ἡ κυλλον 
ἢ δυο wodac - 7 δυο χειρασ exovra. 
βληθηναι εἰσ το wp - To αἰωνιον 
TO avro εἰ καὶ οοφθαλμοσ σου σκανδαλιζει σε 9 
ἐξελεαυτον᾽ και βαλε απὸ σον. καλον σοι ἐστιν 
μονοφθαλμον εἰσ τὴν ζωὴν εἰσελθειν 
ἢ 9vo οφθαλμουσ exovra βληθηναι 


εἰσ τὴν γεενναν 


; opare py καταφρονησηται IO 


€voc τουτων των μείκρων 
TOV πιστενοντων εἰσ ELE 
Àeyo yap ὕμειν ort οἱ ayyeAot αντων εν ovparow 
— 
δια παντοσ βλεπουσιν «To προσωπον Tov πρσ μου 


(Fol. 58 ὁ.) 


SEC" MATTHEUM 
— — Sy — 


Amen dico uobis.8i non convertamini 
et fueritis sicut pueri - non introibitis 
in regno caelorum : 
quicumque ergo humiliaverit se 
sicut puer iste. hic erit maior 
in regno caelorum et quicumque 
susceperit - unum puerum talem 
in nomine meo *me recipit 
qui autem scandalizauerit. unum de minimis istis 
qui credunt in me. expedit ei 
ut suspendatur mola asinaria 
super collum eius 
et demergi in pelago maris 
Uae mundo a scandalis 
necesse est enim - uenire scandala 
uerum tamen uae homini 
per quem scandalum uenit 
Si autem manus tua ‘aut pes tuus 
scandalizat te. abscide eum 
et mitte abs te. bonum tibi est 
introire in uitam ‘clodum aut sideratum 
quam duo pedes. aut duas manus habentem 
mitti in ignem aeternum 
Similiter - et si oculus tuus . scandalizat te 
erue eum - et mitte abs te. bonum tibi est 
luscum in uitam uenire 
quam duos oculos habentem mitti 
in gehennam 
uidete ne contemnatis 
unum horum minimorum 
qui credunt in me 
dico enim uobis: quod angeli eorum in caelis 
semper uident faciem patris mei 
(Fol. 59 a.) 


Car, XVIII. 3—10. 


TOV εν TOU ουρανοισ 
ρπβ : λθεν yap οὗὕιοσ του avOpurrov 
σωσαιτο απολωλοσ᾽ τι δεῦμειν δοκει 
εαν γενηται τινι ανθρωπω 
exarov προβατα. και πλανηθὴ εν e£ αυτων 
ουχι αφιησιν τα ἐνενήκοντα evvea. 
ἐπι τὰ 0p - και πορευομενοσ 
ζητει To πλανωμενον 
καὶ €Qy γενῆται ευρειν avro 
ἀμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν - ort χαίρει er avro μαλλον 
ἢ ert Tour qà TOS μη πεπλανημενοισ 
ovroc ovk ἐστιν θελημα 
ἐνπροσθεν rov πατροσ μων 
TOV εν τοισ ουρανοισ "ἵνα ἀποληται εν 
των μεικρων τουτων 
pry : €av δε apaprynon ew oe o αδελῴοσ σου 
ὕπαγε eXev£ov avrov: μεταξυ σον 
καὶ αντου JLOVOV - ἐεαν σου ἀακουσὴ 
ἐκερδησεσ Toy αδελῴον σου 
eay δε μη ακουσὴ 
παραλαβε μετα σου ert eva ἡ δυο 
iva ext στοματοσ δνο ἡ τρειων 
σταθη παν ρημα 
»πὸ : ἐὰν δε παρακουσὴ avrov eure Ty ἐκκλησεια 
n «ay δε καὶ THO εκκλήσειασ παρακουσὴη 
ἐστω σοι ὠσπερ o εθνικοσ'" καὶ wo 0 τελωνὴσ 
pre : ἀμὴν Aeyw ὕμειν - ova ay Snoyre 
n ἐπι TG yno ἐστε NeAvpeva. ev Tour ουρανοισ 
prs παλιν Xeyo ὕμειν - ors Óvo «ay συνφωνησονσι 
εξ υμων emt τὴσ yo 
περι παντοσ του πραγματοσ + OV αν αἰτήσωνται 


γενήσεται αντοισ Tapa Tov πατροσ μον 


τοῦ €V OUpavour 


(Fol. 59 5.) 


ATT 51 


SEC 


f &j 
f taf 


qui est in caelis 
uenit enim filius hominis 
salbare id quod perit ‘quid autem uobis uidetur 
si fuerit alicui homini 
centum oues. et erraverit una ex eis 
nonne relinquet. xcuiiii. 
in montibus et pergens 
quaeret eam quae erravit 
et 8i fuerit ut inveniat eam 
amen dico uobis. quia gaudet magis in illa 
quam super. xcuiiii. quae non erraverunt 
8ic non est uoluntas 
coram patre uestro 
qui est in caelis: ut pereat unum 
de minimis his 
si autem peccaverit in te frater tuus 
uade argue eum inter te 
et ipsum solum. si te audierit 
lucrastus es fratrem tuum 
si autem non audierit 
adsume tecum adhuc unum aut duos 
ut in ore duorum uel trium 
stet omne verbum 
si autem minus audierit eos. dic ecclesiae 
si autem et ecclesiam non audierit 
erit tibi sicut ethnicus. et sicut publicanus 
amen dico uobis quaecumque ligaveritis 
in terram erunt soluta in caelis 
iterum dico uobis ‘quia si duo convenerint 
ex uobis super terram 
de omni re:quamcumque petierint 
fiet eis. a patre meo 
qui in caelis est 
(Fol. 6o a.) 


CaP. XVIII. 10—19. 


— οα τὰ] 
52 KAT 


Ovx εἰσιν yap dv0 ἡ τρεισ συνηγμένοι 


εἰσ TO ELOY ονομα 
παρ οισ οὐκ εἰμει EV [LETH QUTOV 
ext : Tore προσελθων πετροσ eurev avro 
Ke ποσακεισ αμαρτήσει εἰσ ej.e o αδελῴφοσ μον 
και aov avro EWO ETTAKLT 
λεγει avro o ue - ov λεγω σοι εωσ ETTAKLT 
αλλα ewe εβδομηκοντακισ επτακισ 
p : δια Tovro ὡμοιωθη ἡ βασιλεια rov ουρανων 
ανθρωπω βασιλει. oo ηθελησεν συναραι λογο 
μετα των δουλων αὐτου 
ἀαρξαμενου Se avrov συναιρειν 
προσηχθὴ avro εἰσ οφειλετησ 
μύυριων ταλαντων 
μὴ €exovroa Se avrov αποδουναι 
εἐκελευσεν avrov o Ko πραθηναι 
και τὴν γυναίκα αυτοῦυ και τα τεκνα 
και παντα οσὰ €.x€V * καὶ ἀποθηναι 
πεσων δεο δουλοσ εκεινοσ 
προσεκννει avro λεγων . μακροθυμησον em ἐμε 
καὶ παντα ἀαποδωσω 
σπλανχνισθεισ Seo xo τοῦ δουλου exewov 
αἀπελυσεν avrov 
και τὸ δανιον αφηκεν avro 
Εξελθων δε o δουλοσ εκεινοσ 
ευρεν eva. των συνδουλων avrov 
oc ὠφειλεν avro δηναρια..ρ" 
και κρατῆσασ αντον exveryey λεγων 
αποδοσ εἰ Tt οφειλεισ 
πεσων ovv o σννδουλοσ avrov παρεκαλει avro 
Acyav μακροθυμησον er ej 
Kayw ἀποδωσω σοι" o 9e ovk ηθελησεν 
adda απελθων εβαλεν avrov εἰσ φυλακὴν 
(Fol. 6o 5.) 


XVIII. 


23 


29 


SEC MATTH 
—— — — 
non enim sunt duo aut tres . collecti 
in meo nomine 
aput quos non ero in medio eorum 
tunc accedens petrus dixit ei 
dme quotiens peccaverit in me frater meus 
et dimittam illi usque septies 
dicit ei hs non dico tibi septies 
sed septuagies septies 
ideo simile est regnum caelorum 
homini regi .qui uoluit tollere rationem 
cum seruis suis 
incipiente autem eo tollere 
oblatus est ei. unus debitor 
dece milium denariorum 
non hante eo unde redderet 
jussit eum dms uenundari 
et uxorem eius et filios 
et omnia quae habebat. et restitui 
cadens autem seruus ille 
&dorabat eum dicens. patiens esto in me 
et omnia restituam 
misertus est autem dms serui illius 
dimisit eum 
et faenus dimisit ei 
Egressus autem seruus ille 
inuenit unum de conseruis suis 
qui debebat ei denarios centum 
et tenens eum . subfocabat dicens 
redde quae debes 
cadens ergo conseruus eius - rogabat eum 
dicens ‘patientiam habe in me 
et ego reddam tibi ‘qui autem noluit 
sed abiit.et misit eum in carcerem 
(Fol. 61 a.) 


Ca». XVIII. 20— 30. 


Ὡς o 
ρπθ : καὶ eyevero ore ehadnoe o ine 
Coy 


εωσ ov asro9o To οφειλομενον 


ἐδοντεσ ovy ot συνδουλοι avrov 31 


Ta γείνομενα ελυπηθησαν σφοδρα 


και ελθοντεσ διεσαφησαν τω κω avrov 


XVIII. 


vrayra τὰ γενομενα 

TOT€ προσκαλεσαμενοσ avrov o KG avrov Aeye 32 
δουλεπονηρε πασαν τὴν οφειλην εκεινῇ 
αφηκα σοι- em παρεκαλεσασ με 
οὐκ εδι ovy καὶ σεελεησε 33 
τον συνδουλον σον. wo kayo σελεησα 

καὶ οργισθεισ o Ko avrov παρεδωκεν avrov 34 
Tour βασανισταισ 
ewe ov azro9o To οφειλομενον 

Ovroc και ὕμειν ποιήσει o TATHP POV 0 OUparog 35 
cay py adyre- εκαστοσ Tw adeAdw avrov 
απὸ των καρδιων ὕμων 

XIX. 1 
Tove λογουσ τοντουσ peTYpEV απὸ THT 
γαλειλαιασ και ἡλθεν εἰσ τα opua. τησ Ἰουδαιασ 
περαν Tov ἴορδανου 
και 1KkoXovÜncay avro οχλοι πολλοι 2 
καὶ εθεραπευσεν αντουσ exet 
και προσηλθον avro ot φαρισαιοι 3 
πειραζοντεσ avroy καὶ λεγουσιν avro 
et efeoriy ανθρωπω απολυσαι 
τὴν γύναικα αντου κατα πασαν αἰτειαν 

O δεαποκριθεισ eurev * ovk ayeyvorre | 4 
OTL ο ποιησασ ar apyne 
apoev και θηλυν εποιησεν avrove 


και εἰπεν EVEKEV TOVTOU καταλειψεῖ ἀνθρωποσ 5 


TOV πατερα και THY μήτερα. Kat κολληθησεται 


T] γυναικει αὐτου 
καὶ ἐσονται ot vo εἰσ σαρκα μειαν 


(Fol. 61 ὁ.) 


Carr. XVIII 


ATTH 53 


donec redderet quod debebatur 
uidentes ergo conserui eius 
quae fiebant. contristati sunt ualde 
et uenientes narrauerunt domino suo 
omnia quae facta sunt 
tunc aduocans eum dms eius dicit 
serue nequa omne debitum illud 
dimisi tibi .quia rogasti me 
non oportebat ergo et te misereri con 
seruo tuo sicut et ego misertus sum tui 
Et iratus dms eius tradidit eum 
tortoribus 
donec redderet debitum 
ita et uobis faciet pater meus caelestis 
nisi dimiseritis - unusquisque fratri suo 
de cordibus uestris 
Et factum est -cum locutus esset ihs 
sermones hos. transtulit se 
a galilaea . et uenjt in finibus iudeae 
trans iordanen 
et saecutae sunt eum turbae multae 
et curavit eos ibi 
et accesserunt ad eum pharisaei 
teptantes eum et dicunt illi 
si licet homini dimittere 
uxorem -suam per omnem causam 
ihs autem respondens dixit non legistis 
quia qui fecit ab initio 
masculum et feminam fecit eos 
Et dixit propter hoc relinquet homo 
patrem et matrem et coniungetur 
mulieri suae 
et erunt duo in carne una 
(Fol. 62 a.) 


30—XIX. 5. 


— v 
54 KAT 


wore ovkert εἰσιν δυο αλλα pea capt XIX. 6 
O ovv o Óc συνεζευξεν εἰσ ev 

ανθρωποσ μὴ αποχωριζετω 
λεγουσιν avro τὶ ovv o μωῦσησ ενετειλατο , 


δουναι βιβλιον αποστασειον. Kat αἀπολυσαι 
καὶ Neyer αντοισ' 
οτι προσ τὴν σκληροκαρδιαν ὕμων 
επετρεψεν ὕμειν μωνσὴσ 
απολυσαιτασ γυναικασ ὕμων 
a apxro δε ovk eyevero ουτωσ᾽ 
ρᾷ : λέγω δεῦμειν oom αν απολυσὴ τὴν γυναικα 
— αὐτου -παρεκτοσ Àoyov πορνειασ 
και γαμησὴ αλλὴν μοιχαται 
paa : λεγουσιν avro ot μαθηται αὐτου 
€t ουτωσ ἐστιν ἡ αἰτεια «του ανδροσ 


μετα THO γυναικοσ'"ου συνῴερει γαμησαι 


O 8« eurev αὐτοισ - ov παντεσ χωρουσιν 
τον Aoyov rovrov . αλλ our δεδοται 
Εισιν yap evvovxot- οἰτινεσ ἐκ κοιλειασ μήτροσ᾽ 
εγεννηθησαν ovrod : καὶ εἰσιν evvovxot 
οἰτινεσ᾽ ηυνουχισθησαν 
ὕπο των ανθρωπων. kat εἰσιν evvovyot 
οἰτινεσ ευνουχισαν εαυτουσ 
δια την βασιλειαν rov ουρανων 
o δυναμενοσ χωρεῖν χωρειτω 
pap : Tore προσήηνεχθησαν avro παιδια 
B iva ἐπιθη rac χειρασ avrow - και προσευξητε 
ot Se μαθηται. erereysnoay avrow 
O de ine eurey avrou * acera, Ta παιδια 
και μη kwAvonTe avra eAÜew προσ με 


τῶν yap τοιοντων ἐστιν - 7) βασιλεια των ουρανῶ 


και επιθεισ Tax χειρασ avrouwr - eropevOn εκειδε 


pay και tov «ur προσελθων Neyer avro διδασκαλε 
À 
(Fol. 62 5.) 


Cap. 


IO 


ΣΙ 


12 


13 


14 


16 


— 


SEC MATTH 
-- -- — 


alioquin non sunt iam duo ‘sed una caro 
quod ergo dà coniunxit in unum 
homo non separet 
dicunt ei. quid ergo moyses praecepit 
dare librum repudii . et dimittere 
dicit eis 
quia ad durum cor vestrum 
dimisit uobis moyses 
dimittere uxores uestras 
ab initio autem non fuit sic 
dico autem uobis. quicumque dimiserit uxore. 
suam . excepta ratione adulterii 
et duxerit aliam moechatur 
dicunt ei discipuli eius 
si sic est causa uiri 
cum muliere : non expedit nubere 
qui autem dixit eis. non omnes capiunt 
uerbum hoc. sed quibus datum est 
sunt enim eunuchi.qui ex utero matris 
nati sunt sic. et sunt eunuchi 
qui eunuchi facti sunt 
ab hominibus. et sunt eunuchi 
qui seipsos castrauerunt 
propter regnum caelorum 
qui potest capere capiat 
tunc oblati sunt ei pueri 
ut inponeret manus eis et oraret 
discipuli autem conminati sunt eis 
ihs autem dixit eis. dimittite pueros 
et ne prohibueritis eos uenire ad me 
talium enim est regnum caelorum 
et inpositis manibus eis abiit inde 
Et ecce unus accedens ait illi magister 
(Fol. 65 a.) 


XIX. 6— 16. 


[3 


[2] 


τι ἀγαθὸν ποιήσω ἵνα σχω ζωὴν αἰωνιον XIX. 
O δε eurev avro τι με ἐρωτασ πέρι ἀγαθου 17 
εἰσ ἐστιν αγαθοσ. εἰ δε θελεισ εἰσ την ζωὴν exec. 
τήρει τασ €vroAag - Neyer avro Tou 18 
Ode we εἰπεν ov φονευσεισ 
ov μοιχευσεισ ov κλεψεισ 
ον ψευδομαρτυρησεισ 
τειμα TOV πατερα. και τὴν μητερα 19 
καὶ αἀγαπησεισ TOV πλησεῖον σον WO σεαυτὸν 


Aeye avro o veayurkoo *ravra, παντα εφυλαξα 20 


εκ V€OTT]TOO > TL ETL ὕστερω 


; Edy avro o one «εἰ θελεισ τελειοσ εἰναι 21 


ὕπαγε πωλησὸν σου τα ὕπαρχοντα 
και Soo Tow πτωχοισ 

και e£eur θησαυρον εν ουραγοισ 
και δευρο ἀκολουθει μοι 


: ἀακουσασ ονεανισκοσ TOV λογον | 22 


απηλθεν Avrovpevor 
ἣν yap €xov Krnpara πολλα 
O de - ειπεν Tour μαθηταισ avrov 23 
ἀμὴν Xeyo ὕμειν - orc πλουσιοσ 
δυσκολωσ eureXevo erat 
eur τὴν βασιλειαν rov ουρανων 
παλιν δελεγω ὕμειν" εὐκοπωτερον ἐστιν 24 
καμήλον .δια τρυπηματοσ ραφιδοσ διελθειν 
ἢ πλουσιον εἰισελθειν - εἰσ την βασιλειαν του θυ 


ακουσαντεσ δεοι μαθηται εἐξεπλησσοντο 25 
και εφοβηθησαν σφοδρα λεγοντεσ 
Tw apa δυναται σωθηναι 

Ενβλεψασ δεο iyo ειἰπεν avrois 26 


παρα ayÜperrow rovro Suvaroy eat 
— 
παρα Se rw Ow παντα δυνατα ἐστιν 


τοτε αποκριθεισ᾽ οπετροσ εἰπεν avro 27 


(Fol. 63 6.) 


Car. 


SEC MATTH 55 
—— — -- 
quid boni faciam . ut habeam uitam aeternam 
qui autem dicit ei . quid me interrogas de bono 
unus est bonus ‘si autem uis in uitam uenire 
serua manda dicit ei quae 
ihà autem dixit.non occides 
non moechaueris- non furabis 
non falsum testimonium dices 
honora patrem et matrem 
et diliges proximum tuum sicut te ipsum 
dicit ei iubenis. haec omnia custodiui 
a iuuentute- quid adhuc mihi deest 
dicit ei ihs si uis perfectus ease 
uade uende substantiam tuam 
et da pauperibus 
et habebis thensaurum in caelis 
et ueni sequerem 
audiens iuuenis verbum 
abit tristis - 
erat enim habens possessiones multas 
ihs autem dixit discipulis suis 
amen dico uobis. quoniam diues 
difficile introibit 
in regnum caelorum 
iterum dico uobis. facilius est — 
camellum . per foramen acus transire 
quam diuitem introire.in regnum dei 
audientes autem discipuli stupebant 
et timuerunt ualde dicentes 
quis igitur potest saluari 
respiciens autem ihs dixit eis 
aput hominibus hoc inpossibile est 
aput dm autem. omnia possibilia sunt 
tunc respondens petrus dixit ei - 
(Fol. 64 a.) 


XIX. 16—27. 


56 KAT MAG60 


ἴδου ἡμεισ αφηκαμεν Tavra. XIX. 


Kat ἠκολουθηκαμαν σοι-τι apa, eae NEW 
par :0 δε ino eurey avro ἀμὴν Aeyw ὕμειν a8 
n or. üp.e.g ot ακολουθησαντεσ μοι 
εν T παλινγενεσεια 
oray καθιση οὕιοσ τον ανθρωπου 


: emt Üpovov δοξησ avrov : καθισεσθε και αυτοι 


IBS 


ert dexadvo θρονουσ 
κρεινοντεσ ιβ : $vAac Tov ia paz 

pan : καὶ πασ οστισ αφηκεν OLKELAT 29 
ἡ αδελφουσ -ἡ αδελφασ -ἡ μήτερα 
3] τεκνα "ἢ a;ypova * EVEKA TOV ογοματοσ μου 
εκατονταπλασίον λήμψεται 
και ζωὴν αἰωνιον κληρονομήσει 


: πολλοι δε evovrat’ πρωτοι αἰσχατοι 30 


Hj 


και αἰσχατοι πρωτοι 
: Opota yap ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια των ουρανων XX. 1 


sa 


avOpwrw οικοδεσποτη : ocru εξηλθεν 
apa πρωΐ μεισθωσασθαι epyaraa 
eur TOY αμπελωνα avrov 'συμφωνησασ δε 2 
pera Toy epyarwy "εκ δηναριου τὴν ἡμεραν 
απεστειλεν αντουσ "εἰσ τὸν αμπελωνα αὐτου 
και διεξελθων περι «pay τριτὴν 3 
evpev αλλουσ ἐστωτασ εν τὴ ayopa ἀργουσ 
κακειγοισ ELITEY .ὕπαγεται και ὕμεισ 4 
εἰσ τον αμπελωγνα και o αν ἢ δικαιον 
δωσω ὕμειν - ot δεαπηλθον 

παλιν δε εξελθων" wept wpay ἐκτὴν 5 
και €VVG.TYV * ETOLNT EY ὡσαυτωσ' 
wept Oe THY ἐνδεκατην 6 
εξηλθεν και evpey αλλουσ ἐστωτασ 
Kat λεγει avrour - rt woe ἐστήκατε 
oAnY τὴν ἡμέραν αργοι- Xeyovaty avro 7 

(Fol. 64 5.) 


SEC MATTH: 
——— an 
ecce nos dimisimus omnia 
et secuti sumus te. quid igitur erit nobis 
ihs autem dixit ei amen dico uobis 
quoniam uos - qui secuti estis me 
in regeneratione 
cum sederit filius hominis 
super sedem gloriae suae. sedebitis et uos 
super duodecim sedes 
iudicantes duodecim tribus israhel 
Et omnis quicumque reliquid domum 
aut fratres aut sorores- aut matrem 
aut filios. aut agros : propter nomen meum 
centuplum accipiet 
et uitam aeternam hereditabit 
multi autem erunt primi novissimi 
et nobissimi primi 
simile est enim *reguum caelorum 
homini patrifamilias- qui exiit 
deluculo. conducere operarios 
in uineam suam- conueniens autem 
cum operariis. ex denario diem 
misit ΘΟΒ "in uineam suam 
Et egressus. circa horam tertiam 
inuenit alios stantes ‘in foro otiosos 
et illis dixit.ite et uos 
in uineam. et quod fuerit iustum 
dauo uobis. qui autem abierunt 
iterum autem exiens. circa horam sextam 
et nonam . fecit identidem 
circa undecimam autem 
exiit et inuenit alios stantes 
et dicit eis* quid hic statis 
toto die otiosi . dicunt ei 
(Fol. 65 o.). 


Capp. XIX. 2;—XX. 7. 


ort ovOew ἡμασ ej.eurÜocaro 
Aeyet avrowr ὕπαγεται και ὕμεισ' 
εἰσ TOV αμπελωνα μου 
Οψειασ δε γενομενησ᾽ λέγει o Ko 
TOV ἀαμπελωνοσ Tw ἐπιτρόπῳ αὐτὸν 
κάλεσον Tove ἐργατασ 
καὶ ἀποδοσ αντοισ Tov μισθον 
ἀρξαμενοσ απὸ των αἰσχατων 
εωσ των πρωτων 
Ελθοντεσ ovv οἱ περι τὴν ἐενδεκατην wpay 
ἐλαβον ava δηναριον 
και ἐελθοντεσ οἱ πρωτοι 
εἐνομιίσαν ort πλειω λημψονται 
ἐλαβον δε και αυτοι ava δηναριον 
λαβοντεσ δε eyovyucay 
κατα του οἰκοδεσποτον λεγοντεσ 
OUTOL οἱ αἰσχατοι μιαν ὡραν ἐποιῆσαν 
και WOUT αντουσ ἡμεῖψν ἐποιησασ 
Tow βαστασασιν ro βαροσ rho ἡμερασ 
Kal TOV καυσωνα 
O δεαποκρειθισ en avrov εἰπεν 
eraipe ovx adixw ge 
ovxt δηναριου συνεφωνησασ μοι 
apoy TO σὸν Kas ὕπαγε 
θελω Se rw aur xao τοντω δουναι 
QC και COL- οὐκ ἐστιν μοι 
ο θελω ποιησαι εν τοισ ἐμοισ 
ἢ οοφθαλμοσ cov πονηροσ ἐστιν 
ort cyw ἀγαθοσ ειμει 


OUVTOO ECOVTAL OL GU XO TOL Toc TOL 


IO 


II 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


και οἱ πρωτοι QAO XGTOL ' TOÀXÀOL yap εἰσιν κλητοι 


ολιγοι δε exXexros 
--- 2 
σα : και avaBawwy o ino εἰσ ἸἹεροσολυμα 
(Fol. 65 5.) 


17 


quia nemo nos conduxit 
ait illis .ite et uos 
in uineam meam 
sero autem facto dicit dms 
uineae procuratori suo 
uoca operarios 
et redde eis mercedem 
incipiens & nouissimis 
usque ad primos 
uenientes ergo qui circa undecimam horam 
acceperunt singulos denarios 
et cum uenissent primi 
sperauerunt quod plus aociperent 
acceperunt autem singulos denarios 
accipientes autem murmurauerunt 
aduersus familiam dicentes 
hii nouissimi una hora fecerunt 
et aequales illos nobis fecisti 
qui portauimus pondus diei 
et aestus 
qui autem respondens uni eorum dixit 
amice non te nocui 
nonne denario placuisti mecum 
tolle tuum et uade 
uolo autem nouissimo huic dare 
sicut et tibi. non licet mihi 
quod uolo facere in meis 
aut oculus tuus nequam est 
quod ego bonus sum 
sic erunt nouissimi primi 
et primi nouissimi - multi enim sunt uocati 
pauci autem electi 
Et ascendens ihs hierosolyma 
(Fol. 66 a.) 


CAP. XX. 7—17. 


57 


58 


Jas 


f 


παρελαβὲεν Tove - 18. Kar tay εν τη οδω 

και eurey avrou ‘ov αναβενομεν 

εἰσ ἱἵεροσολυμα Kat οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπον 
παραδοθήσεται τοισ ἀρχιερευσιν 
καιγραμματευσιν * Kat κατακρεινουσιν GUTOV 
θανατω και παραδωσουσιν avrov 

τοισ εθνεσιν εἰσ το ἐνπαιξαι 


και μαστείγωσαι καὶ σταυρωσαι 


KQL τὴ τριτὴ ἡμερα αναστήσεται 


: Τοτεπροσηλθεν avro 


ἢ prp των ὕιων ζεβεδεου 
μετα των ὕιων AUTYO προσκυνουσα 
και αἰτουσα τιαπαντου 
O δε eurev αυτή tt θελεισ λεγει avro) 
eure tva. καθισωσιν ovrot ot δυο ὕιοι μου 
εἰσ €x δεξιων σου και εἰσ εξ εὐωνυμων 
ev τη βασιλεια σου 
— 
αποκριθεισ δε o ine εἰπεν 
ovk οιδατε τι αιτειτε.δυνασθαιτο ποτήριον 
πείειν - 0 eyw μελλω πείνειν 
λεγουσιν δυναμεθα 
λεγει avrouw o ine “τὸ μεν ποτήριον μου πιεσθε 
το δε καθεισαι εκ δεξιων μον 
καὶ εὖ εὐωνυμων * ovK ἐστιν ἐμον TOUTO δονναι 
αλλοισ ἡτοιμασται. ὕπο Tov πατροσ μον 
και ἀκουσαντεσ οἱ δεκα ἡγανακτησαν 
περι Tay δυο αδελῴφων 
Οδε to προσκαλεσαμενοσ' AUTOS 
εἰπεν avro, oare - oTt οἱ ἀρχοντεσ' 
τῶν εθνων - κατακυριευουσιν avrov 
και οἱ μεγαλοὶ κατεξουσιαζουσιν αυτων 
Ovx ovroc ἐστιν εν ὕμειν "αλλ oc av θελη 


εν ὕμειν μεγασ γενεσθε 
(Fol. 66 5.) 


18 


19 


20 


2I 


22 


23 


25 


26 


SEC MATTH 
—— -- = 
suscepit duodecim - seorsum in uia 
et dixit eis. ecce ascendimus 
hierosolyma et filius hominis 
tradetur principibus sacerdotum 
et scribis et condemnabunt eum 
morti ‘et tradent eum 
gentibus. ad castigandum 
et inludendum "οὗ crucifigendum 
et tertio die resurget 
tunc accessit ad eum 
mater filiorum zebedei 
cum filiis suis adorans 
et petens aliquid ab eo 
qui autem dixit ei quid uis dicit ei 
dic ut sedeant hi duo fili mei 
unus a dextris tuis. et unus a sinistris 
in regno tuo 
respondens autem ihs dixit 
nescitis quid petatis * potestis calicem 
bibere:quod ego uiuiturus sum 


dicunt possimus 


ait illis ih3- calicem quidem meum bibetis 


sedere autem a dextris meis 

et a sinistris. non est meum dare 
aliis praeparatum est a patre meo 
et audientes decem indignati sunt 
de duobus fratribus 


— 
ihs autem conuocans eos 


dixit eis - scitis ‘quod re gentium 
dominantur eorum 


et magni‘ principantur eorum 


non ita est in uobis. sed qui uoluerit 


in uobis magnus fieri 
(Fol. 67 a.) 


Car. XX. 17—26. 


εἐστεὕμων διακονοσ' ΧΧ. 

και oo av θελὴ ev ὕμειν - εἰναι πρωτοσ 27 
: ἐστε ὕμων δουλοσ᾽ : excep o ὕιοσ τον ανθρωπον 28 

ovk Gey διακονηθηναι..αλλα διακονησαι 

καὶ δουναι την ψυχὴν avrov 

λυτρον αντι πολλων 

ὕμεισ δε (yrecvre - ex μεικρου αυξησαι 


[2 


και ἐκ μειζονοσ ἐλαττον εἰναι 
Εισερχομενοι δε και παρακληθεντεσ 

δειπνησαι-. μὴ ανακλεινεσθαι 

εἰσ rove ἐξεχοντασ τοπουσ 

p ποτε ἐνδοξοτεροσ σον ἐπελθη 

καὶ προσελθων o δειπνοκλητωρ evry σοι 


ετι KATW χωρει. και καταισχυνθηση 


Cav δε αναπεσησ * «wr rov yrrova τοπον 
και ἐπελθη σου ἡττων 
ἐρει σοι o δειπνοκλήτωρ '"συναγε ert aye 
καὶ ἐσται σοι TOVTO χρήσιμον 

σὲ : καὶ ἐεκπορενομενὼν AUTWY απὸ ἵερίχω 29 

ἠκολουθησαν avro οχλοι πολλοι 
και ov Svo τυφλοι καθημενοι 30 
παρα τὴν οδον. ἠκουσαν ort ine mapayet 
και expa£ay Aeyovrea - ehenooy ἡμασ 
ire δανειδ. o Se οχλοσ επετειμησεν αντοισ 31 
Wa σειωπησωσὶιν 

Οι δε μειζον ἐκραξαν λεγοντεσ 
Ke eXenooy ἡμασ Vu Saved 

KQL OTAT O we εφωνήσεν avrove Kat ecrev 32 
τι θελεται ποιησω ὕμειν - λεγουσιν avro Ke 33 
ἵνα aviywow ot οφθαλμοι μων 
σπλανχνισθεισ δεο ine 34 
ἡψατο των ομματων avrov 


καὶ evdewo ἀανεβλεψαν και ἠκολουθησαν av 
τω 


(Fol. 67 à.) 


‘SEC MATTH 59 
—— -- — 
erit uester minister 
et qui uoluerit in uobis. esse primus 
erit uester seruus. sicut filius hominis 
non uenit ministrari.sed ministrare 
et dare animam suam 
redemptionem pro multis 
uos autem quaeritis de minimo crescere 
et de magno minui 
introeuntes autem ‘et rogati 
cenare - ne discubueritis - 
in eminentibus locis 
ne forte dignior te superueniat 
et accedens cenae inuitator dicat tibi 
adhuc deorsum accede - et confondaris 
si autem discubueris in minimum locum 
et superueniat minor te 
dicit tibi inuitator caene - collige adhuc superius 
et erit tibi hoc utile 
Et egredientibus eis ab iericho 
saecutae sunt eum turbae multae 
et ecce duo caeci saedentes 
secus uiam audierunt quod ihs transit 
et clamauerunt dicentes miserere nostri 
fili dauid turba autem increpabat eos 
ut tacerent 
qui autem maius clamabant dicentes 
dme miserere nostri fili dauid 
et stans ibs uocauit eos et dixit 
quid uultis ut faeiam uobis dicunt ei dme 
ut aperiantur oculi nostri 
et misertus ihs 
tetigit oculos eorum 


et continuo respexerunt. et secuti sunt eu 


(Fol. 68 a.) 


Car. XX. 26—34. 


60 


[31 


say 


[83] 


ses 


καὶ ore ἤγγισαν ew ἱἹεροσολυμα 


XXI 1 


καιηλθον eo βηθφαγη - προσ To opoc Tuv ελαιῶ 
rore ino απεστειλεν.. vo μαθητασ Xeyov avTtas 2 


πορενεσθαι εἰσ THY κωμὴν THY κατέναντι ὕμω 
και ευθεωσ ευρησεται- oyoy δεδεμενὴν 

και πωλον μετ αυτὴσ «λυσαντεσ ayerat μοι 
καὶ αν τισ ὕμιν εἰπὴ TL ποιειται 

ἐρειτε ort 0 KG avrov €xet χρειαν exei 


και evGewo αποστελει avrove 


: Touro δε yeyover - iva πληρωθη 


To ρηθεν «δια rov προφητου Aeyovroa 
evrare τὴ θνγατρι σιων 
ἴδου o βασιλευσ σον epxerat σοι πραῦσ 
επιβεβηκωσ emt ονον 


καὶ πωλον ὕιον ὕποξυγιον 


: πορευθεντεσ Se οἱ μαθηται ἐποιησαν 


— 
καθωσ συνεταξεν αντοισ o ino 
και ἤγαγον τὴν OVOY καὶ Toy πωλον 
καὶ ἐπεθηκαν er αυτὸν Ta ειἰματεια 


και εκαθητο exavw avrov 


O δεπλειστοσ οχλοσ .εἐστρωσαν avrov τα ειματεια 8 


εν Ty οδω - aÀXo: δε exorrov κλαδουσ 
azo των δενδρων - και εστρωσαν εν τὴ οδω 


οι 8e oyAot οἱ προαγοντεσ αὐτὸν 


και οἱ ακολονθουντεσ ἐκραζαν λεγοντεσ 


οσσανα τω tw δανειδ. εὐυλογημενοσ᾽ o ἐρχομενοσ 


— 
εν ονοματι κυ οσσαναὰ EV TOUT ὑψιστοισ 


: και εἰσελθοντοσ avrov ew Ἱεροσολυμα 


ἐσεισθη aca ἡ πολεισ λεγουσα 
TW ἐστιν OUTOO - οἱ δεπολλοι εἰπὸν 


ovroc ἐστιν οπροφητησ we 


aro ναζαρεθ Tyo γαλιλαιασ 


---- 
και εἰσῆλθεν o tno εἰσ ro tepoy του θυ 


(Fol. 68 5.) 


10 


I1 


12 


Et ut adpropiassent hierosolyma 
uenerunt in betphage-ad montem oliueti 
tunc ihs misit. duos discipulos suos dicens 
ite in castellum quod contra uos 
et mox inuenietis. aainam alligatam 
et pullum cum ea. solbentes adducite mihi 
et si quis uobis dixerit quid facitis 
dicetis quoniam dms eorum opus habet 
et continuo dimittit eos 
hoc autem factum - ut conpleretur 
quod dictum est per prophetam dicentem 
dicite filiae sion 
ecce rex tuus uenit tibi mansuetus 
ascendens super asinam 
et pullum subiugalem 
abeuntes autem discipuli fecerunt 
sicut praeceperat eis ihs 
et adduxerunt asinam et pullum 
et superposuerunt super eum uestimenta 
et sedebat super eum 
plurima autem turba .strauerunt uestimenta sua 
in ula ‘alii uero praecidebant ramos 
de arboribus - et sternebant in uia 
turbae autem quae praecedebant eum 
et que sequebantur clamabant dicentes 
ossana fili dauid . benedictus qui benit 
in nomine dmi. ossana in excelsis 
Et ingresso eo ‘in hierosolyma 
mota est omnis ciuitas dicens 
quis est hic. multi autem dixerunt 
hic est propheta ihs 
a nazaret galilaeae 
Et introiit ihe in templum del 
(Fol. 69 a.) 


Car. XXI 1—12. 


[3] 


καὶ ἐξεβαλεπαντασ rove πωλουντασ 


και ayopaLovrac ev τω iepw 


και rag τραπεζασ των κολλυβιστὼων κατεστρεψα 


και τασ καθεδρασ των πωλουντων 

Tag περιστερασ. και λεγει avrour -γεγραπται 
οἰκοσ μου" 
οιἰκοσ προσευχησ κληθήσεται 

ὕμεισ δε avrov ἐποιησατε 


σπήλαιον ληστων 


— 
σιβ :και προσῆλθον avrw τυφλοι και χωλοι 


εν τω tepw και εθεραπευσεν avrova 
Ξειδοντεσ δε οἱ ἀρχιερεισ' 

και οἱ γραμματεισ - Ta θαυμασια α ἐποιησεν 
kat Tove παιδασ Tove κραζοντασ 

εν Tw ἵερω και λεγοντασ 

οσσανα Tw vu» Saved 

ἡγανακτῆσαν και εἶπαν αὐτω 

ακονεισ TL OUTOL λεγουσιν 

Ο δε ine Aeyet avro ναι" ovderore aveyvurre 
ex στόοματοσ νήηπειων - και θηλαζοντων 


καταρτεισω atvov 


ow :και καταλειπὼν avrovo εξηλθεν eco 


A 


To πολεωσ εἰσ βηθανειαν 
και ηυλισθη exec 


πρωι δεπαραγων εἰσ Τὴν πολιν 


ἐπεινασεν - καὶ εἰδων συκὴν juu 

ἐπι tna οδου-ηλθεν ex αὐτὴν 

και οὐδεν evpey εν αὐτὴ 

ει μη φυλλα μονον και λεγει avr 

perc εξ ov καρποσ yevyrat eur Toy aua 
και ἐξηρανθη παραχρημα ἡ συκὴ 


και ἴδοντεσ οἱ μαθηται. εθαυμασαν λεγοντεσ 


Tug παραχρημα. εξηρανθὴ ἡ cvi 
(Fol. 69 ὁ.) 


XXI. 


SEC MATTH 
——— an 
et eiecit omnes uendentes 
et ementes in templo 
Et mensas numulariorum euertit 
et cathedras uendentium 
columbaa. et dicit eis . scriptum est 
domus mea 
domus orationis uocabitur 
uos autem eam fecistis 
spelucam latronum 
Et accesserunt ad eum caeci et clodi 
in templo . et curauit eos 
uidentes autem principes sacerdotum 
et scribae mirabilia quae fecit 
et pueros clamantes 
in templo et dicentes 
ossana filio dauid 
indignati sunt et dixerunt ei 
audis quid isti dicunt 


ihs autem dicit eis etiam "numquam legistis 


ex ore infantium et lactantium 
praeparasti laudem 
Et relinquens eos exiit foras 
civitate in bethaniam 
et mansit ibi 
mane autem transiens in civitatem 
esuriit. et uidens ficum unam 
super uiam uenit ad eam 
et nihil inuenit in eam 
nisi folia tantum "οὐ dicit ei 
jam non ex te fructus erit.in aeternum 
et haruit subito ficus 
Et uidentes discipuli mirati sunt dicentes 
quomodo subito haruit ficus 
(Fol. 70a.) 


CAP. XXI. 12— 20. 


61 


πο τα». 


ove: αποκρεισ δε ino εἰπεν avrour XXI 21 
— 


αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν eay ἐεχητεπιστιν 
και μη διακριθηται 
OV μονον TO THO συκησ ποιήσετε 
αλλα Kat τω ορει τοντω εαν εἰπητέ 
αρθητι και βληθητι εἰσ την θαλασσαν γενήσεται 
σις : καὶ παντα ova αἰτησητε 22 
ἐν TH προσευχὴ πιστευοντεσ λήμψεσθαι 
: καὶ ελθοντοσ avrov εἰσ Tro ἵερον 23 
προσηλθον avro διδασκοντει. 
οι αρχιερεισ 
και οἱπρεσβυτεροι του Xaov λεγοντεσ 
εν roux εξουσεια ταντα ποιεισ 
και τισ σοι ἐδωκεν 
τὴν ἐξουσειαν ταυτὴν 
αποκρειθεισ δεο ine εἰπεν αὐτοισ' 24 
ἐπερωτήσω ὕμασ καγω eva λογον 
ἐαν εἰπῆτε μοι καγω ὕμειν epo 
εν wow. ἐξουσια ravra. TOW 
το βαπτισμα iwavvou ποθεν ἣν 26 
εξ ovpavov ἡ ef ανθρωπων 
Or δε διελογιζοντο παρ eavrow λεγοντεσ' 
eay εἴπωμεν εξ ovpayov* ἐρει ἡμειν 
δια τι ουκ επιστευσατε avTw° 
«ay δε εἰπωμεν εξ ανθρωπων . 26 
φοβουμεθα rov οχλον - ravrea yap εχουσιν 
TOV loa yvy ‘wo προφήτην 
και αποκρειθεντεσ To op euray 27 
ovx οἰδαμεν ‘ey avrow Kat avro 
ovde eyo Aeyo ὕμειν 
ev rove e£fova eta ταυτα ποιω 
eu : τι δεῦμιν δοκει. ανθρωποσ euxev τεκνα δυο 28 


και προσελθων τω πρωτω ειπεν TEKVOY 


(Fol. 705.) 


SEC MATTH 
——— ς-ς 
respondens autem ihs dixit eis 
amen dico uobis. si habueritis fidem 
et non hisitaueritis 
non solum de ficu facietis 
sed et si monti huic dixeritis 
tollere et mitte te in mare fiet 
et omnia quaecumque petieritis 
in oratione credentes accipietis | 
Et ueniente eo in templum 
adcesserunt ad eum docentem 
principes sacerdotum 
et seniores plebis dicentes 
in qua potestate haec facis 
et quis tibi dedit | e 
potestatem hanc 
respondens autem ihs dixit eis 
interrogavo bos. et ego unum sermonem 
si dixeritis mihi. et ego uobis dicam 
in qua potestate haec facio 
baptisma iohannis unde est 
de caelo aut ex hominibus 
qui autem altercabantur.inter ge dicentes 
si dixerimus de caelo. dicet nobis 
quare non crededistis ei 
si autem dixeribus ex hominibus 
timemus turbam - omnes enim habent 
iohannen - sicut profetam 
Et respondentes ihu dixerunt 
nescimus. ait illis et ipse 
nec ego dico uobis 
in qua potestate haec facio 
quid autem uobis uidetur. homo habebat filios 
et accedens priori dixit fili 
(Fol. 71 4.) 


Cap. XXI. 21—28, 


ὕπαγε σήμερον epyya£ov evo To αμπελωνα 
οδεαποκρειθεισ eurey ov θελω 
ὕστερον Se μεταμεταμεληθεισ 
απηλθεν ew τον αμπελωνα 
προσελθὼν δε ro erepo ειἰπεν ὡσαντωσ' 
o δεαποκρειθεισ ειπεν eyo κεὕπαγω 
καὶ ovk απηλθεν «τισ ex των δνω 
To θελημα του πατροσ εποιησεν 
λεγουσιν o αισχατοσ 
λεγει αντοισ o ine «ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
οτι οἱ τελωναι και αἱ πορναι 
προάγουσιν tac: εἰσ τὴν βασιλειαν του ϑυ 
λθεν yap προσ ὕμασ Ἰωαννὴσ 
ev od δικαιοσυνησ᾽. καὶ ovk επιστευσαται αυτω 
ot δετελωναι και αἱ πορναι 
επιστευσαν avro -ὕμεισ δε ειδοντεσ' 
μετεμεληθητε ὕστερον - Tov πιστευσαι AUTO 
cd : αλλην παραβολὴν ακουσατε 
n ανθρωποσ nv οἰκοδεσποτησ 
οστισ εφυτευσεν αμπελωνα 
και φραγμον avro περιεθηκεν 
και ρυξεν ey avro Ayvoy 
και ὠκοδομήσεν πυργον 
και εἐξεδοτο avrov γεωργοισ 
και απεδημησεν. ore δε ἡγγισεν 
ο καιροσ TOV καρπὼν 
απεστειλεν Tove δουλουσ avrov 
προσ Tove γεωργουσ «λαβιν Tove καρπονσ avrov 
και λαβοντεσ οἱ γεωργοι τουσ δουλουσ avrov 
ον μεν ἐδειραν 
οδεαπεκτειναν 
ον δεελειθοβολησαν 
παλιν ovy ἀπεστειλεν - addove δουλουσ πλιονασ 


(Fol. 71 6.) 


XXL. 


30 


34 


35 


36 


— 


SEC MATTH 63 
—— — 4 
uade hodie operare in uineam 
qui autem respondens dixit nolo 
postea autem paenitentia ductus 
iit in uineam 
accedens autem alteri dixit identidem 
qui autem respondens dixit ego dme eo 
et non iit. quis de duobus 
uoluntatem patris fecit 
dicunt nouissimus 
dicit eis ihs amen dico uobis 
quia publicani et meretrices 
antecedent uos. in regno caelorum 
uenit enim ad uos iohannes 
in uia iustitiae. et non credidistis ei 
publicani autem et meretrices 
crediderunt ei . uos autem uidentes 


paenituistis postea "αὖ crederitis ei 


aliam parabolam audite 


homo fuit paterfamilias 

qui plantauit uineam 

et maceriam cireumposuit 

et fodiit ei torcular 

et aedificauit turrem 

et locauit eam cultoribus. et profectus est 
peregre. cum adpropinquasset autem 
tempus fructuum 

misit seruos suos 


ad colonos. accipere fructos suos 


Et accipientes coloni seruos eius 


quem quidem ceciderunt 
quem autem occiderunt 


quem uero lapidauerunt. 


iterum uero misit alios plures seruos 


(Fol. 72a.) 


CAP. AXI. 28— 36. 


64 KAT 


TOV πρωτῶων - και ἐποίησαν αντοισ woavTOT —. XXI. 
vorepoy δε. απεστειλεν avrous 37 
Toy ὕιον avrov λεγων 
EVT PATO OYTE TOV ULOV μου 
Ot δεγεωργοι ἴδοντεσ Toy Voy 38 
εἰπὸν εν εαντοισ - OVTOT ἐστιν O κληρονομοσ 


δευτε αποκτεινωμεν avroy * kat σχωμεν 


τὴν κληρονομίαν avTOv 

και λαβοντεσ avrov απεκτειναν 39 
και εἐξεβαλαν εξω τον αμπελωνοσ 
oray ovy ελθη o KG TOV αμπελωνοσ 40 


τι ποιήσει τοισ γεωργοισ €K€LVOUT 
λεγουσιν avro 41 
κακουσ κακωσ ἀπολεσει αντουσ 
Kat Tov αμπελωνα 
exdwoerat a) our γεωργοισ 
OLTLVET αποδωσουσὶιν avro TOUT καρπουσ 
εν TOL καιροισ αυτων 
λεγει avrow o ine ουδεποτε ἀνέγνωτε 042 
εν ταισ γραφαισ 
λιθον ον απεδοκειμασαν 
οι οἰκοδομουντεσ' - ovrog «γενηθὴ 


eur κεφαλὴν γωνειασ 
παρα κυ eyevero avr») και ἐστιν θαυμαστη 
ev οφθαλμοισ ὕμων 
διά Tovro λεγω ὕμειν ort αρθησεται 43 
ad υμων ἡ βασιλεια του θυ 
και δοθησεται εθνει 
ποίουντι TOUT καρπουσ αυτησ 
E : και ακουσαντεσ οἱ ἀρχιερεισ 4: 


kat ot φαρισαιοι rag: παραβολασ avrov 


eyvocay ort περι avrov λέγει 
και ζητουντεσ avrov κρατῆσαι 46 
(Fol. 72 5.) 


SEC MATTH 
—— -ς- — 
prioribus. et fecerunt eis identidem 
nouissime autem . misit illis 
filium suum dicens 
reuerebuntur filium meum 
Coloni autem: uidentes filium 
dixerunt intra se - hic est heres 
uenite occidamus eum - et habeamus 
hereditatem eius 
Et accipientes eum occiderunt 
et elecerunt extra uineam 
8i ergo uenerit dms uineae 
quid faciet colonis illis 
dicunt ei ; 
malos male perdet eos 
et uineam | 
locauit aliis colonis 
qui reddent ei fructus 


temporibus suis 


dicit eis ihs numquam legistis 
in scripturis 
lapidem quem reprobauerunt 
nedificantes - hic factus est 
in caput anguli 
a dmo facta est haec. et est mirabilis 
in oculis uestris 
propter hoc dico uobis - quia tolletur 
& uobis regnum dei 
et dabitur genti 
facienti fructos suos 
et audientes principes sacerdotum 
et pharisaei : parabolas eius 
cognouerunt quia de ipsis dicit 
et quaerentes eum tenere 
(Fol. 73 a-) 


Car. XXI. 36—46. 


εφοβηθησαν rovs οχλουσ ΧΧΙ. 
eri wo προφὴν avrov etxov 
u— co, 
σκα :και azrokpiÜew o ιησ παλιν εἰπεν XXII. 1 
a, 
εν oÀaur αντοισ λεγων 
«ou» ἡ βασιλεια των ουρανων 2 


ἀνθρωπω βασιλει. οστισ ἐποιησεν γαμουσ' 
Tw UU) GVTOV - και απεστειλεν τουσ δουλουσ αὐτου 3 
καλεσαι Tove κεκλημενουσ εἰσ τουσ γαμουσ 
καὶ ουκηθελον ελθειν 

παλιν απεστειλεν αλλουσ δουλουσ λεγων 4 
ἐίπατετοισ κεκλημενοισ 
ἴδου To αριστον pov ητοιμακα 
0t ταυροι μου και Ta. σειτιστα τεθυμενα 
καὶ παντα ετοιμα᾽ δευτε εἰσ Tove γαμουσ' 

Οι δεαμελησαντεσ αἀπηλθον ᾿ 5 
οι μεν exo TOV εἰδιον αγρον 
οἱ δε emt τὴν ἐεμπορειαν avrov 
ot δε λοιποι κρατησαντεσ τουσ δουλουσ avrov — 6 
ὕβρεισαν. και απεκτειναν 
εκεινοσ o βασιλευσ. ακουσασ ὠργισθη 7 
xat πεμψασ TO στρατευμα avTov 
απωλεσεν Tove hover exetvova 
καὶ THY πολιν αυτων ἐνεπρῆσεν 

Tore Xeyet τοισ δουλοισ avrov 8 
ο μεν γαμοσ ετοιμοσ ἐστιν 
οἱ δε κεκλημένοι. ovk σαν αξιοι 
πορενεσθαι ουν. ἐπι τασ διεξοδουσ τῶν οὗν 9 


καὶ οσουσ αν ευρητε- καλεσατε eur τουσ γαμοὺσ 


καὶ εξελθοντεσ οι δουλοι avrov εἰσ TAT οδουσ 10 
συνήγαγον avrac ovg evpay 
movnpove τε καὶ ἀαγαθουσ 
καὶ etAnoOn o yajoc * rov ανακειμενων 
σκβ : Εἰσελθων Se 0 βασιλευσ᾽ n 
(Fol. 73 6.) 


"SEG ΤῊ 65 
t 


timuerunt turbas 
quia sicut prophetam eum habebant 
Et respondens ihs iterum dixit 
in parauolis dicens eis 
simile est regnum caelorum 
homini regi - qui fecit nuptias 
filio suo. et. misit seruos suos 
uocare inuitatos ad nuptias 
et nolebant uenire 
iterum misit alios seruos dicens 
dicite inuitatis 
ecce prandium meum paraui 
tauri mei - et saginata occisa 
et omnia parata * uenite ad nuptias 
qui autem neglentes abierunt 
quidam in suum agrum 
quidam ad negotiationem suam 
reliqui autem tenentes seruos eius 
iniuriauerunt. et occiderunt 
ille rex audiens iratus est 
et mittens exercitum suum 
occidit homicidas illos 
et ciuitatem eorum incendit 
tunc dicit seruis suis 
nuptiae quidem paratae sunt 
qui autem uocati sunt. non fuerunt digni 
ite ergo. in exitus uiarum 
et quodquod inueneritis . uocate ad nuptias 
Et exeuntes serui illius in uias 
collegerunt omnes quos inuenerunt 
malos et bonos 
et repletae sunt nuptiae . discumbentium 


ingressus autem rex 
(Fol. 74 a.) . 


Capp. XXI. 46—XXII. r1. 


66 


— 


θεασασθαι rove ανακειμενουσ' . XXII. 


edev exer ανθρωπον - μὴ ἐενδεδυμενον 
evdupa γαμον. και λεγει avro 12 
erepat- πωσ ἡλθεσ woe 


μὴ exav ἐνδυμα γαμον 
oo δε εφειμωθη 


Tore εἰπεν o βασιλευσ - Tow διακονοισ' 13 
apare avrov - TOOWY καὶ χείρων 
και Baderat avrov εἰσ ro σκοτοσ TO e&urepov 
exet emrat o κλανθμοσ 
xato βρυγμοσ Tov οδοντων 


πολλοι yap eur kXagrot- oAryot δε ἐεκλεκτοι 14 


oxy : Tore πορευθεντεσ οι φαρισαιοι 15 
—Á 


συνβονλιον ἐλαβον - wc avrov παγιδευσωσι 
ev λογω. και αποστελλουσὶν προσ avroy τό 
Tove μαθητασ αὐτων | 
pera Tov npwotavow λεγοντεσ διδασκαλε 
odapey ort αληθησ ει. και τὴν οδον rov θυ 
em αλήθεια διδασκεισ “Kat OU μελει σοι περι ουδενοσ 
ov yap βλεπεισ eur προσωπον ayÜpenrov 
τι covdoxet- εξεστινδουναι κηνσον "καισαριηου" 17 
γνουσ δεο ine τὴν πονήριαν αὐτῶν evwey 18 
τι με πειραζεται ὕποκρειται ᾿ 
επιδειξατε μοι TO ννομισμα του κηνσου 19 
ot δεπροσήνεγκαν avro δηναριον 
λεγει avrow: o ine τινοσ ἢ ELKWY αντῇ 20 
και ἡ επιγραφη - λεγουσιν avre καισαροσ' 21 
Tore Neyet αντοισ - ATOOOTE TA KALTAPOT TO) καισαρι 
και τὰ του Ov Tw Ow" και ἀκουσαντεσ εθαυμασαν 22 
και αφεντεσ avrov ἀπηλθαν 
ἐν «xeu τὴ ἡμερα- προσηλθον avro 23 
σαδδουκαιοι A€yovrea * μὴ εἰναι αναστασιν 
και ετηρωτησαν avroy λεγοντεσ διδασκαλε 24 
(Fol. 746.) 


SEC MATTH 
—— ς-- = 
uidere discumbentes 
uidit ibi hominem ‘non indutum uestem 
nuptialem: et dicit ei 
amice. quomodo uenisti hoc 
non habens uestem nuptialem 
qui autem ommutuit 
tunc ait rex . ministris 
tollite eum pedibus et manibus 
et mittite eum ‘in tenebras exteriores 
ibi erit fletus 
et stridor dentium 
multi enim sunt uocati . pauci autem electi 
tunc euntes pharisaei | 
consilium ceperunt.quomodo eum captarent 
in uerbo et mittunt ad eum 
discipulos suos 
cum herodianis dicentes magister 
Scimus quia uerax es. et uiam dei 
in ueritate doces . et non pertinet ad te de nullo 
non enim respicis ad faciem hominum 
quid tibi bidetur licet dare censum. caesari aut no 
sciens autem ihs malitiam eorum dixit 
quid me teptatis hypocritae 
hostendite mihi denarium census 
qui autem obtulerunt ei denarium 
dicit eis ihs cuius imago haeo 
et inscriptio dicunt ei caesaris 
tunc dicit eis . reddite quae caesaris caesari 
et quae del deo et audientes mirati sunt 
et relicto eo abierunt 
in illa die accesserunt ad eum 
sadducaei dicentes . non esse resurrectionem 
Et interrogauerunt eum dicentes magister 
(Fol. 75 a.) 


Cap. XXII. 11—24. 


— — SS —À 
KAT ΜΑΘΘ 
— « ὦ. 


— 


μωῦσησ εἰπεν. eay ur arobayyn 


μὴ €xov τεκνα cya, ἐπιγαμβρευσει 
o ἀαδελῴοσ αντου" και αναστησει σπερμα 
Tw adeAdw avrov 
cay rap new erra adeAdot 
και O Tpwrog γαμησασ ετελευτησεν 


SEC 


--- .--΄ 


f Ej 


ATTH 61 


XXIL moyses dixit.si quis mortuus fuerit 
non habens filios αὖ nubat fratri suo 
et excitet sem 
fratri suo 

25 | Erantaputnosseptem fratres 


et primus nubens mortuus est 


και μὴ ἐεχων σπερμα- αφηκεν THY γυναικα avrov et non habens semen - dimisit uxorem suam 


To ἀαδελῴω avrov. ομοιωσ Kas o Óevrepoa 
Kat O TDLTOG - €wo TOV ἐπτα 
ὕστερον Se παντων -απεθανεν και ἡ γυνὴ 


εν Τὴ Gayao'Tag €, OVV τινοσ ἐστε 


TOV exTa γυνὴ παντεσ᾽ yap εσχον αὐτὴν 


26 fratri suo*similiter et secundus 

et tertius' usque ad septem 
27 nouissime autem omnium . mortua est et mulier 
28 in resurrectione ergo. cuius erit 


de septem uxor’ omnes enim habuerunt eam 


— — 
αποκρειθεισ δε o ine εἰπεν αντοισ «πλανασθαι 29 | respondens autem ibs dixit eis * erratis 


μὴ εἰδοτεσ raa *ypa.aa ‘nde τὴν δυναμιν Tov ὃν nescientes scripturas. nec uirtutem det 
εν yap Tn αναστασει 30 in resurrectione enim 
OVT€ γαμουσν OvT€ γαμειζονται neque nubunt neque nubuntur 


αλλα wo αγγελοι εν ovpayw εισιν 
wept O€ THT ἀαναστασεωσ των νεκρων 


ovx ἀνεγνωτετο ρηθεν ὕμειν 


sed sicut angeli in caelo sunt 
31 de resurrectione autem mortuorum 


non legistis . quod dictum est uobis 


taro rov θυ λεγοντοσ - yo eui o óc aBpaap 32 a do dicente. ego sum ds abraham 


—. — 
και 0 Oo ἴσακ. και o θσ iaxwB 
— 
ovk ἐστιν θσ vexpoy aÀAa (avrov 


και ακουσαντεσ ot oxXot ἐξεπλησσοντο 


ἐπι τὴ διδαχὴ avrov 
ond : Orde φαρεισαιοι ἀκουσαντεσ 
--οὔὡ 


ort ἐεφειμωσεν τουσ σαδδουκαιουσ 
συνήχθησαν er avrov 

καὶ ἐτηρωτησεν εἰσ εξ avrov νομικοσ 
πειραζων avroy και λεγων διδασκαλε 
WOU EVTOAN ev ro VOW μεγαλη 


— — ὡς 
Edy avro ino ayarynoe kv rov Oy cov 


et da isac- et ds iacob 
non est ds mortuorum sed uiuorum 
33 | Etaudientes turbae stupebant 
super doctrina eius 
34 | pharisaei autem audientes 
quia ommutuit sadducaeos 
congregati sunt ad eum 
35 et interrogauit unus ex eis - iurisperitus 
36 temptans eum et dicet dicens magister 
quod mandatum in lege maius 
37  diciteiihsdiligis dmn dm tuum 


ev ody τὴ καρδεια Cou’ καὶ ev ολη TH ψυχὴ σου in toto corde tuo. et in tota anima tua 


και ev oA τὴ διανοια σον" 


(Fol. 755.) 


et in tota mente tua 
(Fol. 76 a.) 


Ca». X XII. 24— 37. 


— --- - 
68 KAT 


αὐτὴ ἐστιν μεγαλη Kat por) evroAy 
Sevrepa δε ομοια ravry - ayarnoer 

TOV πλησιον σου wo σεαντον 

εν τανυταισ Taio Ova εντολαισ 


ολοσ ονομοσ κρεματαὶ καὶ οἱ Tpopyrat 
--Ἵ 
σκε: (ζυνηγμενων de rev φαρισαιων 
tau, a, 
επηρωτησεν avrovg o tno λεγων 
τι ὕμειν δοκεῖ περι TOV χρυ - Tw od ὕιοσ ἐστεν 
λεγουσιν avro Tov Saved 
co, 
Aeyet avroww πωσ ovv Saved ev πνι 
— 
καλεῖ avroy ky λεγων 
—, -- 
εἰπεν Ko To κω μον. καθου εκ δεξιων pov 
ewe ay Ow rovc εκθρουσ σου 
ὕποκατω των ποδων σου 
A A 
Ec ovv Saved’ ey πνι καλει avrov ky 


---τ 
σκς: πωσ ULOC GUTOU εστιν : και ουδεισ εδυνατο 
— 


αποκρειθήναι avro λογον 
ovde ετολμησεν τισ ar εκεινησ THO «pag 
ἐπερωτήσεαντον οὐκετι 
ext : Tore ἐλαλησεν o ‘no Tour οχλοισ 
και rows μαθηταισ avrov λεγων 
ext TH καθεδρασ μωῦσεωσ 
εκαθισαν ot ypappareo- και οἱ φαρισαιοι 
WAYTS OVV * TAVTA OUV OVA αν ειἰπωσιν ποιειτε 
και τηρεῖτε «κατα 6€ Ta ἐεργα avray 
μὴ ποιειτε" Xeyovaw yap καὶ ov ποιουσιν 
δεσμενουσιν yap: φορτεια βαρεα 
και αδυσβαστακτα καὶ επιτιθεασιν 
ἐπι Tove wove roy ανθρωπων 
avrot e ro δακτυλω avrov 
ov θελουσιν κεινησαι avra 


ome, 


oxy : παντα € TG. epya avrwy ποιουσιν 
— 


προσ To θεαθηναι τοισ ανθρωποισ 


(Fol. 76 5.) 


XXII 38 


39 


40 


42 


43 


45 
46 


XXIIL 1 


— 


E 


A— » — 


ef 


MATTH 
— — 


hoc est primum ‘et magnum mandatum 
secundum autem simile huic. diliges 
proximum tuum sicut teipsum 
in his duobus mandatis 
totum uerbum pendet. et prophetae 
collectis autem pharisaeis 
interrogauit eos ihs dicens 
quid uobis uidetur de xpo ‘cuius filius est 
dicunt ei dauid 
. e — 
ait illis quomodo ergo dauid in spu 
uocat eum dmn dicens 
— — . . 
dixit dns dmo meo. sede a dextris meis 
ponec ponam inimicos tuos 
suptus pedes tuos 
— — 
8i ergo dauid in spu uocat eum dmn 
quomodo filius eius- et nemo poterat 
respondere ei uerbum 
neque ausus est aliquis ex illa hora 
interrogare eum amplius 
ὅτ . 
tunc locutus est ihs turbis 
et discipulis suis dicens 
super cathedra moysi 
sederunt scribae - et pharisaei 
Omnia ergo quae dixerint uobis facite 
et custodite . secundum opera aute eorum 
nolite facere. dicunt enim et non faciunt 
alligant enim . onera grauia 
et non ferenda. et inponunt 
super umera hominum 
ipsi autem digito suo 
nolunt mouere ea 
omnia autem opera sua faciunt 
ut uideantur hominibus 


(Fol. 77 a.) 


Capp. XXII. 38—XXIIL. 5. 


πλατυνουσὶν yap ra. φυλακτήρια avrov XXIII. 
καὶ μεγαλυνουσιν τα κρασπεδα 

φιλουσιν δε τὴν τὴν πρωκλεισιαν 6 
εν rows Oeurvouw - καὶ rac πρωτοκαθεδριασ 

εν ταισ συναγωγαισ καὶ τουσ ασπασμουσ' 7 


ev Taio ayopaic kat καλεισθαι ὕπο roy ανθρωπων 


σκθ : pae pae. ὕμεισ δε μη κληθητεραββει 8 

εἰσ yap ἐστιν ὕμων o καθηγητησ 

παντεσ δεῦμεισ αδελῴοι ἐσται 

καὶ πάτερα μὴ καλεσητε ὕμειν emt THO γὴσ 9 

εἰσ yap ἐστιν οπατὴρ ὕμων 0 εν ονρανοισ 

μηδε κληθητεκ αι 10 

ort καθηγητησ ὕμων εἰσ ἐστιν o χρσ 

o μειζων ὕμων εσται ὕμων διακονοσ 11 
OX : ocrw Se ὕψωσει eavrov ταπεινωθησεται 12 
n και οστισ ταπεινωσει εαυτον ὕὑψωθησεται 
σλα :Ovas δεῦμειν "γραμματεισ και φαρισαιοι 13 

ὕποκριται" ore κλειεται 

τὴν βασιλειαν των ουρανων 

ενπροσθεν rov ανθρωπων 

ὕμεισ yap ovk εἰσερχεσθαι" οὐδε τουσ εἰσερχομενονσ 

αφειεται εἰσελθειν 
σλβ : Ovas ὕμειν γραμματεισ και φαρισαιοι 15 
n ὕποκριται. ort περιαγετε τὴν θαλασσαν 

καὶ τὴν ξηραν - iva, ποιήσηται 

eva, προσηλντον " καὶ οταν γενηται 

TOLELT € αὐτον"ὕιον γεεννὴσ 

διπλοτερον ὕμων 
σλγ :Ovaa ὕμειν οδηγοι τυφλοι Aeyovrea τό 


OC αν ομοσὴ εν TW Vau οὐδεν ἐστιν 
og Say ομοσή €v τω χρυσὼω του νάου 
οφειλει᾿ μωροι και τνφλοι 17 


τισ yap μειζω ἐστιν 0 χρυσοσ 7 οναοσ 
(Fol. 75 δ.) 


SEC MATTH 69 
—— — -ς 
dilatant enim phylacteria sua 

et amplificant fimbrias 

amant autem primos discubitus 

in cenis et primas cathedras 

in synagogis et salutationes 

in foros et uocari ab hominibus 

magister magister. uos autem nolite uocari magistri 
unus est enim uester doctor 

omnes autem uos fratres estis 

et patrem ne uocaueritis uobis super terram 

unus est enim pater uester qui in caelis 

nec uocemini doctores 


. — 
quia doctor uester est xps 


maior uester ‘erit uester minister 


quicumque autem exaltauerit se‘ humiliauitar 


et quicumque humiliauerit se ‘exaltauitur 


uae autem uobis. scribae et pharisaei 


hypocritae .quoniam cluditis 


regnum caelorum 


coram hominibus 


uos autem non introitis . nec introeuntes 


sinitis introire 


. uae uobis scribae et pharisaei 


hypocritae. quia circumitis mare 

et haridam . ut faciatis 

unum proselytum ‘et cum factus fuerit 
facitis eum. filium gehennae 


duplum quam uos 


uae uobis duces caeci dicentes 


quicumque iurauerit in templo * nihil est 
qui autem iurauerit in auro templi 


deuitor est - stulti et caeci 


quis enim maior est. aurum aut emplum 


(Fol. 78 a.) 


Car. XXIII. 5—17. 


70 KAT 


οαγιασασ TOV χρυσὸν XXII 
Kat 07 ay ομοσὴ ev Tw θυσιαστηριω οὐδὲν ἐστιν 18 
oc Say οβμοσὴ ἐν τω δωρω Tw exavw avTov 
operer τυφλοι τι yap pet 19 
To Swpov ἡ ro θυσιαστηριον 
To αγιαζον To Swpov 
O ovv ομοσασ ev τω θυσιαστηριω ομννει ev ave 10 
και €V πασει TOT ἐπανω GUTOV 
και οομοσασ᾽ εν TW γαω ομννει εν αυτω 21 
και €y TW κατοικήσαντι αντον 
και ο ὁομοσασ €V τω ουρανω 22 
ομννει ev τω θρονω του bv 
και εν Tw καθημενω ἐπανω avrov 
—, 
σλὸ : Ουαι ὕμειν γραμματεισ και φαρισαιο 23 
ὕποκριται" ort αποδεκατουτε ro 10voguoy 


και ro ayzÜoy - kat To κυμεινον 


και αφηκατετα Bapvrepa Tov νομου 
τὴν κρισιν" και TO ἐλεοσ᾽ καὶ τὴν πιστιν 
Tavra εδει ποιησαι 
-- 
ode : κακεινα μὴ αφιεναι : οδηγοι τυφλοι 24 
— 


διυλιζοντεσ Tov κωνωπα 
τον δε καμηλον καταπεινοντεσ' 
σὰς Ova: ὕμειν γραμματεισ και φαρισαιοι ὕποκριται 15 
ort καθαριζεται To ἐξω Tov ποτήριου 
και τησ παροψιδοσ' 'ἐσωθεν de γεμουσιν 
αρπαγὴσ και ἀκρασειασ 
φαρισαιε rvÀe: καθαρισον πρωτὸον . 26 
TO ἐντοσ του ποτήριον 
ἵνα γενηται καὶ τὸ ewer avrov καθαρον 
ont Ova« ὕμειν γραμματεισ καὶ φαρισαιοι 27 
B ὕποκριται" ort παρομοιαζετε 
ταφοισ κεκονιαμενοισ 


εξωθεν οταῴφοσ φαινετε ὡραιοσ 


(Fol. 78 5.) 


=~ 


qui sanctificauit aurum 
Et qui iurauerit in altare. nihil est 
qui autem iurauerit in dono. quod est super eum 
debet - caeci quid enim est maius 
donum aut altare 
quod sanctificat donum 
qui ergo iurauerit in altare. ratin eo 
et in omnibus quae super eum 
et qui iurauerit in templo. iurat in eo 
etinh 
et qui iurauerit in caelo 
iurat in sede del 
et qui sedet 


uae uobis scribae et farisael 


nti eum 


upra eum 


hypocritae quoniam decimatis mentam 
et anethum . et cyminum- 
et reliquistis - crauiora legis 
iudicium ‘et misericordiam . et fidem 
haec autem oportuit facere 
et illa non omittere: duces caeci 
liquantes culicem 
camellum autem deuorantes 
uae uobis scribae et pharisaei hypocritae 
quia mundatis quod foras est calicis 
et parapsidis - intus autem plena sunt 
rapinae et intemperantiae 
phariseae cecae munda primum 
quod intus est calicis 
ut fiat et quod foras est mundum 
uae uobis scribae. et pharisaei 
hypocritae quoniam similatis 
monumentis dealbatis 


& foris monumentum paretur decorum 
(Fol. 79 a.) 


Cap. XXIII. 17—27. 


ἐσωθεν Se γεμι oo rewy νεκρων XXIIL 
και ago ακαθαρσειασ - οντωσ Kat ὕμεισ 28 
εξωθεν μεν φενεσθαι ror ανθρωποισ δικαιοι 
ἐσωθεν δε erat μεστοι ὕποκρισεωσ' 


καὶ ανομειασ 


“με. 
ody: Ovat ὕμειν γραμματεισ και φαρισαιοι 29 
um, 


— 
c A0 
— 


ὕποκριται ort οἰκοδομειτε 


τουσ ταφουσ των προφητων᾽ καὶ κοσμειτε 
τα μνημεῖα των δικαίων και λεγεται 30 
ει ἡμεθα ev ταισ ἡμεραισ΄- των πατερων pu 
ov ay ἡμεθα avrov κοινωνοι 
εν To αιἰματι TOY προφητων 
WOTE μαρτυρεῖτε EAUTOLT + OTL ὕιοι ἐστε 31 
των φονευσαντων rovo προφητασ 
: και ὕμεισ επληρωσατε 32 
TO μετρον Toy πατέρων ὕμων 
οφεισ᾽" γεννηματα εχνιδων 33 
T0 φυγεται" απὸ THT κρισεωσ TH γεεννὴσ 
: δια Tovro ἴδου αποστελω προφητασ καὶ σοφουσ 34 
καὶ ypoppareo και εξ αντων ATOKTELVELTE 
και στανρωσεται. καὶ διωξεται 
απὸ πολεωσ εἰσ πολιν -οπωσ en εφυμασ͵ 35 
παν aj, δικαιον 
εἐχχυννομενον emt ria yug 
απὸ αἱματοσ αβελ rov Suxatov 
ews αἱματοσ ζαχαριου.ὕιον βαραχειου 
ον epovevorare- μεταξὺ του yaov 
Kat Tov θυσιαστήριον: αμην Aeyw ὕμειν 36 


ἥξει ravra. παντα" ἐπὶ τὴν γενεαν ταντὴν 


cepa :iepova'aA np. Ἱερουσαλὴμ." αποκτεινουσα 37 
——, 


Tove προφητασ - καιλιθοβολουσατουσ απεσταλμενουσ 
προσ σε: ποσακεισ ἡθελησα 


ετισυναγαγειν Τὰ TEKVG σὸν 


(Fol. 79 5.) 


SEC MATTH 71 
— ee ee — 


intus autem est plenum ossib . mortuorum 
et totius inmunditiae -ita et uos 

a foris quidem paretis hominibus iusti 

ab intus autem estis pleni hypocrisi 


et iniquitate 


uae uobis scribae et pharisaei 


ypocritae - quoniam aedificatis 

sepulcra prophetarum . et urnatis 
monumenta . justorum et dicitis 

8i fuissemus in diebus. patrum nostrorum 
numquam essemus eorum socii 


in sanguine prophetarum 


itaque testes estis uobis quia fili estis 


qui occiderunt prophetas 

et uos inplestis 

mensuram patrum uestrorum 
Berpentes. generatio uiperarum 


quomodo fugietis de iudicio gehennae 


propter hoc ecce mitto prophetas et sapientes 


et scribas: et ex his occidetis 

et crucifigetis - et persequemini 

de civitate in civitate ‘ut ueniat super uos 
omnis sanguis iustus 

quod effunditur super terram 

a sanguine abel iusti 

usquae ad sanguinem zacchariae :fili barachie 
quem occidistis : inter templum 

et altare : amen dico uobis 


uenient omnia hae-.super generatione ista 


hierusalem hierusalem - quae interficis 


prophetas. et lapidas missos 
ad te -quotiens uolui 
congregare filios tuos 

(Fol. 8o a.) 


Cap. XXIII. 27—37. 


—_——-. = — 
72 KAT MA@@AION 
— 


ov Τροπονορνισ €T LO UVG.yet - TG. VOO'O €LO, QUrqa XXIII. 


ὕπο rac Trepvyaa ‘Kat ovk nOeAnoare 
Sov adhere ὕμειν “οοιἰκοσ μων ερημοσ' 
λεγω yap ὕμειν᾽οτι ov μὴ p.e Ore απαρτι 
«wo αν eumyre- εὐυλογήημενοσ o ἐερχομενοσ' 
εν ονοματι ϑυ 
[σμβ] “καὶ ἐξελθων o ine απὸ TOV L€pov ἐπορεύετο 
και προσηλθον ot μαθηται avrov 
εἐπιδειξαι avro: τασ οἰκοδομασ rov iepov 
O δεαποκρειθεισ εἰπεν avrow 
βλεπετεπαντα ravra : αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
ort ον μη αφεθη woe λιθοσ επι λιθον 
oo ov καταλυθήσεται 
P καθημένου 9« avrov ert Tov opova 
B τῶν ἐλεων προσῆλθον avro ot μαθηται 
κατ Otay λεγοντεσ' 
εἰπεημειν Tore ravra εσται 
και τι τὸ σήμειον THT παρουσιασ σον 
και THO συντελειασ TOV αἰωνοσ 
και αποκριθεισ o - εἰπεν avrour 
βλεπεται μη Tw ὕμασ πλανηση 
πολλοι yap ελευσονται 
ert Tw ονοματι μου Aeyovreo " Eyw εἰμί o xpo 
καὶ πολλουσ πλανησουσιν 
μελλεται δε akovew πολεμουσ 
και akoag πολεμων "ορατε μὴ θροεισθαι 
δει yap γενεσθαι. αλλ ουπω ἐστιν το τελοσ' 
Εγερθησεται yap εθνοσ em εθνοσ 
και βασιλεια ext βαδιλειαν - και ἐσονται λειμοι 
καὶ σεισμοι κατα τοπουσ 
avra δεταντα ἀρχὴ οδυνων 
cu :rore παραδωσουσιν ὕμασ ew θλειψειν 


και αποκτεινουσὶν ὕμασ - και ἐσεσθαι μεισονμε 
vot 


(Fol. 8o 5.) 


38 


39 


XXIV. 1 


SEC MATTH 
—— — — 
sicut gallina congregat pullos suos 
sub alas suas et noluistis 
ecce demittetur uobis: domus uestra deserta 
dico enim uobis ‘quia non uidebitis me amodo 
donec dicatis. benedictus qui uenit 
in nomine dei 
Et exiens ihs de templo  abiebat 
et accesserunt discipuli eius 
ostendere ei fabricas templi 
qui autem respondens dixit eis 
uidetis haec omnia. amen dico uobis 
quia non relinquetur hic. lapis super lapidem 
qui non destruetur 
sedente autem eo super montem 
oliueti - accesserunt ad eum discipuli 
seorsum dicentes 
dic nobis quando erunt 
et quod signum aduentus tui 
et consummationes saeculi 
Et respondens ihs dixit eis 
uidete ne qui uos seducat 
multi enim uenient 
in nomine meo dicentes- ego sum xps 
et multos seducent 
incipietis autem audire bella 
et opiniones bellorum :uidete nolite turbari 
oportet enim fieri - sed necdum est finis 
Exsurget enim gens super gentem 
et regnum supra regnum et erunt fames 
et terrae motus per loca 
omnia autem haec initia dolorum 
tunc tradent uos in angustiis 
et occident uos: et eritis odibiles 


(Fol. 81a.) 


Carp, X XIII. 37—XXIV. 9. 


SO — 
KAT MA@@AION 


ὕπο παντων εθνων δια To ονομα μον XXIV. 
ope : KQL TOTE σκαν ovrat πολλοι 10 
Kat αλληλονσ παραδωσουσιν 
καὶ μεισήσουσιν ἀλληλουσ “καὶ πολλος 11 
ψευδοπροφηται εξεγερθησονται 
kat πλανησουσιν πολλουσ 
και δια ro πληθυναι τὴν ανομειαν 12 
ψυγησεται ἡ a-yoar των πολλων 
o δε ὕπομεινασ' εἰσ τελοσ rj 
ope : ovrog σωθησεται : καὶ κηρυχθησεται r4 
TO εὐαγγελιον rovro Tye βασιλειασ 
ev oAn TH οικουμενὴ 
εἰσ μαρτυριον πασιν τοισ εθνεσιν 
καὶ rore ξει το τελοσ 
out : Ὅταν ovy egre r5 
To βδελυγμα THE ἐρημωσεωσ᾽ 
To prBey δια δανιηλον. rov προφητου 
ἐστωσ εν TOT G-yU0 - O AVAYELYWTKWY Youre 
opm : τότε οἱ ἐν TH ἴουδαια φευγετωσαν ew Τα ορὴ τό 
^— οδεεπιτου δωματοσ - μη καταβατω 17 
αραι τι εκ THO OLKELAT + καὶ O €V TW AYPW 18 
p» επιστρεψατω οπισω - 
apat To ειματειον αντου 
σμθ : Ova4 δεταισ «v γαστρι ἐχουσαισ 19 | 


και ταισ θηλαζομεναισ - ev exewaoy TAL ἡμέραισ 
προσευχεσθαι δε. iva. μὴ γενηται ἡ φυγὴ juo 
χειμωνοσ μηδεσαββατου 

c 

qva Ἔσται yap τοτεθλειψισ peyary 


Ota οὐκ €yever Ὁ. aT ἀρχὴσ κοσμου 


[9 


εωσ νυν οὐδε μη γενοιτο 
σνβ : καὶ εἰ μὴ εκολοβωθησαν .αιμεραι ἐκεῖναι 
ovx ay εσωθη πασα capt 
δια be rove exAexrove κολοβωθησονται 
(Fol. 81 5.) 


2c 


22 


SEC MATTH 73 
— — -.-ς.ἥ — 


omnibus gentibus:propter nomen meum 
et tunc scandalizabuntur multi 
et inuicem tradent 
et odient alterutrum ‘et multi 
pseudoprophetae exsurgent 
et seducent multos 
et quia repleta est iniquitas 
refrigescet caritas multorum 
qui autem sustinuerit in finem 
hicliberabitur : Et praedicabitur 
euangelium hoc regni 
in toto mundo 
in testimonium omnibus gentibus 
et tunc ueniet finis 
cum ergo uideritis 
abominationem desolationis 
quod dictum est per danielum prophetam 
stans in loco sancto qui legit intellegat 
tunc qui in iudaea- fugiat in montibus 
qui autem super tectum ‘non descendat 
tollere aliquid de domo ‘et quiin agro 
non conuertatur retro 
tollere tunicam suam 
iiae autem in utero habentibus 
et lactantibus in illis diebus 
orate autem ‘ut non fiat fuga uestra 
hieme nec sabbato 
Erit enim tunc tribulatio magna 
qualis non fuit. ab initio saeculi 
usque nunc ‘nec fiet 
Et nisi breuiati essent dies illi 
non salbata esset omnis caro 
propter electos autem breuiabuntur 
(Fol. 82 a-) 


Cap. XXIV, 9—221. 


10 


[3 [3! 


[3! 


ove : 


:at ἡμέραι εκειναι : TOTE €aY TLC ὕμειν εἰπὴ XXIV. 23 


ἴδου woe o χρσ 1] ἐκει" μὴ πιστευσηται 


: ἐγερθησονται yap ψευδοχρειστοι 24 


και ψευδοπροφηται" και δωσουσιν σημεια 
μεγαλα και τερατα.- wore πλανηθηναι 


εἰ δυνατον και τουσ εκλεκτουσ 


: ἴδου προειρηκα ὕμειν : cay ovy εἰπωσιν ὕμειν 25, 26 
ἴδου ev Ty ἐερημω ἐστιν μὴ ἐξελθηται 
iov ev Tour ταμειοισ. μη πιστευσηται 
:ὡσπερ yap ἡ ἀστραπὴ εἐξερχεται απο ανατολων 27 
και φαινει eoo δυσμων᾽ ουτωσ εσται ἡ παρουσεια 
: TOv ὕιου τον ανθρωπου : οπου αν ἡτοπτωμα 28 
exe, συναχθησονται οι aerot 
: Ευθεωσ δε μετα την θλειψειν 29 


των ἡμέρων εκεινων - o ἡλιοσ σκοτισθησεται 

και ἡ σελήνη ov duce T0 φεγγοσ avrqo 

καιοι ἀστερεσ πεσουνται EK του ουρανου 

και at δυναμεισ των ουρανων σαλενθησονται 

και rore φανήσεται To σημειον 30 
Tov ὕιου τον ανθρωπου - Tov εν ουραγοισ 

και κοψονται ror€ - πασαι at φυλαι THT γησ 

καὶ οψονται τον vuv τον avOpunrov Epxopevo 

emt TOV γεφελων του ovpavov 

μετα δυναμεωσ πολλησ και δοξησ 

Kat ἀποστελει τουσ αγγελουσ avrov 31 
pera σαλπιγγοσ και φωνησ μεγαλησ 

και επισυναξουσιν .τουσ ἐεκλεκτουσ G.UTOV 

εκ των τεσσαρων ἀνεμων 

απὸ AKpwy ουρανων 


€WO GKDOV αντῶν 


apxoj.evov Se rovrov γεινεσθαι 


αναβλεψατε καὶ erapare 
Tac κεφαλασ ὕμων .διοτι εγγειζει 
(Fol. 82 5.) 


SEO MATTH 
“τ -- -- 

dies illi etunc si quis dixerit uobis 
ecce hic xps aut illic nolite credere 
exsurgent enim pseudoxpl 
et pseudoprofetae- et dabunt signa 
magna et prodigia. ut seducantur 
si possibile est et electos 

_ ecce praedixi uobis. si ergo dixerit uobis 
ecce in deserto est - nolite exire 
ecce in cubiculo. nolite credere 

sicut enim scoriscatio exit.ab oriente 
et lucet usque in orientem: ita erit aduentus 
fili hominis ubicumque fuerit daner 
ibi congregabuntur aquilae 

continuo autem postribulationem 
dierum illorum . sol obscurabitur 
et luna non dabit lumen suum 
et stellae cadent de caelo 
et uirtutes caeli - mouebuntur 
et tunc parebit signum 
fili hominis. qui in caelo est 
et plangebunt tunc: omnes tribus terrae 
et uidebunt filium hominis uenientem 
super nubes caeli 
cum uirtute magna et gloria 
et mittet angelos suos 
cum tuba et uoce magna 
et concolligent electos eius 
a quattuor uentis 
ab extremo caelorum 


usque ad summum eorum 


incipientibus autem his fieri 


respicite et leuate 
capita uestra. quia adpropiat 
(Fol. 83 a.) 


Cap. XXIV. 21— 31. 


ἢ απολυτρωσεισ ὕμων XXIV. 

απὸ Se rgo συκὴησ μαθεται τὴν παραβολην 
oray ἤδη o κλαδοσ aurne -γενηται αἀπαλοσ 
καὶ Ta φυλλα ἐκφνη γεινωσκεται ort 
€vyuc ἐστιν το Üepoa 'οντωσ και ὕμεισ 33 


οταν ἴδητεταυτα παντα. YELVWOKETE ort 


€vyvc ἐστιν emt θυραισ 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὕμειν - ort ov μὴ παρελθη 


3] γενεα αντὴ - €Wo ay ταυτα παντα γένηται 


34 


O ovpavoc και ἡ yn παρελευσεται 35 


ot 6€ Aoyot μου ov μη παρελθωσιν 


—, _ 
σξ swept δε Tho ἡμερασ εκεινησ και wpac οὐυδεισοιδε 36. 


ovde οἱ αγγελοι των ουρανων οὐδε οὕιοσ 


€t μὴ οπατηρμονοσ' ὡσπεργαραιημεραιτοννωε 37 


OUTWO EOTAL Καὶ ἢ “αρονυσεία TOU ὕιου τον QV Ópesov 


ofa : Ὥσπερ yap ἡσαν ev ταισ ἡμεραισ εκειναισ 38 
po Tov κατακλυσμου -τρωγοντεσ και πεινοντεσ 
και γαμουντεσ και γαμειζοντεσ 
αχρει THO ἡμερασ "εἰσηλθεν voe eur THY κειβωτο 
και οὐκ εγνωσαν ews ἢλθεν o κατακλυσμοσ 39 


καὶ ἡρεν TAYTAT * ονυτωσ ETTAL ἢ παρουσεια 
TOV Viov του ανθρωπου 
σὲβ : Tore 8vo ἐσονται ev Tw aypw- εἰσ παραλαμβάνεται 40 
και εἰσ αφειεται 
δυο αληθουσαι ev τω μυλωνι 41 
peu. παραλαμβανεται "και pera αφειεται 
δυο ἐπὶ κλεινησ jeu “εἰσ παραλαμβανεται 


— 
g . KGQL€LO ADLETAL : Op€uTE OUV 
wey ? Yeryop 


42 
ort ουκ οἰδαται" ποια ἡμέρα O Ko. ὕμων epxerat 
sé : €xewo δε yervwoxeras ort εἰ det 43 
o οἰκοδεσποτησ Trou. φνλακὴ o κλεπτὴσ epxerei 
εἐγρηγορησεν ay - και ovk ἡασεν διορυχθηναι 
τὴν οἰκειαν avrov "δια Tovro και ὕμεισ 44 


(Fol. 835.) 


32 , 


SEC MATTH 75 
redemptio uestra 
a fico autem discite parabolam 


cum iam ramus eius factus fuerit mollis 
et folia germinant ‘cognoscitis quia _ 
prope est aestas ita et uos 
cum uideritis haec omnia scitote quoniam 
prope est ad ianuas 
amen dico uobis quia non praeteribit 
generatio haec:donec haec omnia fiant 
caelum et terra transient 
berba autem mea non transient _ 
de die autem illo. et hora nemo scit 
nec angeli caelorum - nec filius 
nisi pater solus. sicut enim dies noe 
ita erit aduentus fili hominis 
Sicut enim erant in diebus illis 
ante dilubium manducantes et bibentes 
nubentes et nuptiis tradentes 
usque in eum diem: quo introiit noe in arcam 
et nescierunt. donec uenit diluuium 
et tulit omnes. ita erit aduentus 
fili hominis 
tunc duo erunt in agro. unus adsumetur 
et unus relinquetur 
duae molentes in pistrino 
una adsumetur : et una relinquetur 
duo in lecto: unus adsumetur 
et unus relinquetur ‘vigilate ergo 
quia nescitis: quo die dm uester uenturus est 
illud autem scitote quia si sciret 
paterfamilias qua uigilia fur ueniret 
uigilaret utique. et non demisisset perforari 
domum suam ideo et uos 
(Fol. 84 a.) 


Car. XXIV. 31— 44. 


76 


yeweo Oar erorpor- ort ἡ ov δοκειται opa. XXIV. 


o Utoc τον ανθρωπου epxerat 


: τισ yap ἐστιν οππιστοσ δουλοσ᾽ kat φρονιμοσ͵ 45 


— 
ov κατεστησεν o xa επι THO θεραπειασ avrov 


δουναι avrowr τὴν Tpodyy ἐν καιρω 


--- — 
ofs Ἱμακαριοσ o δουλοσ execyoa - oy ελθων o kc avTov 46 
— 


a 


ευρήσει OVTWO ποιουντα 


Αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν ort em πασιν 47 


TOT ὕπαρχουσ ἐν avrov καταθτηήσει αὐτὸν 


:Eay δε evry o κακοσ δουλοσ εκεινοσ 48 


εν Ty καρδια avrov χρονιζι μου o xo eBay 
Kat αρξηται τυπτειν Tove συνδουλουσ avTOV 49 
εσθιη δε και ew μετα των μεθυοντων 
ἥξειο Ko Tov δουλου ἐκεινοῦ εν ἡμέρα 50 
ἢ ov προσδοκα και εν wpa ἡ ov γεινωσκει 
και διχοτομήσει avroy * καὶ To μεροσ avrov θήσει §1 
μετα των ὕποκριτων - exer εσται o κλανθμοσ 
και ο βρυγμοσ των οδοντων 
: rore ομοιωθήσεται "ἡ βασιλεια των ονρανων XXV. 1 
δεκα παρθενοισ .αιτινεσ λαβουσαι 
Tac λαμπαδασ eavrwv 
εἐξηλθον εἰσ ἀπαντησιν του νυμφιου 
καὶ THO νυμφησ 
πεντε δε εξ avrov σαν μωραι 2 
καὶ πεντε φρονιμοι 
At ovv μωραι λαβουσαι "τασ λαμπαδασαυτων 3 
ουκ ἐλαβον μεθ eavruv ελαιον 
ἐν TOG αγγειοισ avra - αἱ δε φρονιμοι 4 
ἐλαβὸον ελεον εν row αγγειοισ 
μέτα Toy λαμπαδων avrov 
χρονιζοντοσ δετου νυμφιον 
ενυσταξαν πασαι και exabevdov 


μεσὴσ Se vukroa - κραυγὴ γεγονεν 
(Fol. 84 δ.) 


ΤᾺ 


ON 


— 


SEC MATTH 


estote parati quia qua non speratis hora 
filius hominis ueniet 

quis enim est feidelis seruus et sapieus 
quem constituit dms ‘super familiam suam 
dare eis cibaria in tempore 

beatus serbusille.quem ueniens dms eius 
inuenerit ita facientem 

amen dico uobis quia super omnia 
bona sua constituet eum 

si autem dixerit malus ille seruus 
in corde suo. tardat dms meus uenire 
et incipiat caedere conseruos suos 
manducet autem et bibat cum ebriosis 
ueniet dms serui illius in die 
qua non sperat et hora qua nescit 
et diuidet eum . et partem eius ponet 
cum hypocritis ibi erit fletus 
et stridor dentium 
tunc similabitur regnum caelorum 
decem uirginibus:quae acceperunt 
lampadas suas 
et exierunt in obuiam sponsi 
et sponsae 
quinque autem ex his erant stultae 
et quinque sapientes 

stultae ergo accipientes - lampadas suas 
non acceperunt secum oleum 
in uasis suis - sapientes autem 
acceperunt oleum in uasis suis 
cum lampadibus suis 

tardante autem sponso 
dormitauerunt omnes. et dormiebant 
mediautem nocte. clamor factus est 

(Fol. 85 a.) 


Capp. XXIV. 44—XXV. 6. 


i&ov o vu.duoc εἐξερχεσαι εἰσ arayrgoiy avrov XXV. ! 


more ἤγερθησαν πασαι at παρθενοι 
και εκοσμῆσαν .τασ λαμπαδασ avrov 
αι δε μωραι tao φρονιμοισ εἰπὸν 
δοτεημειν ex του ἐελεον ὕμων 
ort at λαμπαδεσ ἡμων ἔβεννυνται 
απεκριθησαν δε αι φρονιμοι λεγουσαι 
μὴ ToT€ OV μὴ αρκεσει pay και ὕμειν 
πορενεσθαι μαλλον "προσ rove πωλουντασ 
και ἀγορασαται εαυταισ 
Ewe ὕπαγουσιν ἀγορασαι λθεν ονυμφιοσ 
και αἱ ἐετοιμοι εἰσηλθον per avrov 


εἰσ Tove yaj.ova + και εκλισθη ἡ θυρα 


7 


10 


ὕστερον Se nAOov- at λοιπαι παρθενοι λέγουσαι 11 


ey, ey, 
κε κε avoifov ἡμειν 


O δεάποκριθεισ ειπεν -αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
ovk oda iar : γρηγορειται ovy 


οτι οὐκ ovdare τὴν ἡμέραν *ovÓe THY ὡραν 


: ὡσπερ ανθρωποσ αποδημων 


ἐκαλεσεν Tova ἴδιουσ δουλουσ 


και παρεδωκεν avrour* τα ὕπαρχοντα avrov 


— 
: Kat ὦ μεν ἐδωκεν : e: TaÀavra 


ω be B-o Se eva: exaaro 
κατα τὴν δυναμιν avrov 
και απεδημησεν ευθεωσ -πορενθεισ δε 
o ra T€vr€ τάλαντα λαβων 
Tpryacao εν avrou ‘kat ἐκερδησεν 
Ομοιωσ xa: o ra Svo raAayra λαβων 
και avrog ἐκερδησεν αλλα δυο 
O 8e ro ev λαβων..ὠρυξεν ev τὴ yn 
xat ἐκρυψεν ro apyuptoy του KV avrov 


μετα δεπολυν ypovoy 


(Fol. 85.) 


12 


16 


18 


19 


fm 


C MATTH 


eccesponsus - exite obuiam ei 
tunc surgunt omnes uirgines 
et aptauerunt lampadas suas 
stultae autem sapientibus dixerunt 
date nobis de oleo uestro 
quia lampadae nostrae extinguntur 
responderunt autem sapientes dicentes 
ne quando non sufficiat nobis et uobis 
ite potius ad uendentes 


et emite uobis 


cum uadunt emere . uenit sponsus 


et quae paratae erant introierunt cum eo 


ad nuptias. et clusa est ianua 


nouissime uenerunt. reliquae uirgines dicetes 


Su, 0 — 
dme dme aperi nobis 


qui autem respondens dixit.amen dico uobis 


nescio uos * uigilate ergo 
quoniam nescitis dienfÉnec horam 
sicut homo peregre profectus 
uocauit seruos suos 
et tradidit eis substantiam suam 
et cuidam quidem dedit -u-talanta 
cuidam duo cuidam unum. unicuique 
secundum uirtutem suam 
et profectus est continuo pergens autem 
qui quinque talenta accepit 
operatus est in eis. et lucratus est 
alia quinque talenta 
similiter et qui duo talanta accepit 
et ipse lucratus est alia duo 
qui autem unum acceperat fodit in terra 
et abscondit argentum dmi sui 
post multum autem tempus 
(Fol. 86 a.) 


Cap. XXV. 6—19. 


77 


78 


ἐρχεται ὁ xo των δουλων εκεινων 

και συνερει λογον μετ avrov 
Kat προσελθων 

o τα πεντεταλαντα λαβων 

προσήνεγκεν αλλα Tevre TaAavra λεγων ke 

πεντε τάλαντα μοι παρεδωκασ 

eie αλλα πεντε ταλαντα. επεκερδησα 
Εφηαυτωο Ko avrov. εὖ δουλε αγαθε και πιστε 

ἐπι er ολιγα no πιστοσ 

emt πολλων σε καταστήσω 

εισελθε εἰσ τὴν χαραν του κυ σου 
προσελθὼων δε 

και o Ta δυο ταλαντα λαβὼν evrev 

xe δυο ταλαντα μοι παρεδωκεσ 

tdov αλλα δυο ταλαντα ἐπεκερδησα 
Edy avro o Ko avrov. ev δουλε αγαθε και πιστε 

ert er ολιγα no πιστοσ 

emt πολλων σε καταστήσω 

εισελθε eur την χαραν TOV κυ σου 
προσελθων δε . 

o To eva ταλαντον eAnduc eurev 

Ke eyvev ort oxAnpoo εἰ ανθρωποσ 

θεριζων οπου ovk ἐσπειρασ 

και συνάγων oov ov διεσκορπισασ 

και φοβηθεισ ἀπηλθον 

και ἐεκρυψα ro ταλαντον Gov εν τὴ yy 

εἰδον €xeur τὸ σὸν 
αποκριθεισ δεο KO αυτου εἰπεν avro 

movnpe δουλε και oxvnpe 

ndewo ort θεριζω οπου ovk ἐσπειρα 

και συναγω obey ov διεσκορπισα 

εδει ovv σε βαλειν ro ἀργνριον μον 

row τραπεζειταισ᾽ καὶ ελθων eyo 


(Fol. 865.) 


20 


21 


22 


24 


25 


27 


— 


SE 


heen) 


MATTH 
= — 


sas 


uenit dms seruorum illorum 
et tollit rationem cum eis 
Et accedens 
qui quinque acceperat talanta 
obtulit alia quinque talanta dicens dme 
quinque talanta mihi tradidisti 
ecce alia quinque talanta superlucratus sum 
ait illi dms suus.eu serue bone et fidelis 
quia in modicis fuisti fidelis 
super multa te constituam 
intra in gaudium dmi tui 
accedens autem 
et qui duo talanta acceperat dixit 
dme duo talanta mihi tradidisti 
ecce alia duo talanta superlucratus sum 
ait illi dms suus. eu serue bone et fidelis 
quia in modicis fuisti fidelis 
super multa te constituam 
intrain gaudium dmi tui 
accedens autem 
qui unum talantum acceperat dixit 
dme cognoui - quia durus es homo 
metens ubi non seminasti 
et congregans ubi non sparsisti 
et timens abii. 
et abscondi talantum tuum in terra 
ecce habes quod tuum 
respondens autem dms eius dixit ei 
nequa serue et piger 
sciebas quia meto ubi non seminaui 
et congrego ubi non disparsi 
oportebat ergo te. mittere argentum meum 


nummullariis. et ueniens ego 
(Fol. 87 a.) 


Cap. XXV. 19--27. 


—Á 
coa, 
— 


A 
c . 
ie 


EKOPLO ALYY ay TO ἐμον συν TOKW 
aparat ovy at avrov To TaAavroy 


και Sore To €xovrt Ta πεντε ταλαντα 


: Tw yap exovrt δοθησεται. και περισσευσεται 


Tov δε μὴ exovroa 
kat o exe, αρθησεται απ avrov 


: kat Tov axpecoy SovAov βαλεται efw 


XXV. 


28 


29 


30 


εισ TO GKOTOG TO εξωτερον - EXEL edat o κλαυθμοσ 


και o βρνγμοσ rov οδοντων 


Οταν δε ελθη o ὕιοσ του ανθρωπου 


41 


εν τη δοξη avrov. και παντεσ οι αγγελοι μετ avrov 


rore καθισει επι Üpovov δοξησ avrov 
και συναχθησονται 
ἐνπροσθεν avrov ravra. ra. εθνη 
και αφοριει avrove απὸ αλληλων 
ὡσπερ o ποιμὴν -αφορειζει τα προβατα 
απο των εριφων. και στήσει τα προβατα 
ex δεξιων avrov τα δε ἐριφεια ef εὐωνυμὼ 
Tore epet o βασιλευσ᾽ τοισ «x δεξιων avrov 
Sevre ot ευλογήμενοι rov πατροσ μου 
κληρονομήσατε 
τὴν ἡτοιμασμενὴν ὕμειν βασιλειαν 
απο καταβολησ κοσμου 
Επεινασα γαρ. και εδωκατε μοι φαγειν 
εδιψησα και εποτεισαται με 
ξενοσ ἡμὴν᾽᾿ καὶ συνήγαγεται με 
γύυμνοσ. και περιεβαλεται με 
σθενησα. και επεσκεψασθαι με 
εν φυλακὴ ἡμὴν - καὶ ἤλθατεπροσ με 


Tore αποκριθησονται avro - ot δικαιοι λεγοντεσ 


ay 
K€ TOTE OE ειἰδομεν πεινῶντα 


και εθρεψαμεν - 7 δειψωντα και erorwraquev 


ποτε δε ειδομεν σε ξενον 


(Fol. 87 5.) 


34 


33 


34 


35 


.36 


37 


38 


accepissem utique quod meum est- cum usura 


tollite ergo ab eo talantum 


et date habenti quinque talenta 
habenti enim dabitur: et habundabit | | 
non habentis autem 

et quod habet tolletur ab eo 

et inutilem seruum mittite foras 

in tenebras exteriores - ibi erit fletus 


et stridor dentium 


cum autem uenerit filius hominis 


in gloria sua ‘et omnes angeli cum eo 
tunc sedebit. super sedem gloriae suae 
et congregabuntur 

ante eum omnes gentes 

et segregat eos ab inuicem 

sicut pastor ‘segregat oues 

ab haedis- et statuet oues 


a dextris suis : haedos autem a sinistris 


tunc dicit rex - his qui a dextris eius 


uenite benedicti patris mei 
hereditate possidete 
praeparatum est uobis regnum 


ab origine mundi 


Esuriui enim ‘et dedistis mihi manducare 


sitiui et potastis me — 

peregrinus eram -et collexistis me 
nudus.et operuistis me 
infirmatus sum ‘et uisitastis me 


in carcere fui- et uenistis ad me 


tunc respondebunt ei iusti dicentes 


dme quando te uidimus esurientem 

et pauimus - aut sitientem et potauimus 

quando autem uidimus te peregrinum 
(Fol. 88 a.) 


Cap, XXV. 27—38. 


T9 


80 KAT M 


καὶ συνηγαγομεν - καὶ γυμνον και περιεβαλομεΧΧΥ. 


ἡ ποτεσεειδομεν ασθενουντα 
ἢ εν φυλακὴ και ἡλθαμεν προσ σε 
και αποκρειθεισ epe, αυτοισ o βασιλευσ 
αμην λεγω ὕμειν - ed οσον ἐποιήσαται 
eve τουτων των αδελῴφων μου 
TOV ἐλαχιστων - €J40L ἐποιήσαται 
TOT€ Ept kat τοισ εξ εὐωνυμων 
wopever Ga. απ ἐμον ot κατηραμενοι 
εἰσ TO πυρ TO αἰωνιον 
ο ἤτοιμασεν O πατὴρ μον 
τω διαβολω και row ἀγγελοισ avrov 
Erevaca yap και ovx ἐδωκατε μοι φαγειν 
εδειψησα. και ovk ἐποτεισατε με 
ξενοσ nny ‘Kat ov συνήγαγεται με 
γυμνοσ και ov περιεβαλεται pe 


ασθενησ και εν φυλακή. και ovk ἐπεσκεψασθαι με 


— 
Tore αποκριθήσονται. Kat avrot λεγοντεσ κε 


ποτε σεειδομεν πεινωντα 
ἢ δειψωντα - ἢ ξενον ἡ γυμνον 
7] ἀσθενὴ ἡ ev φυλακη 
και ov διηκονησαμεν σοι 
rore ἀποκριθήσεται αυτοισ λεγων 
ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν - ες οσον ovk ἐποιήσατε 
ενι τουτων των ἐλαχιστων 
ovde ἐμοι ἐποιησατε 
και ἀαπελευσονται OUTOL . εἰσ κολασιν αἰωνιον 
ot δε δικαιοι εἰσ ζωὴν αἰωνιον 
Kat ἐγενετο οτελεσεν o ino 
παντασ rovg λογουσ rovrove’ 
ecrev row μαθηταισ : ort pera δυο ἡμερασ 
σοὺ : TO πασχα γεινεται. Kato νιοσ Tov ανθρωπου 
παραδιδοται εἰσ το σταυρωθηναι 
(Fol. 88 5.) 


39 


al 


42 


43 


4 


45 


46 


XXVI. 1 


στ. 


“SEG 
— 


MATTH 
— — — 
et colleximus aut nudum et cooperuimus 
aut quando te uidimus infirmum 
aut in carcere.et uenimus ad te 
Et respondens dixit eis rex 
amen dico uobis:in quantum fecistis 
uni horum fratrorum meorum 
minimorum - mihi fecistis 
tunc ait et his qui a sinistris 
ite a me maledicti 
in igne aeternum 
quod praeparauit pater meus 
diabolo et angelis eius 
Esurii enim ‘et non dedistis mihi manducare 
sitiui-et non potastis me 
peregrinus fui. et non collexistis me 
nudus et non operuistis me 
infirmis et in carcerem . et non uisitastis me 
tunc respondebunt. et ipsi dicentes dine 
quando te uidimus esurientem 
aut sitientem . aut hospitem aut nudum 
aut infirmum aut in carcerem 
et non ministrauimus tibi 
tunc respondebit eis dicens 
amen dico uobis in quantum non fecistis 
uni horum minimorum 
nec mihi fecistis 
et ibunt hii-in poenam aeternam 
iusti autem in uitam aeternam 
Et factum est cum consummasset ih 
omnes sermones hos 
dixit discipulis ‘quia post uiduum 
pascha fit. et filius hominis 
tradetur. ut crucifigatur 
(Fol. 89 a.) 


Carr. XXV. 38—XX VI. 2. 


----- 
oe : Tore συνήχθησαν οι ἀαρχειερεισ 


και ot rpeo Burepot του λαου 
εἰσ τὴν αυλὴν του αρχιερεωσ 
του λεγομένου καϊφα᾽ και συνεβουλευοντο 
ἵνα Toy y δολω κρατησωσιν 
και ἀποκτειγωσιν - EAeyoy δε μὴ εν τὴ eopry 
iva μη θορυβοσ γενηται ev τω Law 
co ς TOV Be aq yevoj.evov ev βηθανια 
εν οἰκεια σιμωνοσ του Aempog ov 
προσῆλθεν avro γυνὴ 
ἐχουσα ἀλαβαστρον μυρου πολντειμουν 
και KaTexeev ἐπὶ THO κεφαλὴησ avrov 
ανακειμενον avrov -ἴδοντεσ δε o. μαθηται 
ἡγανακτῆσαν λεγοντεσ 
εἰσ Tt απωλεια αὐτὴ 
ndvvaro yap rovro πραθῆναι πολλου 
και δοθηναι τοισ πτωχοισ 
γνουσ δε ae εἰπεν AUTOW 
τι κοπουσ WapexeTat TH yuvatKer 
€pyov yap xaXov ἤργασατο ew ej. 
WAVTOTE yap TOVO πτωχουσ᾽ 
ἔχετε μεθ cavrovy 
ἐμεδεου πάντοτε exere 
vol : βαλουσα yap avra ro μυρον rovro 
ETL TOV σωματοσματοσ μον 
προσ To ἐνταφιασαι με εποιησεν 
αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 'οπου ay κηρυχθη 
TO ἐναγγελιον rovro εν oXo τω KOT PW 
λαληθήσεται. και o ἐποιησεν αὐτὴ 
εἰσ μνημοσυνον αυὐτὴσ 
so : rore πορενθεισ εἰσ των (f - 
o λεγομενοσ ιουδασ σκαριωτὴσ 
προσ τουσ αρχιερεισ 


(Fol. 89 5.) 


XXVI 3 


SEC MATTH 81 
“SSO — 


tunc congregati sunt principes sacerdotum 


et seniores plebis 

in atrium principis sacerdotum 

qui dicitur caiphas ‘et consiliabantur 

ut ihm dolo tenerent . 

et occiderent. dicebant autem ne in die festo 


ut non tumultus fieret in populo 


ihu autem facto in bethania 


in domo simonis leprosi 

&ccessit ad eum mulier | 

habens alabastrum unguenti praetiosi 
et perfudit super caput eius 
discumbentis . uidentes autem discipuli 
indignati sunt dicentes 

ut quid perditio haec 

poterat enim hoc uenundari caro 


et dari pauperibus 


*. A . . .ϑ 
sciens autem ibs dixit eis 


quid labores praestatis mulieri 
opus enim bonum operata est in me 
semper enim pauperes 

habetis uobiscum 

me autem non semper habetis 


mittens enim haec unguentum 


super corpus meum 


ad sepeliendum me fecit 


amen dico uobis. ubicumque praedicabitur 


euangelium hoc in toto mundo 
loquetur'et quod fecit haec 


in memoriam eius 


tunc abit unus de duodecim 


qui dicitur iudas scariotes 
ad principes sacerdotum 
(Fol. goa.) 


Cap. XXVI. 3—14. 


11 


82 KAT MA69 


και €yo ὕμειν παραδωσω.- αὐτὸν bis trado eum 
ow Se ec Tay avro A στατηρασ tem statuerunt ei . xxx -stateras 
καὶ azrore εζητει ευκαιριὰν τό xinde querebat opportunitatem 
tva avrov παβαδω αὐτοισ eum traderet 

T7 Se porn των αζυμων 17 ima autem azymorum 


προσῆλθον ot μαθηταιτω - Aeyovrea accesserunt discipuli . ihu dicentes 


που θελεισ ετοιμασομεν σοι φαγειν τὸ πασχα ubi uis paremus tibi . manducare pascha 
O de «urev ὕπαγετε εἰσ τὴν πολιν 18 qui autem dixit eis itte in ciuitate 


προσ τον δεινα. και evra re AUPE ad quendam: et dicite ei 


o διδασκαλοσ᾽ λεγει" 0 καιροσ μου evyvo ἐστιν magister dicit.tempus meum prope est 


προσ σεποιήσω TO πασχα μετὰ των μαθητων μον ad te faciam pascha. cum discipulis meis 


και εποιῆσαν οἱ pabyrar-wo συνεταξεν avrowr 19 et fecerunt discipuli . sicut constituit eis ihs 


o ino και ἡτοιμασαν TO πασχα et parauerunt pascha 
rod :Οψειασ δε yevoperno - avexerro pera των 1B 20 | sero autem facto.discumbebat cum . xii- 

και ἐσθιοντων avrav eure at et manducantibus eis dixit 

αμην Aeyo ὕμειν amen dico uobis 

ort εἰσ εξ viov παραδωσει με quoniam unus ex uobis tradet me 
om : καὶ Avrovpevot σφοδρα - np~avro λεγειν 22 et contristati ualde - coeperunt dicere 

ELD εκαστοσ LUTOV - py τι Eyw εἰμι κε unusquisque-eorum ‘num quid ego sum dme 
cra :O de azrokpewr εἰπεν o ev Barrropevor 23 | quiautem respondens dixit:qu ntinguet 


Τὴν x€tpa. μετ €juov - εἰσ TO tpuBadtov manum mecum in parapside 


ουτοσ μεπαραδωσει hic me tradet 
O per ovy ὕιοσ τουιανθρωπου ὕπαγει 24 | filiusquidem hominis uadit 
καθωσ γεγραπται rept avrov. sicut scriptum est de eo 


ovat 0e To ανθρωπω exeww uae autem homini illi 


δι ov οὕιοσ Tov avOpwrov παραδιδοταε per quem filius hominis traditur 


ox B Sua Tovro : kaXov yy avro propter hoc bonum erat ei 
om, 


και εἰπεν avrove ‘Tt θελετε μοι Sova: ΧΧΥ͂Ι. 15 quid uultis mihi dare 


et ovx εγεννηθη o ayÜparoo exewoa 8i non esset natus homo ille 
ony :αποκριθεισ δε o tovdac’ o παραδιδουσ avrov ewre 25 | respondens autem iuda. qui tradebat eum dixit 
pn τι eyo eiii po] ei. eye avro av amar num quid ego sum rabbi . dicit ei tu dixisti 
ond :aurwy 8¢ ecÜwyrav - o ing λαβὼν aprov 26 | ipsisautem manducantibus. ihs accipiens pane 
^ καιευλογησασ exhacey- ka Bove rou μαθηταισ et benedicens fregit. et dans discipulis dixit 
(Fol. go.) = (Fol. gr a.) 


Car. XXVI. 15— 26. 


AaBere φαγεται rovro ἐστιν ro ow 
:xat λαβὼν το ποτήριον. και evyapurry) 
εἐδωκεν αὐτοισ Aeyov - πειεται ef avrov 
TOUTO Yap ἐστιν TO αιμα μου 
To καινὴσ StaGynxyne - ro ὕπερ πολλων 
€KXUVVOJLEVOV εἰσ αφεσιν αμαρτίων 
λεγω de Trew ov μη Tw» ἀπαρτει 
€K TOVTOV TOV γενηματοσ THE ἀμπέελον 
εωσ THO ἡμεέρασ εκεινηὴσ 
οταν αυτοπίω μεθ υμων καινον 
εν rn βασειλεια του πρσ pev 
: Kat ὕμνησαντεσ εξηλθον ew ro opoa av eXaus 
: rore Aeyet avrour o iyo “παντεσ ὕμεισ 
σκανδαλισθησεσθαι ev ἐμοι εν τὴ νυκτι Ταυτη 
> γεγρᾶπται yap 
παταζω roy ποιμενα 
και διασκορπισθησεται 
τα προβατα THE ποιμνησ 
μετα δε τὸ ἐγερθηναι με 
προαξω ὕμασ εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 


— 
σπθ: αποκριθεισ δε o srerpoo evrev avro 
—, 


(3 sagas 


εἰ παντεσ σκανδαλισθησονται ev σοι 

eyw ovderore σκανδαλισθήσομαι 
Edy avro o ijo ay λεγω σοι 

οτι ταυτὴ TQ VUKT πρειν ἀλεκτορα φωνησαι 
[Tp ἀπαρνησὴ με: λεγει avra πετροσ 


«ay Sen pe aw σοι αποθανειν 


[Δ] 


OV μὴ σε απαρνήσομαι 


ομοιωσ καὶ παντεσ οἱ μαθηται εἰπὸν 


εἰσ xoptoy λεγομενον γεθσαμακει 
σαβ : καὶ λεγει τοισ μαθηταισ avrov 


tu Sy 
TYG : TOTE ἔρχεται o tno μετ orav 
-- 


ΧΧΥ͂Ι. 


27 


28 


29 


31 


“32 


33 


34 


35 


καθισατε avrov- ewe ay ἀπελθων exer προσευξομει 


(Fol. 91 5.) 


oy, 
&unc uenit ihs cum eis 


SEC MATTH 83 


accipite manducate. hoc est meum corpus 
et accipiens calicem et gratias agens 
dedit eis dicens .'bibite ex eo omnes 

hoc est enim sanguis meus 

noui testamenti . qui pro multis 


effunditur.in remissionem peccatorum 


dico autem uobis non uiuam amodo 


ab hac creatura vitis 

usque adiem illum 

cum illum uiuam uobiscum notum 
in regno patris mei 


et hymno dicto exierunt in monte oliueti 


— 
tunc dicit eis ihs omnes uos 


scandalizamini in mein nocte hac 
-scriptum est enim 
percutiam pastorem 


et dispargentur 
oues gregis 


post autem surrexero 


praecedam uos in in galilaeam 


respondens autem petrus dixit ei 


si omnes scandalizabuntur in te 


ego numquam scandalizabor 


ait illi ihs -amen dico tibi 


quia hac nocte . antequam gallus-cantet 
ter abnegabis me - dicit ei petrus 

etsi oportuerit me tecum mori 

non te negabo 

similiter et omnes discipuli dixerunt 


in agrum qui dicitur getsamani 
.et dicit discipulis suis 
sedete ibidem . quousque eam 1110 orare 


(Fol. 92 a. 


Car. X XVI. 26—36. 


και παραλαβὼν τον πετρον ΧΧΥ͂Ι. 37 


και rov duo ὕιουσ ζεβεδαιου 
ηρξατο λυπεισθαι και αδημονειν 
eqy srore λέγει avrow -περιλυποσ ἐστιν ἡ γζνχὴ μου 
ewo θανατου. μεινατε ὧδε και γρηγορειται 
at δ: per epov. : καὶ προσελθων μεικρον 
€T€O €y EEL προσωπον αὐτου 
προσευχομενοσ καὶ Neywv - rarep pov 
εἰ δυνατὸν ἐστιν παρελθατω απ ἐμου 


: τὸ ποτήριον τουτο. : πλὴν ovx wo eyo θελω 


και ευρισκει avrovg καθευδοντασ 

και Acyet τω πετρω οντωσ οὐκ εἰσχυσαται 
μίαν opay γρηγορήῆσαι μετ ἐμου 
γρήγορειται καὶ προσευχεσθαι 

ἵνα py εἰσελθηται εἰσ πειρασμον 


J 


E 
[Δ 


: TO μεν πνὰ προθυμον᾽ ἢ δε σαρξ᾽ ασθενηὴσ 


Sj 


ἢ: παλιν ex Sevrepov areAOwy 


E 


J 


προσηνξατο λεγων πατερ μου 
εἰ ov δυναται To ποτήριον τουτο- παρελθειν 
ἐαν μὴ avro πιω. γενηθητω το θελημα σου 
και ελθων παλιν. evpev αυτουσ καθευδοντασ 
yoay yap αὐτῶν οἱ οφθαλμοι" βεβαρημενοι 
και αφεισ αντουσ παλιν ἀπελθων προσηνξατο 
TOV αὐτὸν Xoyov εἰπὼν 

oop: TOT€ ἐρχεται- προσ Tov μαθητασ avrov 

Ν και λεγει avrour * καθευδετετο λοιπὸν 
καὶ ἀαναπανεσθαι - Sov ἤγγικεν opa. 
και οὔιοσ Tov ανθρωπου παραδιδοται 
εἰσ χειρασ αμαρτωλων - eyepea Ue αγωμεν 
ἴδου ἤγγικεν o παραδιδουσ με 

T Cri Se avrov λαλουντοσ 

~ ἴδου ἴουδασ εἰσ των B ηλθεν 

(Fol 92 ὁ.) 


48 


aAA og ov : καιερχεταιπροστουσ μαθητασαντον 40 


41 


42 


43 


4 


45 


47 


SEC MATTH 
— --- 


ὭΡΑ, — 


et suscipiens petrum 


et duos filios. zebedaei 


coepit contristari ct deficere 


tunc dicit eis. tristis est anima mea 


usque ad mortem ‘sustinete hic et uigilate 
mecum ᾿ et accedens pusillum 

cecidit in faciem suam 

orans et dicens. pater meus 

si possibile est. transeat a me 

calix iste: uerum non sicut ego uolo 
sedsicuttu. Et uenit ad discipulos suos 
et inuenit eos dormientes 

et dicit petro.sic non ualuistis 

una hora uigilare mecum 

uigilate et orate 

ut non intretis in temptatione 


aps quidem pronptus. caro autem infirmis 


iterum secundo abiit 


orauit dicens. pater meus 

si non potest calix iste. transire 

nisi illut bibam fiat uoluntas tua 

et ueniens iterum: inuenit eos dormientes 
erant enim eorum oculi . grauati 

et relinquens eos « iterum abiit et orauit 


eundem sermonem dicens 


tunc uenit. ad discipulos suos 


et dicit eis. dormite de cetero 

et requiescite - ecce adpropiauit hora 
et filius hominis tradetur 

in manus peccatorum ‘surgite eamus 


ecce proximat qui me trade 


adhuc autem eo loquente 


ecce 1udas unus de. xii. uenit 
(Fol. 93 a.) 


Cap, XXVI. 37—47. 


[8 


Saf 


Kat μετ avrov οχλοσ ToÀvo * μετὰ payatpwy XXVI. 


και fvAwy- απὸ των apyxtepeoy 


και πρεσβυτέρων του λαον 


: O δεπαραδιδουσ avrov ἐδωκεν avrow 


σημεῖον λεγων - ov ay φιλησω avrog ἐστιν 
κρατησατε avrov 
και evÜeoc προσελθων ro i ειπεν 
χαιραι ραββει. και κατεφιλησεν avrov 
Ειπεν 0e avro o me ed o rape: erepat 
rore προσαλθοντεσ - ereBadov rac xeipaar 


— 
€mt TOV LV καὶ ἐΚραΤΉσαν avTOV 


ον — 
: Kat tov eur Tov μετα LU 


ἐκτεινασ τὴν χειρα- ἀπεσπασεν THY μαχαιρα 


αντου και επαταξεν roy δουλον 
TOV ἀρχιερεωσ 


Kat αφειλεν avrov ro ὠτειον 


c 
: Tore Acye avro o ine 


αποστρεψον THY μαχαιραν gov 


εἰσ TOV TOTOV αὐτὴσ 
παντεσ yap ot λαβοντεσ μαχαιραν 
εν μαχαιρα ἀπολουνται 


7 Soxeu ort ov δνναμαι αρτι 


48 


49 


50 


5I 


52 


53 


παρακαλεσαι TOV TATEPA μου" και παραστησει μοι 


πλειω.ιβ. λεγειωνησ αγγελων 
wo ovy πληρωθηήσονται αἱ γραφαι 


: οτιουτωσ det γενεσθαι : εν exeun TH opa. 


ο une €urey τοισ oxAour - wo Ere ληστην 
ἤλθατε. pera μαχαιρων καὶ ξυλων 
συνλαβειν με 

καθημέραν προσ ὕμασ ἐεκαθημὴν 


εν Tw ἵερω διδασκων - Kat ovk ἐκρατήσατε με 


: Tovro e oXov γεγονεν 


iva πληρωθωσιν at γραφαι των προφητων 
(Fol. 93 5.) 


Car. XXVI 


55 


$6 


rba multa: cum gladiis 
us*a principibus sacerdotum 
aioribus plebis 
tem tradebat eum dedit eis signum 

dicens: quem osculatus fuero ipse est 
tenete eum 

Et continuo accedentes ad ihm dixit 
habe rabbi. et osculatus est eum 

dixit autem illi ihs ad quod uenisti ame 
tunc accedentes ‘inmiserunt manus 
in ihm ‘et tenuerunt eum 

Et ecce unus ex is qui erant cum ihü 
extendens manus eiecit gladium 
suum - et percussit seruum 
principes sacerdotis 
et abstulit eius auriculam 

tunc dicit ei ihs 
conuerte gladium tuum 
in locum suum 
omnes enim qui accipiunt gladium 
gladio peribunt 
aut putas quia non possum modo 
rogare patrem meum - et adsistet mihi 
plus. xii-legiones angelorum 
quomodo ergo couplebuntur. scripturae 
quia sic oportet fieri -in illa hora 
ihs dixit turbis ‘quasi ad latronem 
uenistis: cum gladiis et fustibus 
conprehendere me 
cottidie apud uos sedebam 
in templo docens. et non tenuistis me 
hoc autem totum factum est 


ut conplerentur scripturae prophetarum 
(Fol. 94a.) 


. 47—56. 


85 


86 
Tore οἱ μαθηται παντεσ αφεντεσ avr 
.-- Se — 
Tf : οι δεκρατήσαντεσ rov uy ἀπήγαγον 
προσ kaubay rov ἀαρχιερεα 
οποῦυ OL γραμματεισ 
και οἱ πρεσβντεροι συνήχθησαν 


τᾷ : Ο δεπετροσ qgkoXovÜe avro απὸ μακροθεν 
εωσ THE αυλησ του ἀαρχιερεωσ 
και εἰσελθων «a ἐεκαθητο 
μετα των ὕπηρετων "εἰδειν ro τελοσ 

τῇ : Οιδεαρχίερεισ 
και ro συνεδριον ολον εζητουν 
ψευδομαρτυρειαν - κατα του - 
oToc avrov θανατωσουσιν 
και ovK €vpov To «bna 
Kat πολλοι προσηλθον  ψευδομαρτυρεσ 
καὶ ovk evpoy To εξησ 

τὸ : vorepov δεηλθον δυο ψευδομαρτυρεσ 
και εἰπὸν - TOUTOV ἡκουσαμεν λέγοντα 
ὄνναμαι καταλυσαῖι roy vaoy του Ov 
και δια τρειων ἡμερων.. οἰκοδομῆσαι avroy 

και ἀαναστασ 0 ἀρχιερευσ εἶπεν avro 

ovdey ἀποκρινὴ - TL OVTOL σὸν καταμαρτυρονοῖ 
οδε ue ἐσιωπα αποκριθεισ ovy 
0 apxuepeva eurev avro ορκιζω σε 


MS - 
xara του θυ rov ζωντοσ - iva. ἡμειν «orga 


— — 
TL εἰσὺ εἰ o xpa 0 Hog rov Ov Neyer avro o igo 
--- 
σνειπασ πλὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
ort ἀπαρτι οψεσθαι "τον ὕιον rov ανθρωπον 
καθημενον ex δεξιων τησ δυναμεωσ 
καὶ ἐρχομενον ἐπὶ των νεφελων TOV OUparev 
tam, 
Tia: τότε O ἀρχιερευσ διερρηξεν 


τα ειματια avrov λεγων - εβλασφημησεν 
τι ETL χρειαν ἐχομεν * yaprvpoy 
(Fol. 94 à.) 


XXVI. 


57 


58 


60 


62 


63 


‘SEC MATTH 
— i o — — 


tunc discipuli omnes relinquentes eum fugerunt 
illi autem tenentes ihm duxerunt 
ad caiphan ‘principem sacerdotum 
ubi scribae 
et seniores congregati sunt 
petrus autem sequebatur eum . de longe 
usque ad ianuam principis sacerdotis 
et ingressus intus sedebat 
cum ministris . uidere finem rei 
principes autem sacerdotum 
et conuenticulum totum quaerebant 
falsum testimonium aduersus ihm 
quatenus mortificarent eum 
et non inuenerunt sequentia 
et multi accesserunt falsi testes 
et non inuenerunt rei sequentia 
nouissime autem uenerunt duo falsi testes 
et dixerunt. hunc audiuimus dicentem 
possum dissoluere templum hoc dei 
et post tres dies - aedificare eum eum 
Et surgens princeps sacerdotum ait illi 
nihil respondes . quid isti testantur de te 
ihs autem tacebat: respondens ergo 
princeps sacerdotum dixit ei-adiuro te 
per dm uiuum. ut nobis dicas 
si tu es xps filius dei dicit ei ihs 
tu dixisti . uerumtamen dico uobis 
quia amodo uideuitis filium hominis 
sedentem a dextris. uirtutis 
et uenientem super nubes caeli 
tunc princeps sacerdotum ‘disrupit 
uestimenta sua dicens blasphemauit 


quid adhuc opus habemus testium 
(Fol. 95a.) 


Car, XXVI. 56—65. 


— — 0 — 
KA MA®® 87 


ἴδε νυν yxovoare rv βλασφημειαν XXVI ecce nunc aud 
τι ὕμειν δοκει- 66 quid uobi 

Or δεαπεκριθησαν παντεσ καὶ εἰπὸν qui au 
evoxog Üavarov ἐστιν re 


! TOT€ EVENTUTAY εἰσ TO προσωπον AVTOV 67 tu 


[2] 


και ἐεκολαφισαν avroy 
αλλοι δε ἐραπεισαν avroy Aeyoyrea 68 
c 


προφητευσον jew xpe* Tur ἐστιν 0 παισασ σε 


3 
e 
Qe 


: Ὁ Be πετροσ εκαθητο. εξω ev τή ανυλη 69 


J 


και προσηλθεν αυτω. μια παιδισκὴ Aeyovea 

kat συ ἦσθα pera uv του γαλειλαιου 

o δεηρνήσατο ἐνπροσθεν παντων λεγων 70 
ουκ οιδα τι λεγεισ ovde επισταμαι 


zt : ἔξελθοντοσ δε avrov εἰσ rov πυλῶνα γι | [Haec fragmenta folii 96 inter ff. 89 οἱ 90 a biblio- 


wer adAn raid . 
edey avroy αλλη παιδισκη _ pego inseruntur, eüdem manu, quae ad pedem 
καὶ λέγει Tour ἐκει ovroq sv μετα i fol. 16b, ad pedem fol. 95b adnotante: De- 


rov vatwpatou- Kas παλιν ἠρνήσατο ” sideratur hic foliu, continens Versionem Lat. 


μεθ opkov λεγων - ovx oia, roy ayÜperroy huie paginae respondente, et Textum Graecu 


μετα μεικρον δε: προσελθοντεσ ot εστωτεσ' 73 quem reddit sequens pagina.] 
εἰπὸν To πετρω.- ἀληθωσ e£ avrov εἰ 
και yap ἡ λαλεια σου ομοιαζει 
ore ἤρξατο καταθεματιζειν. και ομννειν 74 
ort οὐκ οιἰδα Toy ανθρωπον 
‘kas εὐθεωσ ἀλεκτωρ εφωνησεν 
τις : καὶ εμνησθη o πετροσ' 75 
TOV ρηματοσ Uo εἰρηκοτοσ' 
πριν adexropa φωνησαι 
Tpwr arapyna με- και ἐξελθων «5o 
ἐκλαυσεν Tupac 
rd: πρωιασ Se γενομενὴσ XXVII. 1 
" : συνβουλιον εποιῆσαν παντεσ 
Ot αρχιερεισ. καὶ οἱ πρεσβυτεροι rov Xaov 
κατα τον eq ἵνα θανατωσουσιν αὐτὸν 


(Fol. 95 5.) (Fol. 96 a.) 


Carp. XXVI. 65—X XVII. t. 


88 
y XXVIL = 


ἡγεμονι 
3 


7 


put 
w 


(Fol. 96 6.) 


“πο ᾿ς 
E 


--- — 


f gj 


ATTH 


et ligantes eum duxerunt 
et tradiderunt pontio pilato praesidi 
tunc uidens iudas : qui tradidit eum 
quoniam damnatus est *paenitentia ductus 
misit. xxx - argenteos. principibus sacerdotum 
et senioribus dicens *peccaui 
tradens sanguinem iustum 
qui autem dixerunt quid an nos tu uideris 
et proiciens argentum in templo 
discessit et pergens suspendit se 
principes autem sacerdotum 
accipientes pecuniam dixerunt 
non licet mittere eam - in corbam 
quia praetium sanguinis est 
Consilio autem accepto. inter se 
emerunt agrum figuli 
ad sepulturam peregrinorum 
propter quod appellatus est ager ille. echeldemach 
hoc est ager sanguinis. usque in hodiernum 
tunc conpletum est quod dictum est 
per hieremian prophetam dicentem 
et acceperunt. xxx - argenteos 
praetium adpraetiati 
quem adpraetiauerunt - de filiis istrahel 
et dederunt eos 
in agrum figuli 
sicut constituit mihi ds 
ihs autem stetit ante praesidem 
et interrogauit eum praesis dicens 
_tu es rex iudaeorum 
ih autom ait tu dixisti 
et dum accusaretur 


& principibus sacerdotum . et senioribus 


(Fol. 97 a.) 


Cap. XXVII. 2—12. 


KAT MA@6 
“τς ---. 
ουδὲεν απεκρεινετο 
TOT€ λεγει avro 0 πιλατοσ - OUK ακονεισ τοσα 
καταμαρτυρουσιν σου" Kat οὐκ απεκριθὴ avro 
ἐν ρημα 
wore θαυμαζειν τον ἡγεμονα λιαν 
reB: κατα Se rv eopryv - εἰωθει o ἤγεμων" 
azroAvew eva δεσμιον Tw οχλω 
ov 70eXov 
ταν :Ειχον δετοτε Oo jov ἐεπισημον 
τον λεγομενον βαραββᾶν 
συνήγμενων δε avrov εἰπεν avroug o πειλατοσ 
τινα θελεται ὕμειν aroAvow- βαραββαν 7 oy 
TOV λεγομενον χρν 
nds yap ort δια φθονον 
παρεδωκαν avrov 
: καθημενου δε avrov ἐπι τον βηματοσ 
απεστειῖλεν προσ GUTOV "ἢ γυνὴ avrov λέγουσα 
μηδεν σοι καὶ τω δικαίω εκεινω- 
πολλα yap ἐπαθὸν σημερὸν 
κατ ovap δι avroy: 
: Οἱ δεαρχίερεισ και οἱ πρεσβυτεροι 
ἐπεισαν Tove οχλουσ 
iva αἰτήσωνται τὸν Bapa [Jay : 
τον δε Ὧν απολεσωσὶιν 
αποκριθεισ δε o ἤγεμων εἰπεν avrour 
τινα θελεται απὸ των Svo - αἀπολυσω ὕμειν 
οι δεειπαν βαραββαν 


— . — 
: λέγει avrow o πειλατοσ. TL our ποιήσωμεν ιὴν 


tov Aeyopevov χρν : Aeyovaty παντεσ᾽ 
σταυρωθητω - eye: avrow οἤγεμων 
TL Yap κακον εποιῆσεν 

ot δεπερισσωσ ckpa day Aeyovreoc 


σταυρωθητω 
(Fol. 97 6.) 


CaP. 


XXVII. 


13 
14 


17 


19 


SEC MATTH 89 
nihil respondebat 


tunc dicit illi pilatus . non audis quanta 
testantur de te. et non respondit ei 
unum uerbum 
ita ut miraretur praesis ualde 

per diem autem festum . consueuerat praesis 
dimittere. unum uinctum populo 
quem uolebant 

habebant autem tunc uinctum insignem 
qui dicebatur barabbas 
congregatis autem illis: dixit illis pilatus 
quem uultis uobis dimittam . barabban aut ihn 
qui dicitur xps 
sciebat enim quia per inuidiam 
tradidérant eum 

sedente autem eo pro tribunali 
misit ad eum . uxor eius dicens 
nihil tibi sit cum iusto illo 
multa enim passa sum hodie 
per uisum propter eum 

principes autem sacerdotum ‘et seniores 
persuaserunt turbis 
ut peterent barabban 
ihm autem perderent 

respondens autem praesens dixit eis 
quem uultis de duobus: dimittam uobis 
qui autem dixerunt barabban 

dicit eis pilatus-quid ergo faciem ihm 
qui dicitur xps dicunt omnes 
crucifigatur: dicit eis praesens 
quid enim mali fecit 
qui autem amplius clamabant dicentes 
crucifigatur 

(Fol.. 98 a.) 


XXVII. 12—23. 


12 


rxt : ἴδων δε o πιλατοσ - ort ovdey ὠφελει 
᾿ ἄλλα μαλλον θορυβοσ yeveras 
λαβὼν ὕδωρ -απενιψατο rac χειρασ 
Karevavrt Tov oxXov λεγων -αθωοσ εἰμι eyo 
απὸ TOV αιματοσ τουτου .ὕμεισ οψεσθαι 
και ἀποκριθεισ ao o λαοσ «urey 

τοαιμααντου 
€ ἡμασ Kal eri τα τεκνα μων 

τκὴ : τοτε ἀπελυσεν avrow roy βαραββαν 

n Toy δὲ ay φλαγελλωσασ παρεδωκεν avrour 
ἵνα σταυρωσωσιν αντοὸν 

τκὸ : rore oi στρατιωται TOV ἤγεμονοσ 

— —- 
παραλαβοντεσ τον ιὴν εἰσ To πραιτωριον 
συνήγαγεν ex avroy ολὴν τὴν σπειραν 
και ἐενδυσαντεσ' avrov "εἰματιον πορῴυρονν 
και χλαμυδαν κοκκινὴν περιεθηκαν avra 
και πλεξαντεσ στεφανον - εξ ακανθων 
ἐπέθηκαν ext τὴν κεφαλὴν avrov 
και καλαμον ev τὴ δεξεια avrov 
και yovvrerga avrea * evzpogÜev avrov 
ενεπεξαν avro λεγοντεσ 


χαιραι βασιλεν των Ἰουδαίων 


ἘΣ] 


> καὶ ἐενπτυσαντεσ εἰσ αὐτὸν 
ελαβον rov καλαμον 
και ετυπτον εἰσ τὴν κεφαλὴν avrov 
και ore ἐενεπαιξαν αυτω εξεδυσαν avroy 
τὴν χλαμυδα καὶ eveducay avroy 
Tha : TO εἰματια αὐτου ἀπήγαγον avrov 
εἰσ το σταυρωσαι : εξερχομένοι δὲ 


evpov ἀνθρωπον κυρηναιον 


εἰσ ἀπαντήσιν αυὐτον.ονοματι σιμωνα 


TOVTOV ἤνγαρενσαν - iva apy Tov σταυρον avrov 


7B : και ελθοντεσ εἰσ roov λεγομενον γολγοθα 
(Fol. 98 5.) 


XXVII. 24 


33 


SEC Mae 
—— - — 
uidens autem pilatus - quia nihil proficit 
sed magis tum fieri 
accipiens aquam lauit manus suas 
coram populo dicens. innocens sum ego 
a sanguinem huius. uos uideuitis 
Et respondens omnis populus dixit 
sanguis huius 
super nos et super filios nostros 
tunc dimisit eis barabbam 
ihm autem flagris caesum tradidit eis 
ut crucifigerent eum 
tunc milites praesidis . 
suscipientes ihm ‘in praetorium 
congregauerunt ad eum . uniuersam cohortem 
et uestientes eum - tunicam purpuream 
et chlamydem coccineam circumdederunt ei 
et torquentes coronam de spinis 
inposuerunt.super caput eius 
et harundinem in dextera eius 
et adgeniculantes ante eum 
inluserunt eum dicentes 
habe rex iudaeorum 
et conspuentes in eum 
acceperunt harundinem 
et percutiebant super caput eius 
Et cum delusissent eum exuerunt eum 
clamydem. et uestierunt eum 
uestimenta sua. duxerunt eum 
utcrucifigerent: Exeuntes autem 
inuenerunt hominem cyreneum 
obuiam sibi uenientem-nomine simonem 
hunc angariauerunt. ut tolleret crucem eius 


Et uenientes in locum. qui dicitur golgotha 
(Fol. 99 a.) 


Cap, XXVII. 24— 33. 


— XXVII. 


TÀy : 0 ἐστιν κρανιου τοποσ᾿: καὶ €Dokay avro Teu 


οινον μετα χολησ μεμειγμενον 
και γευσαμενοσ οὐκ ἤθελησεν mew 
thd: (ταυρωσαντεσ δε αυτον 
διεμερισαντο Ta ειματεια avrov 
βαλοντεσ κληρον - και καθημενοι 
τλε : ετήρουν avrov εκει: καὶ ἐπεθῆκαν 


eravw rc κεφαλησ avrov: τὴν αἰτειαν avrov 
— 


γεγραμμενὴν «οντοσ eaTty ino 
o βασιλευσ των Ἰουδαίων 


τὰς : TOT€ σταυρουνται συν avro 'δνο λησται 
— 

evo ex δεξιων" και εἰσ εξ εὐωνυμων 

"AL Or δε παραπορενομενοι. εβλασφημουν avrov 
κεινουντεσ τὴν κεφαλὴν avrwy . καὶ λεγοντεσ 
ova o καταλνων roy vaoy 
και EV τρισιν ἡμεραισ οἰκοδομων 
σωσὸον σεαντον εἰ ULOG εἰ TOU θυ 
και καταβηθει απο του σταυρον 

τλη: Ομοιωσ Se και οἱ αρχίερεισ 
ενπαιζοντεσ μετα των γραμματαιων 
καὶ φαρισαιων λεγοντεσ - αλλουσ ἐσωσεν 
ἐαντον ov δυναται σωσαι 
βασιλενσ wpand ἐστιν" καταβατω νυν 
απο TOV σταυρον᾽ και πιστευσομεν AUTW 
εἰ πεποιθεν emt roy ὃν. ρυσασθω νυν avrov 


—, 
et θελει avrov. eurev yap ort θυ eua itor 


—, 
TNO : τοδε avro και οἱ Anorat- 0t σταυρωθεντεσ 
——, 
συν avTo* ὠνειδιζον avrov 
— 


Tu : απὸ δε ekro ὡρασ σκοτοσ €yevero 
emt πασαν τὴν yv. €o0 «var. opa 
τμα: περι δε τὴν ἐννατὴην opay -ανεβοησεν ine 
φωνὴ peyady Aeyoy 
λει λει Aapa ζαφθανει.τοντ ἐστιν 
(Fol. 99 5.) 


34 


42 


43 


45 


91 


quod est caluariae locus. et dederunt ei bibere 
uinum cum felle mixtum 

et gustans noluit uiuere 

cum autem crucefixissent eum 

diuiserunt sibi uestimenta eius 

mittentes sortem . et sedentes 

seruabant eum ibi. et inposuerunt 


super caput eius causam 


 &criptam ‘hic est ihs 


rex iudaeorum 


tunc crucifiguntur cum eo ‘duo latrones 


unus a dextris- et unus a sinistris 


transeuntes autem . blasphemabant eum 


mouentes capud suum - et dicentes 
ua qui dissoluit templum 
et tribus diebus aedificat 
liuera te-ai filius es dei 
et descende de cruce 
similiter et principes sacerdotum 
deludentes cum scribis 
et pharisaeis dicebant - alios saluos fecit 
seipsum non potest salbare 
rex istrahel est .descendat nunc 
de cruce‘et credemus ei 
ai confidit in dm liueret nunc eum 
si uult eum ‘dixit enim quia di filius sum 
identidem autem et latrones qui fixi erant 


cum eo increpabant eum 


ab hora autem sexta tenebre factae sunt 


super omnem terram * usque nonam horam 
circa nonam autem horam exclamauit ihs 
uoce magna dicens 
heli heli lama zapthani hoc est 
(Fol. 100a.) 


Cap. XXVII. 33— 46. 


99 KAT MAG0 


6c] pov Ge pov - tvare με ενκατελιπεσ XXVII. 
amy 
τμβ : Tweo de Tov exer ἐστωτων 47 
—, 
ακουσαντεσ᾽ eXeyov *nÀ«uxy ove ουτοσ 
c 
Thy: Kat ευθεωσ δραμων εἰσ εξ avrov 48 
i, 
και λαβων σπονγον πλησασ ofov 
και περιθεισ καλαμω. εποτειζενιαλτον 
Or δελοιποι evrov -αφεσ ἴδωμεν 49 
ει ἐερχεται ἡλειασ και σωσει avTov 
--- 
τμὸ Ὁ 8e eno παλιν κραξασ φωνὴ μεγαλὴη 50 
— — 
αφηκεν To Trva. 
— 
τμε :Ka4 ἴδου TO καταπετασμα TOV ναον 51 
— 
εσχισθὴ evo Svo pepy- απο avo ev 
v 
TJ. 3 ewo KaTw: Kat 7) yr eren 
[o . 


και αἱ πετραι εσχισθησαν 


και τα μνημία ανεωχθήσαν" καὶ πολλα σωματα 52 
των κεκοιμήημενων αγιων ἡγερθησαν 


και ἐξελθοντεσ εκ των μνημιων £3 
μετα THY eyepaw avrov 
ÀAÜov εἰσ τὴν αγιαν πολιν 
Kat εφανησαν πολλοισ 
rel : O δε exarovrapyne £4 


— 
και οἱ [LET αὐτοῦ THPOUVTED TOV Uv 


εἰδοντεσ Toy σεισμον - και τα γεινομενα 


εφοβηθησαν σφοδρα γοντεσ 
—- 
αληθωσ itc θυ qv ovroc 
τμὴ snoav δε και γυναικεσ πολλαι 55 
tay, 
απο paxpobev θεωρουσαι 


αιτινεσ ἠκολουθησαν τω uu απὸ THE αγιλειλαιασ 
διακονουσαι avro 
εν auc ἣν μαρια μαγδαληνὴ 56 
καὶ μαρια ἡ Tov taxwBov- και iwond μητὴρ 
και ἢ μητὴρ των ὕιων ζεβεδεου 
T :Oweu Se yevoj.evgo - nA Gev avOpwrog πλον 57 
(Fol. 100 5.) 


SEC MATTH 
me — 
ds meus ds meus ut quid me reliquisti 
quidam autem illic stantium 
audientes dicebant. heliam uocat iste 
et continuo currens unus ex his 
et accipiens spongiam inplens aceto 
et inponens harundini. potabat eum 
ceteri autem dixerunt.sine uideamus 
si uenit helias. et liuerat eum 
ihs autem iterum clamans. uoce magna 
dimisit spm 
Et ecce uelum templi 
scissum est in duas partes. agysu usque 
deorsum - et terra mota est 
et petrae fissae sunt 
et monumenta aperta sunt. et multa corpora 
dormientium sanctorum . surrexerunt - 
et exeuntes de monumentis 
pest resurrectionem eius 
enerunt in sanctam ciuitatem 
#t paruerunt multis 
nturio autem 
et qui cum eo serbabant ihm 
uidentes terre motum ‘et quae fiebant 
timuerunt ualde dicentes 
uere di filius erat hic 
Erant autem et mulieres multae 
de longe uidentes 
quae secutae sunt ihm de galilaea 
ministrantes ei 
in quibus erat maria magdalene 
et maria iacobi . et ioseph mater 
et mater filiorum zebedaei 
sero autem facto uenit homo diues 
(Fol. 101 a.) 


Cap. XXVII. 46—57. 


απὸ αρειμαθειασ. ro ονομα iwond ΧΧΥ͂ΙΙ. 
oc Kat avrog ἐμαθητενθὴ τω - 
Ovroc προσηλθεν ro πειλατω 58 
και ητήσατο TO σωματου up 
TV : Toreo πειλατοσ ἐκελευσεν 
n αποδοθηναι ro σωμα 
και παραλαβὼν Ἰωσηφ ro copa 49 
ενετυλιξεν avro εν σινδονι καθαρα 
και εθηκεν avro. εν τω καινὼω avrov μνήμιω όο 
O ἐλατομησεν εν τὴ πετρα 
και προσκυλισασλισασ λιθον μεγαν 
τῇ θυρα rov μνημῴν απηλθεν 
Ta : ἣν δε exet μαρια μαγδαληνὴ 61 
kat αλλη μαρια καθημεναι κατεναντι Tov Ta ov 
0B : τή δε ἐπαυριον -τισ ἐστιν μετα THY παρασκενὴν 62 
συνήχθησαν οἱ apxeepewr 
και ot φαρισαιοι προσ πειλατον λεγοντεσ 63 
Ke εμνησθημεν.οτι exetvor 0 πλανοσ εἰπε 
ert Gov - ort μετα τρεισ ἡμέρασ εγειρομαι 
καιλευσον ovv ασφαλισθηναι rov ταφον 64 
εωσ ἡμέρασ τρειτησ - μή ποτε ελθοντεσ 
ot μαθηται avrov - κλεψωσιν avroy 
kat ἐρουσιν Tw Aaw 
ἤγερθη απο των νεκρων 
και ἐσται 7) αιἰσχατὴ πλανὴ «χείρω THE πρωτὴσ 
Edn δεαντοισ οπειλατοσ exerat φυλακασ 65 
trayerat ασφαλισασθαι wo οιδατε 
Or Se ropevOevrec ἡσφαλισαν rov ταφον 66 
σῴφραγισαντεσ tov λιθον. pera T v $vAak" 
ope de ca BBarwv ry επιφωσκουση 
εἰσ μειαν σαββατων.ηλθεν μαρια μαγδαληνη 


XXVIII. 1 


και ἡ αλλη μαρια θεωρησαι rov ra doy 
και ἴδου σεισμοσ eyevero μεγασ 2 
(Fol. τοι δ.) 


5 


[ef 


MATTH 93 


— 


ab arimathia ‘cui nomen ioseph 


qui et ipse didicerat ab ihu 
hic accessit ad pilatum 

et petit corpus ihu 
tunc pilatus iussit 

reddi corpus 


et suscipiens ioseph corpus 
inuoluit illud .in sindone munda 
et posuit illud 1 nouo suo monumento 
quod absciderat in petra 
et aduoluens saxum magnum 
osteo monumenti abiit 
Erat autem ibidem - maria magdalene 
et alia maria sedentes. contra sepulcrum 
in crastinum autem . quae est post cena pura - 
conuenerunt principes sacerdotum 
et pharisaei - ad pilatum dicentes 
dme rememorati sumus. quia ille seductor dixit 
adhuc uiuens - quia post tres dies resurzam 
iuue ergo muniri sepulcrum 
usque ad diem tertium - ne forte uenientes 
discipuli eius :furentur eum 
et dicent plebi 
surrexit a mortuis 
et erit nouissimus error. peior priori 
dicit autem eis pilatus habetis custodes 
ite munite sicüt scitis 
qui autem abeuntes - munierunt sepulcrum 
signantes lapidem - cum custodibus 
sero autem sabbatorum : inlucescente 
in una sabbatorum - uenit maria magdalene 
et alia maria: uidere sepulchrum 
Et ecce terre motus factus est magnus 
(Fol. 102 a.) 


Capp. XXVII. §57—X XVIII. 2. 


94 


ayyeAoc yap kv xara Bac απ ovpavov XXVIII. 
προσελθων απεκυλισεν roy λιθον 

και exaÜro exavw avrov 

ἣν δεη εἰδεα avrov. wo ἀστραπὴ 3 


και TO ἐνδυμα αντου λευκον wo χείων 


απὸ δε rov φοβονυ avrov. ἐσεισθησαν οι τηρουντεσ 4 


και ἐγενηθησαν wo νεκροι 

αποκριθεισ Se o a»yyeXoa - εἰπεν rau γυναιξιν 
μη φοβεισθαι ὕμεισ. οιδα yap ort - 
TOV ἐστανρωμενον ζητειται..ουκ ἐστιν Woe 
ἤγερθη yap καθωσ ειπεν. δευτε ederat Toy rome 
OTTOV €K€LTO 0 KG - και Taxv ropevÜewrat 
eurare Tour μαθηταισ avrov - ori ἡγερθὴη 
και προαγει ὕμασ εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 


exe avrov οψεσθαι "ἴδου εἰπὸν ὕμειν 


: και ἐξελθουσαι ταχυ απο του μνημειου 


μετα φοβον και χαρασ μεγαλησ 
εἐδραμον απαγγειλαι Tour μαθηταισ avrov 
και ἴδον ο ine απηντησεν ανταισ 
Aeyov xatpatrac- at Se προσελθουσαι 
ἐκρατῆησαν Tove ποδασ avrov 
και TPOTEKVINT AY GUTO 
Tore Neyer ανταισ o ine μὴ φοβεισθαι 
ὕπαγεται ἀαπαγγειλατε Tow: αδελφοισ μου 
iva ἀπελθωσιν εἰσ γαλιλαιαν 


κακει με οψεσθαι 


πορενομενων Se avrov - ἴδον Tuto: THO κουστωδιασ 


εἐλθοντεσ eur τὴν πολιν ᾿ανηγγειλαν 
τοισ ἀρχιερευσιν - ATaVTA. τα γενομενα 
καὶ συναχθεντεσ μετα των πρεσβυτερων 
συνβουλιον AaBovrec - apyyvptov ἵκανον 
ἐδωκαν - Tour στρατιωταισ Aeyoyrea 


eura Te ort- ou μαθηται avrov 


(Fol. 102 5.) 


CAP. 


II 


SEC 


MA 
—— « 
angelus autem dmi descendens de caelo 
accedens reuoluit lapidem 
et sedebat super eum 
erat autem aspectus eius ‘sicut fulgur 
et uestitus eius - albus sicut nix 
a timore autem eius. commoti sunt custodes 
et facti sunt tamquam mortui 
respondens autem angelus. dixit mulieribus 
nolite timere uos. scio enim quia ihm 
crucifixum quaeritis non est hic 
surrexit enim sicut dixit. uenite uide locu 
ubi positus erat dms-et cito euntes 
dicite discipulis eius: quia surrexit 
et praecedit uos in galilaea 
ibi eum uideuitis. ecce dixi uobis 
Et exeuntes cito de monumento 
cum timore et gaudio magno 
cucurrerunt renuntiare discipulis eius 
Et ecce ihs occurrit eis 
dicens habete. quae autem accedentes 
tenuerunt pedes eius 
et adorauerunt ei 
tunc dicit eis ihs. nolite timere 
ite nuntiate fratribus meis 
ut eant in galilaeam 


et ibi me uideuitis 


Euntibus autem illis ecce quidam de custodibus 


uenientes in ciuitate.renuntiarunt 


principibus sacerdotum . omnia quae facta sunt 


Et congregati cum senioribus 
consilio accepto : pecuniam copiosam 
dederunt. militibus dicentes 
dicite quoniam discipuli eius 

(Fol. 103 a.) 


XXVIII. 2—13. 


vuxtog ελθοντεσ .εκλεψαν  vrov XXVIII. 
ἡμῶν κοιμωμένων - καὶ αν ακουσθη rovro 14 
ὕπο TOv ἡγεμονοσ -ἡμεισ πεισομεν αντον | 
και ὕμασ αμεριμνουσ ποιησομεν 

Οιεδελαβοντεσ τα apyyvpua. ἐποιησαν 15 
wo εδιδαχθησαν 
και διεφημισθὴ o Xoyog ovroc 
Tapa. TOL LoVvOaLOLT - EWT THO σήμερον ἡμερασ 

Or δε ἐνδεκα μαθηται επορευθησαν τό 
εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν eur το οροσ 
ov eradaro avrour ine “και ἴδοντεσ avrov 17 


προσεκυνήῆσαν .οἱδε εδιστασαν 
και προσελθων o ine ' ekaXgaey avrow λεγων - 
εδοθη μοι πασα εξουσια 


εν ουρανοισ καὶ emi THO no - ropever fat νυν 
μαθητευσατε παντα τα εθνη 


βαπκτισαντεσ avrove 
εἰσ TO ονομα TOU TATPOT και υἷον 
t 
Kat TOV G;yLOV πνσ διδασκοντεσ avrove 
τήρειν Tavra - oca ενετειλαμὴν ὕμειν 
Kas idov eyw eux μεθ υμων 
πασασ Tar ἡμερασ 


εωσ THO συντελειασ του αἰωνοσ 


Qooo 00000000 0000000 00000000 


(Fol. 103 5.) 


jm 


C 


Bj 


TTH 95 


per nocte uenientes furati sunt eum 
nouis dormientibus. et si auditum fuerit hoc 
a praeside nos suademus ei 


et uos securos faciemus 


qui autem accepta pecunia fecerunt 


sicut docti erant 
et diuulgatum est uerbum hoc 


apud iudaeos - usque in hoernum diem 


undecim autem discipuli abierunt 


in galilaeam in montem 
ubi constituerat eis ihs ‘et uidentes eum 


adorauerunt.quidam autem dubitauerunt 


Et accedens ihs locutus est eis dicens 


data est mihi omnis potestas 

in caelis et super terram . ite nunc 
docete omnes gentes 

baptizantes eos 

in nomine patris et fili 

et sancti aps - docentes eos 

seruare omnia. quanta mandaui uobis 
et ecce ego sum uobiscum 

omnibus diebus 


usque in consummationem saeculi 


QoooooQ000Q0000000000 00000000 


euangelium sec 


mattheum explicit 


sec iohannen 


(Fol. 104 a.) 


CaP. XXVIII. 13—20. 


96 


J 


J 


KATA NHN 
—— — 
Ev apxn nv o Aoyor kat o Xoyoc ἣν προσ rov Ov Li 
και bo qv 0 Àoyyoc - ovroc nv ev ἀρχὴ προσ Tov ὃν 2 
παντα δι avrov eveyero Kat xopur avrov 3 
ἐγένετο ovdev ‘0 γεγονεν "εν avro . 4 
Coy ἐστιν" και ἡ Gorg ἣν To φωσ των ανθρωπω 
καὶ TO φωσ cy τὴ σκοτια φαινει 5 
και ἡ σκοτια avro ov KareAa Bev 
€yevero ανθρωποσ arrectaApevor 6 
Tapa κυὴν ονγομα αντω -ἴωαννὴν 
ovroc ἤλθεν εἰσ μαρτυριαν - iva μαρτυρηση 7 


rep. TOV φωτοσ * wa. παντεσ Tw Teva ovary 


de avrov' ovk ν εκείνοσ To Puc 8 
αλλ ἵνα μαρτυρησὴ περι Tov φωτοσ 
ἣν To φωσ To αληθινον o φωτιζει 9 


zayra avOpwiroy ερχομενον 

εἰσ TOV κοσμον EV TW KOT LW ἣν 10 
Kat 0 κοσμοσ δι αὐτου eyevero Kat 

0 KOO POC αντον OUK €yyo εἰσ τα ἴδια. I1 
nAGev και οι ἴδιοι avrov ov παρελαβον 

οσοι ἐλαβον avrov εδων avrour 12 
ἐξουσιαν τέκνα θυ. γενεσθαι. τοισ πιστενουσι 

εἰσ TO ονομα avTOV - Ovx εξ ἐματων ουδε 13 
εκ θεληματοσ σαρκοσ οὐδε θεληματοσ ανδροσ- 

αλλ εκ θυ ἐγεννηθησαν - Kat o λογοσ 14 
σαρξ eycvero καὶ εσκηνωσεν 

ev ἡμειν και εθεασαμεθα τὴν δοξαν 

avrov δοξαν wo μονογενουσ 


παρα πατροσ πληρὴ χαριτοσ Kot αληθιασ 


Ἰωαννησ μάρτυρι περι avrov και κεκραγεν 15 
OVTOO ἣν OV εἰπὸν O οπισω LOU ἐρχομενοσ 
ἐνπροσθεν μου yeyovey | 
OTL TPWTOT pov NV OTL EK TOV 16 


πληρωματοσ avrov ἡμεισ παντεσ 


(Fol. 104 b.) 


Cap. I. 1—16. 


S. IogANNIS. Car. I. 


[Desunt folia, octo, decimum quartum Codicis qua- 
ternionem complectentia, ad calcem fol. 104 Ὁ 
adnotante eádem manu, quae ad ff. 16b, 95 b, 
Desiderantur omnia abhinc usque ad v. 26 


capitis 34! in textu Graeco.] 


— 


[Ὁ 


EC 


με 


HAN 
— -- 
CAP. Ul. 16 ut filium suum unicum dedit 
ut omnes qui credit in eum 
non pereat sed habeat uitam aeternam 
* 17 non enim misit ds filium suum 
in mundum ut iudicet mundum 
sed ut saluetur mundus per illum 
18 propter hoc qui credit in eum non iudicabitur 
qui autem non credit iam iudicatus est 
quia non credidit 
in nomine unici fili dei 
19 hoc est autem iudicium 


quoniam lux uenit in mundum 


et dilexerunt homines 
[Caput III, v. 16 foo 113 a praescripsit Bent- magis tenebra quam lucem 
leius.] erant enim illorum mala facta 
20 omnis enim qui male agit 


odit lucem et non uenit ad lucem 
ut non arguantur operas eius de luce 
21 qui autem facit ueritatem uenit ad lucem 
ut manifestetur opera eius 
quoniam deo sunt operata 
a2 | post haec exiuit ihs et discipuli eius 
in iudaeam terram et ibi 
morabatur cum illis et baptizabat 
23 erat autem et iohannes baptizans 
in aeno prope salim 
quoniam aquae multae erant ibi 
et ueniebant et baptizabantur 
24 nondum enim missus fuerat in carcerem 
25 iohannes ‘facta est ergo quaestio 
& discipulis iohannis 
ad iudaeos de purificatione 
26 et uenerunt ad iohannen et dixerunt illi 
(Fol. 113a.) 


Cap. III. 16—26. 
13 


98 


— A 
IQAN 
—, a, 


KAT 
— -- 
pae oo «v μετα σον περαν 
του topdavov w av μεμαρτυρηκασ' 
ἴδον ουτοσ βαπτιζει. καὶ mayreo 
εἐρχονται προσ avrov 
απεκριθὴ Ἰωαννησ Kat εἰπεν 
ov δυναται ανθρωποσ λαμβανειν ovdev 
cay μὴ ἡ δεδομενον avro εκ Tov ovpavov 


αντοι ὕμεισ μοι μαρτυρειται 


-. 
OT εἰπὸν οὐκ εἰμι ο XPT αλλ ort 


απεσταλμενοσ εἰμι ἐενπροσθεν exewov 


: oexov THY νυμφὴην νυμιοσ erty 


o δεφιλοσ rov νυμφιου 

ο ἐστωσ και ἀκονων αὐτου 

xapa χαίρει δια τὴν φωνὴν του νυμῴιον 
avr ow ἡ χαρα ἡ ἐμὴ πεπλήρωται 
εκεινον Set avgavery . ewe δε eXarrovotas 


οανωθεν epxoj.evoa «ἐπάνω TAYTWY «er 

o Se wy aro THe γὴσ 

€x TNT yoo ἐστιν Kat ἐκ THT γησ λαλει 

0 €K TOU ουρανου €pxoj.evoa 

0 EWPAKEY καὶ )KOUG €V μαρτυρει 

και THY μαρτυριαν avrov ovóeur Aap fave 


o AaBuy avrov τὴν μαρτυριαν exppayurev 
oro c αληθησ ἐστιν 


III. 


«πὶ — 
ov yap απεστιλεν o θσ “τα ρηματα τοῦ θυ Aare 


ov yop ex μετρου διδωσιν o ὃσ ro và. 
0 πατὴρ ἀγαπα τον BLOV 


και παντα ἐδωκεν EV τῇ χειρι avrov 


* ἵνα "οπιστενων εἰσ TOV ὕιον 


€x ζωὴν αἰωνιον - o 0€ απειθων τω uo 


ovx οψεται ζωὴν 
αλλ ἡ opyn τουθὺ peve er avroy 
Lo, 


400 OVV EYVW 0 LNT - OTL ἤκουσαν οι φαρισαιοι 


(Fol, 153 8.) 


IV. 


27 


34 


I 


‘SEC IOHAN 


rabbi qui erat tecum trans 
iordanen cui tu testimonium reddidisti 


ecce hic baptizat. et omnes ueniunt ad eum 


ueniunt ad eum 


respondit iohannes et dixit 


non potest homo accipere quidquam 
nisi illi datum fuerit de caelo 

ipsi uos mihi testimonium redditis 

quia dixi non sum xps sed quia 

missus sum ante illum 

qui habet sponsam sponsus est 

amicus autem sponsi 

qui stat et audit eum 

gaudio gaudet propter uocem sponsi 
hoc ergo gaudium meum inpletum est 
illum oportet crescere. me autem minui 
qui desusum uenit supra omnes est 

qui autem de terra est 

de terra est et de terra loquitur 

qui de caelo uenit 

quod uidit et audiuit testatur 

et testimonium eius nemo accipit 

qui accepit eius testimonium signauit 
quoniam ds uerax est 

quem enim misit ds uerba del loquitur 
non enim ad mensuram ds dat spm 
‘ds diligit filium: 

et omnia dedit in manu eius 

ut qui credit in filium 

habeat uitam aeternam ‘qui autem non ore 
filio non uidebit uitam 


—> . 
sed ira dei manet in eum 


Cum ergo cognouit 188. quia audierunt farisaei 


(Fol. 114 α.) 


Care. ΠῚ, 26—IV. r. 


xf Ses 


— ~, ὡ — 
KAT IQANNHN 


— 
oTt τησ πλειονασ μαθητασ ποιει 


- — 
και βαπτειζει ἡ Ἰωαννησ᾽ καιτοιγε avrog ino 


ovx εβαπτιζεν αλλ οἱ μαθηται avrov 


: αφηκεν τὴν ἴουδαιαν γὴν 


καὶ ἀπηλθεν παλιν εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 
sede δε avrov διερχεσθαι δια τησ σαμαριασ 


ἐρχεται ovy eur πολιν Tyo σαμαριασ 
λεγομενην avxap* πλήσιον του χωριου 
ov εδωκεν ako) οἴωσηφ ro Uu» avrov 
ἣν Se exec πηγὴ Tov laxo: 
0 ουν ino κεκοπιακωσ 
εκ THO οδοιποριασ εκαθεζετο ουτωσ 
ἐπι τὴ πηγὴ wpa yV oc exry 
€pxeraa γυνὴ €x THe σαμαριασ ἀντλησαι ὕδωρ 
λεγει avry o une Soo μοι Trew 
ot ydp μαθηταὶ avrov απεληλνθισαν 
εἰσ τὴν πολιν - iva τροφασ ἀγορασωσιν 
λεγει ovy avro 7) γυνὴ ἡ σαμαριτισ 
συϊουδαιοσ ὧν πωσ παρ ἐμου 
πεῖν αἰτεισ γυναικοσ σαμαριτιδοσ 
.--- 
απεκριθὴη o tno και εἰπεν avr 
εἰ ἡδεισ τὴν δωρεαν του θυ 
και τισ ἐστιῦ 0 λεγων σοι Soo μοι wee 
συνητησασ αὐτὸν 
και edwxey ay σοι ὕδωρ Lov 
ω-- 
λεγει avro ἢ γυνὴ ke ovde ἀαντλημα exe 
«at ro φρεαρ ἐστι βαθυ. ποθεν exec ὕδωρ ζων 
— td 
μὴ ov μειζων €. Tov πρσ μων taxwB 
oc εδωκεν new To φρεαρ 
καὶ αντοσ εξ QUTOV €TTLEV 
και ot ὕιοι avrov και τα θρεμματα 
c 
απεκριθη ino και εἰπεν avr) πασ 0 πεινων 
€x του ὕδατοσ rovrov - διψησει παλιν 
(Fol. 114 5.) 


‘SEC IOHAN 99 
Se — 
. os) . 6 . 
quia ihs plures discipulos facit 
. . ru 

et baptizat quam iohannes. et tamen ipse ibs. 

non baptizabat sed discipuli eius 

reliquid terram iudaeam 

et abiit iterum in galilaeam 

oportebat autem illum transire per samariam 

uenit ergo in ciuitatem samariae 

quae dicitur sychar.iuxta agrum 

quod dedit iacob - ioseph filio suo 


Erat autem ibi fons 1acob 


ihs autem fatigatus 
de itinere sedebat sic 
supra fontem hora erat quasi sexta 


uenit mulier de samaria- haurire aquam 


dicit illi ihs da mihi bibere 


discipuli enim illius abierant 

in ciuitatem ut escas emerent 
dicit illi ergo mulier samaritana 
tu cum sis iudaeus- quomodo a me 


bibere petis. muliere samaritanae 


respondit ihs et dixit ei 


si scires donum del 

et quis est qui tibi dicet da mihi bibere 
tu peteres ab eo 

et dedisset tibi aquam uiuam 


dicit illi mulier dme nec hauritorium habes 


et puteus altus est. unde habes aquam uiuam 
numquid tu maior es patre nostro iacob 

qui dedit nobis puteum 

et ipse ex eo uiuit 


et fili eius et pecora 


respondit ihs et dixit illi omnis qui bibit, 


ex hac aqua - sitiet iterum 
(Fol. 115 a.) 


Car. IV. 1—13. 


100 


— — 0 —À 
KAT IOAN 
— ν-ὄ — 


o δεπεινων ex rov ὕδατοσ ov eyw Swowavrw IV. 14 
ov δευψησει εἰσ Tov αἰωνα-αλλα ro ὕδωρ 
0 eyw δωσω avro γενήσεται ey avro πηγὴ ὕδατοσ 
αλλομενον εἰσ Luv αἰωνιον 

λεγει προσ avrov ἡ γυνὴ ke Bog pot Tovro To UÓwp 15 
ἵνα μὴ δειψησω μηδὲ ἐρχωμαι 
evOade avrA«w 

λεγει avr 0 ine ὕπαγε φωνῆσον rovavopacey 16 
και ελθε ενθαδε : απεκρειθη ἡ γυνὴ 17 
και εἶπεν ayOpa ovk exw 

λεγει aurn o we καλωσ εἰπασ 
ort ανδρα ovk εχεισ 
πέντε yap avdpac ἐσχεσ 18 
και νυν OV EXEL οὐκ ἐστιν σον ανὴρ 
Tovro αληθεσ εἰρηκασ' 

λεγει avro ἡ γυνὴ Ke Gewpw ort mpodyrye ει 19 
οἱ TATEPET ἡμῶν EV τω Op€t TOUTW 20 
προσεκυνῆσαν 
και ὕμεισ Aeyere ort εν Ἱεροσολυμοισ' 
ἐστιν οτοποσ οπου προσκυνειν Set 

λεγει αυτή o - YUVAL rurTeve μοι 21 
OTL €pxera1 WPA. - OTE ovre EV Tovro τωρει 
oure Y ἵεροσολυμοισ -προσκννήσεται TO mpi . 
ὕμεισ προσκυνειτεο ovk οιδατε 22 
ἡμεισ προσκυνουμεν o οιδαμεν 
οτι ἢ σωτήρια εκ των Ἰουδαίων ἐστιν 
αλλα ερχεται wpa καὶ νυν ἐστιν 23 
ore οἱ αληθινοι προσκυνηται 
προσκυνήσουσιν TQ) πατρι εν πνι. 
και αληθεια" και yap o πατὴρ τοιουτουσ' ζητει 
τουσ προσκυνουντασ QUTOY -πνευμα ο θσ 24 
και τουσ προσκυνονντασ εν TW 


καὶ αληθεια προσκυνεῖν Se 


(Fol. 1155.) 


bi 


SEC IOHAN 

-- --Οο-. — 
qui autem uiuit de aqua ‘quam ego dabo ei 
non sitiet in aeternum. sed aquam. 
quam ego davo ei - fiet in eo fons aquae 


salientis in uitam aeternam 


dicit ad eum mulier dme da mihi hanc aquam 


ut non sitiam neque ueniam 
hic haurire 


dicit illi ihs *uade uoca uirum tuum 


et ueni hoc : respondit mulier 
et dixit uirum non habeo 


dicit illiihs bene dixisti 


quia uirum non habes 

quinque enim uiros habuisti 

et nunc quem habes non est tuus uir 
hoc uerum dixisti 


dicit illi mulier dme uideo quod profeta eg 


patres nostri in hoc monte 
adorauerunt 
et uos dicitis quia in hierosomis 


est locus ubi adorare oportet | 


dicit illi ibs mulier crede mihi 


quia uenit hora. cum neque in hoc monte 

neque hierosolymis - adorauitis patri 

uos adoratis quod nescitis 

nos adoramus quod scimus 

quia salus de iudaeis est 

sed uenit hora et nunc est 

cum ueri adoratores 

adorauerunt patri in spu 

et ueritate. etenim pater tales quaerit 

adorantes eum Eps ds 

et adorantes in spu 

et ueritate adorare oportet , 
(Fol r16a.) 


Car, IV. 14—24. 


λεγει avro ἡ γυνὴ oda. ort μεσσειασ epxerat IV. 25 
o λεγομενοσ xpo *oray ελθη εκεινοσ 


ἀναγγελλει ney avra, 
--.- 
λεγει αὐτὴ o tne eyw εἰμι o λαλων σοι 26 
και ev τουτω ἤλθον ot μαθηται avrov 27 


και εθαυμαζον ort- μετα γυναικοσ 


ελαλει. ουδεισ μεντοι εἰπεν avrw 


τι ζητεισ ἡ τι λαλεισ μετ avro 

αφηκεν ovy ἡ γυνὴ τὴν ὕδριαν εαυτὴσ 28 
και ἀπῆλθεν euo τὴν πολιν 
και λεγει Tow ανθρωποισ 

_ δευτε εἰδετε ανθρωπον οσ eurey μοι ravra 29 

οσα ETOLNTG- μητι εκεινοσ ἐστιν O xpo 

καὶ ἐξηλθον ex Tyo Todkewo - καὶ ἤρχοντο 30 
προσ avrov' ev To μεταξυ npwrwv avrov 31 


ot μαθηται λεγοντεσ : paBBe φαγε 
o 0e «uev avro - eyo Bpwow exo φαγειν 32 
ἣν ὕμεισ ovk obare 


ελεγον δε εν eavrow ot μαθηται 33 
porro ἤνεγκε avro φαγειν 
λέγει avrow o ine - euoy βρωμα εστιν 34 


tva ποιήσω To GeAnpe.- Tov πεμψαντοσ με 
Kat τελειωσω αὐτοῦ TO Epyov 
ovx ὕμεισ Acyere 35 
or, τετραμηνοσ ἐστιν 
και o θερισμοσ epxeraa : ov λεγω ὕμειν 
Exapare rove οφθαλμουσ ὕμων 
και θεασασθαι rac χωρασ - ort λευκαι εἰσιν 
προσ θερισμον : ἡδη o θεριζων 36 
puo Gov λαμβανει. Kat συναγει καρπὸν 
εἰσ ζωὴν αἰωνιον 
ἵνα καὶ οσπειρων Kat o θεριζων 


ομου xo47ffity yap rovro ἐστιν 37 
(Fol 116 δ.) 


SEC IOHAN 101 
SSS OS 
dicit illi mulier scio quia messias uenit 
qui dicitur xpa cum uenerit ille 
adnuntiauit nobis omnia 
dicit illi ihs ego sum qui loquor tecum 
et in hoc uenerunt discipuli eius 
et mirabantur quoniam cum muliere 
loquebatur : nemo tamen dixit illi 
quid quaeris aut quid loqueris cum ea 
dismisit ergo mulier. hydriam suam 
et abiit in ciuitatem 
et dicit hominibus 
uenite uidete hominem . qui dixit mihi omnia 
quae feci numquid ille est xps 
Et exierunt de ciuitate.et ueniebant ad eum 
inter haec rogabant eum 
discipuli dicentes. rabbi manduca 
ad ille dixit eis. ego escam habeo manducare 
quam uos ignoratis 
dicent discipuli adinuicem 
numquid aliquis adtulit illi manducare 
dicit illis ih mea esca est 
ut faciam uoluptatem qui me misit 
et perficiam opus eius 
nonne uos dicitis 
quoniam quattuor mensis sunt 
et messis uenit *ecce dico uobis 
Eleuate oculos uestros 
et uidete regiones quoniam albae sunt 
ad messem ‘iam qui metet 
mercedem accipit . et congregat fructum 
in uitam aeternam 
ut et qui seminat et qui metit 
simul gaudeat in hoc est enim 


(Fol. 117a.) 


Cap. IV. 25—37. 


102 


J&If &f 


o Xoyoc o αληθεινοσ΄ ort αλλοσ ἐστινο σπειρων IV. 
καὶ αλλοσ o θεριζων - eyw απεσταλκα ὕμασ' 38 
θεριξειν - ovx ὕμεισ ἐκοπιασατε | 

αλλοι ἐκοπιασαν Kat ὕμεισ 

εἰσ TOV κοπον avrov εἰσεληλυθατε 

εκ δε ro πολεωσ εκεινησ 39 


πολλοι επιστευσαν εἰσ avrov 


τῶν σαμάριτων δια Tov λογον 

THT γυναικοσ μαρτυρουσησ 

οτι εἰπεν μοι παντα.οσα ἐεποιησα 

wo ovy ἤλθον προσ avrov οἱ σαμαριται 40 
ἤρώωτων avrov μειναι παρ αντοισ 

και ἐμεινεν exer δυο ἡμερασ 


Kat πολλω πλειουσ επιστευσαν 41 


_ δία τὸν Xoyov avrov «τὴ δε γυναικει ἐλεγο 42 


ort οὐκετι δια τὴν σὴν μαρτυριαν 
πιστενομεν «αὐτου Yap ακηκοαμεν 
και οιἰδαμεν ort ουτοσ ἐστιν 


αληθωσ o σωτὴρ του κοσμου o χρσ 


: pera Se rac δνυοημερασ εξηλθεν εκειθεν 43 
: εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν * avrog yap ue ἐμαρτυρησεν 44. 


ort προφητὴσ ev τη ἴδια πατριδι τειμὴν ovk Xe 


:ex ovy ηλθεν εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 45 


εξεδεξαντο avrov oi γαλιλαιοι παντα εωρακοτεσ 


a ἐποιήῆσεν εν Ἱερουσαλὴμ Ty €opry) 
καὶ avrot γαρλθον εἰσ τὴν ὁρτὴν 


nev ovy παλιν εἰσ τὴν Kava THO γαλιλαιασ 46 


οπου εποιησεν ro ὕδωρ otwoy 


ἣν δετισ βασιλισκοσ 


ov οὕιοσ 10 «vet εν καφαρναουμ, 
OVTOC ακουσασ οτι ine ἥκει εκ Tyo ἴουδαιασ 47 
εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν -απηλθεν προσ avrov 
και )pora iva καταβὴ και ἴασηται 
(Fol. 1175.) 


SEC JOHAN 


uerbum ueritatis - quia alius est qui serit 
et alius qui metit. ego misi uos 
metere. non uos lauorastis 


alu lauorauorauerunt et uos 


‘in lauorem eorum introistis 


de ciuitate autem illa 

multi crediderunt in eum 

samaritanorum propter uerbum 

mulieris testimonium reddentis 

quoniam dixit mihi omnia. quaecumque feci 


cum ergo uenissent ad eum samaritani 


rogabant eum ut maneret adpud eos 


et mansit illic uiduo 
et multo plures crediderunt 


propter uerbum illius. mulieri autem dicebant 


quoniam non iam propter tuum testimoniu. 
credimus .ipsum enim audiuimus 
et scimus quoniam hic est 


uere saluator mundi xps 


post uiduum autem exiit inde 


in galilaeam . ipse enim ihs testificatus eat 
quoniam profeta in sua patria - honorem non ha 
cum ergo uenit in galilaeam 

exceperunt eum galilaei . omnia uidentes 

quae fecit in hierusalem die festo 


et ipsi enim uenerant in diem festum 


uenit ergo iterum in cana galilaeae 


ubi fecit aquam uinum 


Erat autem quidam basiliscus 


cuius filius infirmus erat in cafarnaum 
hic cum audisset quod ihs uenit de iudaea 
in galilaeam - abiit ad eum et rogabat 


ut descenderet et sanaret ~~ 


(Fol. 118a.) 


CAP. IV. 37—47. 


avrov Toy ὕϊον -μελλεν yap αποθνησκειν 


— 
Curev ovy o tno προσ avrov 


€ay μη σήμεια Kat Tepara ἴδητε 


ov μη riz Teva T€ - Neyermpoo avroy o βασιλισκοσ 49 


—_— 
κε καταβηθι πρὶν aroBarw ro παιδιον 


— 
Aeyet avro 0 yo 7ropevov o toc σου Ly 


επιστευσεν o ayÜparrog τω λογω 

w εἶπεν avro 0 no «καὶ ETOPEVETO 

non δε avrov καταβαινοντοσ ὕπηντησαν 
οἱ δονλοι avro και ἤγγειλαν aveo 


ort οὕιοσ σου £m 


Εσυθετο ovy τὴν wpay wap avrov 


εν ἡ κομψοτερον εσχεν 

και εἰπαν avro ort εχθεσ' 

wpay εβδομὴν αφηῆκεν avrov o πυρετοσ 
€yvo ovy o πατὴρ. οτι εν ἐκείνη τήωρα φ 
εν ἡ εἰπεν αυτω O ine ort οὕιοσ σου Cy 

και ETUTTEVC'EV QUTOG - και ἢ OLKLA GUTOV OAT 
TOV παλιν Sevrepov σήμειον εποιησεν o Ὡσ 
Mov ex tye Ἰουδαιασ eu τὴν γαλιλαιαν 


Ag μετα ravra. yy eopro των Ἰουδαίων 
— 


f &j 


και aveBy v εἰσ ἱἹεροσολυμα 

ἐστιν Be ev row ἵἱεροσολυμοισ 

ev τὴ προβατικὴ κολυμβηθρα 

ἢ λεγομένη eBpaiore 

βελζεθα πεντεστοασ εχουσα 

εν ταυταισ OVV KATEKELVTO 

πληθοσ των ἀσθενουντων τυφλων Xow 


ξηρων παραλντικων 
ἐκδεχομενων τὴν Tov ὕδατοσ κινησιν 


: ἣν δεανθρωποσ εκει- τριάκοντα και OKTW 


ern ἐχων εν Ty ασθενια avrov 


— 
τουτον ἴδω o ing κατακειμενον 


(Fol. 118 5.) 


50 


51 


53 


54 


V. 1 


BE Eua 


* , 


filium eius erat enim moriturus 


dixit ergo ihs ad eum 


81 signa et prodigia uideritis 
non credetis dicit ad eum regulus 


dme descende priusquam moriatur puer 


dicit illi ihs uade filius tuus uiuit 


credidit homo uerbo 

quod dixit ihs et.abibat 

iam autem illo descendente obuiauerunt 
serui eius et nuntiauerunt ej 


quoniam filius eius uibit 


interrogabat ergo horam ab eis 


in qu& melius habuit 
et dixerunt ei quoniam heri 
hora septima dismisit eum febris 


cognouit ergo pater- quoniam in illa hora 


in qua dixit illi ihs quoniam filius tuus uiuit 


et credidit ipse et domus tota 
hoc iterum secundum signum fecit ihà 


ueniens de iudaea in galilaeam 


post haec erat dies festus iudaeorum 


et ascendit ihs in hierosolymis 
est autem hierosolymis 

in natatoria piscina 

quae dicitur ebraeice 

helzetha quinque porticos habens 
in his discumbebant 


turbae infirmorum . caecorum et claudorum 


aridorum paralyticorum 
expectantium aquae motum 

erat autem homo ibi - triginta et octo 
annos habens in infirmitate sua 


hunc uidit ihs iacentem 


(Fol. 1 19 a.) 


Carr. IV. 47— V. 6. 


108 


—-— Οο-, 
104 KAT IOAN 


και γνουσ ort πολυν 797) xpovov exet. 
λεγει avro θελεισ ὕγιησ γενεσθαι 


λεγει avro οασθενων 
κεανθρωπον OUK EXW- iva oray ταραχθη 

το ὕδωρ. Bady pe «ur τὴν κολυμβηθραν 
ἐν w δεερχομαι eyw 
αλλοσ προ ej.0v καταβαινει 

λεγειαυτω o ine ἐγειρε και apoy 
τὸν κραβαττον σου και περιπατει 
και ὕγιησ eyevero o ἀανθρωποσ 
και ἐγερθεισ pev τον κραβαττον avrov 
και περιεπατει nv δεσαββατον 

€Xeyov ovv ot ἴουδαιοι τω τεθαραπευμενω 
σαββατον «aw και ovx εἐξεστιν σοι apat 
TOV κραβαττον σον 

απεκριθη αντοισ o Trovjaag με dyin 
ἐκεινοσ μοι εἰπεν 
apov rov κραβαττον σου και περιπατει 
ἠρώτησαν avroy rur ἐστιν οανθρωποσ 
ο εἰπὼν σοι: apoy τον κραβαττον σου 
και περιπατει.- o ἀσθενων ovk nde Tuo ἣν 
o yap io evevorey οχλου οντοσ 
εν τωτοπω μεταταντα 
ευρισκει AVTOV 0 ae εν Tw Lepo 

και €urey avro ἴδε ὕγιησ yeyovac’ 
μήκετι apaprave 
ἵνα μὴ χεῖρον τι σοι γενηται 
αἀπηλθεν ovy οανθρωποσ και ἀαπηγγιλεν 
TOUT Ἰουδαιοισ οτι ing ἐστιν οποιήσασ pe iyu) 
και δια Tovro εἐδιωκον οι ἴουδαιοι Tov ἣν 
ort ταῦτα ἐποιει σαββατω 
οδε ine απεκρειθὴ avroww 


o πατὴρ μον «o7 apr. epyaferat 
(Fol. 119 5.) 


Cap. V. 6—17. 


10 


II 


12 


13 


16 


17 


Ja 
[^ 


8 HAN 
— = 
et sciens quod multum iam tempus habet 
dicit illi uis sanus fieri 
dicit illi infirmus 
dme hominem non habeo “αὖ cum mota fuerit 
aqua* mittat me in natatoriam 
dum autem ego uenio 
alius ante me descendit 
dicit illi ihs surge et tolle 
grabattum tuum et ambula 
et sanus factus est homo 
et surgens sustulit grabattum suum 
et ambulabat erat autem sabbatum 
dicebant ergo iudaei qui sanatus erat 
sabbatum est. et non licet tibi tollere 
grabattum tuum 
respondit eis qui fecit me sanum 
ille mihi dixit 
tolle grabattum tuum et ambula 
interrogauerunt eum quis est homo qui tibi 
dixit . tolle grabattum tuum et ambula 
infirmis nesciebat quis esset 
ihs enim deuerterat cum esset turba 
inloco post haec 
inuenit eum ihs in templo 
Et dixit illi ecce sanus factus es 
iam noli peccare 
ne quid tibi peius contingat 
abiit ergo homo et nuntiauit 
iudaeis quia ihs est qui me fecit sanum 
et propter hoc persequebantur iudaei ihm - 
quia haec faciebat sabbato 
ihs autem respondit eis 


pater meus usque modo operatur 
(Fol. 1204.) 


— 


SEC IOHAN 105 


0 
et ego peror ‘propter hoc magis iudaei 


καγω epyaLopar - δια rovro μαλλον ot Ἰουδαιοι V. 18 
εζητουν avrov αἀποκτειναὶ quaerebant illum occidere 
οτι ov povov eAve ro σαββατον quod non solum solueret sabbatum 
αλλα και πατερα ἴδιον eXeye Toy ὃν sed et patrem suum dicebat dm 
ἴσον cavrov ποίων τω Ow aequalem se faciebat deo 
axexpi ovy o ine Kat εἰπεν AUTOW 9 | respondit igitur ihs et dixit illis 
ἀμὴν apyy Xeyo ὕμειν ov δυναται amen amen dico uobis non potest 
0 biog Tov ayÜporrov ποιειν τι ab eavrov filius hominis facere aliquid a se 
«ay py τι Bern ποιουντα Tov πατερα nisi uideat patrem facientem 
@ yap εκεινοσ ποιησὴ ταντα καὶ O ὕιοσ ποιεῖ quaecumque enim ille fecerit. haec et filius facit 
OJLOUUO * O yap πατὴρ ἀγαπα Tov ὕιον 20 similiter. pater enim diligit filium 
καὶ παντα δεικνυει ara - a. Gy αὐτοσ TT00) et omnia ostendit ei . quaecumque ipse facit 
καὶ peLova rovrov δεικνυσιν avro epya et maiora horum ostendit ei opera 
ἵνα ὕμεισ θαυμαζητε ut uos miremini 
WOFEP Yap 0 πατὴρ εγειρει TOUT VeKpova- 21 sicut enim pater suscitat mortuos 
και ζωοποιει et uiuificat 
οντωσ και οὗιοσ ove θελει ζωοποιει sic et filius ques uult uiuificat 
οὐδὲ yap 0 πατὴρ κρίνει ovdeva 22 nec enim pater iudicat aliquem 
αλλα τὴν κρισιν πασαν δεδωκεν ro Vio sed iudicium omne dedit filio 
ἵνα παντεσ τειμωσι TOV ÜLOV 23 ut omnes honorificent filium 
καθωσ τειμωσι rov πατερα sicut honorificant patrem *qui non honortfcat 
= 10 μη τειμὼν TOV ÜLOV - OV τειμα TOV πατερα filium. non honorificat patrem 
TOV πεμψαντα avrov qui misit illum 
μα : ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν : o Toy λογον pow z4 | amen amen dico uobis. qui uerbum meum 
ακονων - και πιστευων TO πεμψαντι με audit. et credit ei qui me misit 
extet ζωὴν auovuoy - και εἰσ κριστν habet uitam aeternam ‘et in iudicium 
οὐκ ἔρχεται αλλα μεταβεβηκεν non uenit ‘sed transiit 
ex rov Gayarov ew ζωην a morte in uitam 
ay αμην Acyw ὑμειν 2s | amenamen dicouobis 
OTL ἐρχεταὶ wpa καὶ νυν ἐστιν quoniam uenit hora et nunc est 
OTE OL V€Kpot ακουσονται THE φωνησ' cum mortui audient uocem 
rov ὕιου rov Ov Kat ot ἀκουσαντεσ fili del et qui audierint 
ζησουσιν wo yap o rarnp o (ov 26 uiuent sicut enim pater uiuens 
(FoL 1205.) [ic (Fol. 121 a.) 
Car. V. 17— 26. 


14 


106 


SRS fu 


exei Conv ev «avro - ovra edwKev Kat Tw vies 
ζωην exew ev eavrw* καὶ ἐξουσιαν ἐδωκεν 

αντω και κρισιν TTOLELV 

ort ὕιοσ ἀανθρωπου ἐστιν μη θαυμαζετε Tovro 
οτι Epxerat wpa 

εν ἢ παντεσ οι εν TOU μνημειοισ 

ακουσονται THO φωνὴσ avrov 

και ἐξελευσονται οἱ τα αγαθα ποιησαντεσ 

εἰσ avacracw Cuno - ot Se φαυλα πρασσοντεσ 


εἰσ ἀνάστασιν κρισεωσ 


Ov δυναμαι eyo απ ἐμαντου 


mote ουδεν καθωσ akovo κρινω 
και ἢ κρισισ ἡ ἐμὴ δικαια ἐστιν 

ort ov ζητω ro θελημα τὸ ejoy 
adda ro θελημα Tov πεμψαντοσ' με 


> «ay eyo μαρτυρω περι ἐμαυτου 


7) μαρτυρια pov ovk ἐστιν αληθησ' 
αλλοσ ἐστιν o papTrupwy περι euov 


και οιἰδατε ort αληθησ ἐστιν 


ἡ μαρτυρια μουν μαρτύρει περί ἐμοῦ 


ὕμεισ απεσταλκατε προσ ἴωαννην 


και μεμαρτυρηκεν Ty αληθεια 

eyw δεου παρα ανθρωπων -τὴν μαρτυρειαν 
λαμβανω αλλαταυτα λεγω 

ἵνα ὕμεισ σωθητε. εκεινοσ ἣν ολυχλον 

o καιομενοσ Kat φαινων - ὕμεισ δε ηθελήσατε 
αγαλλιαθηναι προσ wpay εν ro φωτι avrov 
eyo δε exo τὴν μαρτυριαν 


μειζονα rov ἵωανου - Ta. yap epya a ἐδωκεν μοι 


o πατὴρ iva TeÀuoq € avra - avra TO, Epya α ποιω 


μαρτυριπερι eov - ort o πατὴρ je azreoiA€- 
και οπεμψασ j.€ ramp" 
EXELYOT GUTOG μαρτυρι περι ἐμου 


(Fol 1215.) 


27 


28 


49 


40 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


I 


habet uitam in se ‘sic dedit et filio 
uitam habere in semet ipso - et potestatem dedit εἰ 
iudicium facere 

quoniam filius honis est . nolite mirari hoc 
quoniam uenit hora 

in qua omnes qui in monumentis sunt 

audient uocem eius 

et procedent qui bona fecerunt 

in resurrectionem uitae. qui autem male egerunt 
in resurrectione iudicii 

non possum ego à me 

facere quidquam sicut audio iudico 

et iudicium meum iustum est 

quoniam non quaero uoluntatem meam 

sed uoluntatem eius qui me misit 

8i ego testimonium dico dico de me 
testimonium meum non est uerum 

alter est qui testimonium dicit de me 

et scitis quoniam uerum est 

testimonium quod testatur de me 


uos misistis ad iohannen 


et testimonium pehibuit ueritati 

ego autem non ab hominibus testimonium 
accipio - sed haec dico 

ut uos salbi sitis. ille erat lucerna 

ardens. et lucens. uos autem uoluistis 
exultare ad oram ‘in lumine eius 

ego autem habeo testimonium 

maius quam iohannen opera enim quae dedit mini 
pater ut perficiam ea. ipsa opera quae facio 
testimonium dat de me ‘quia pater me misit 
et qui me misit pater 

illeipse testimonium perhibet de me 


(Fol. 122 a.) 


Cap. V. 36—37. 


sss 


[5] 


IRS 


: ovre φωνὴν avrov πωποτε AKNKOATE v. 
ovre et007 avrou ewpaxare 
3 Ka. Tov λογον avrov οὐκ €xere 38 
μένοντα ev ὕμειν ort oy ἀπεσταῖκεν exetvor 
TOUTW ὕμεισ OU πιστευετε 
Epeware raa γραφασ οτιὕμεισ Gokevre 39 
€xew ev avraue ζωὴν αἰωνιον 


Και €K€LVG4 εἰσὶν ἁαμαρτανμουσαιε 


περι ἐμου και ov θελεται ελθειν προσ με 40 
ἵνα ζωὴν αἰωνιον ἐχητε 
δοξαν παρα ανθρωπων ov λαμβανω 41 
αλλα eyvwxa ὕμασ ort ovk exere 42 
τὴν ἀγαπὴν του Óv εν εαυτοισ 

€yo εἐληλυθα ev τω ovopatt Tov «po μον 43 


καὶ ov λαμβανετε pe- eay αλλοσ ελθη 
εν Tw ονοματι ro ἴδιω. exewoy λημψεσθαι 
voc δυνασθαι ὕμεισ πιστευσαι 44 
Sofay παρ αλληλων λαμβανοντεσ 
και τὴν Sofay τὴν παρα του μονου θυ 
ον ζητιτε μη δοκειτε 45 
OTL ἐγω κατηγορήσω ὕμασ 
προσ TOV πρὰ ἐστιν οκατηγορων ὕμων 
μωῦσησ εἰσ oy ὕμεισ ἡλπικατε 
ELYAP ETLOTEVETE | uia ec- ETLOTEVETE 46 
GY ἐμοι- περι ἐμου yap ἐκεινοσ ἐγραψεν 
ec Se Tour εκεινου γραμμασιν ov πιστενετε 47 
TOC TOUT ἐμοισ ρημασν πιστευσητε 

: pera ravra anne o ane περαντὴησ θαλασσησΎ!. 1 
Tho γαλιλαιασ εἰσ τα μερη THO τιβεριαδοσ 


ἠκολουθι δεαντω οχλοσ πολυσ 2 
ore €Ücopovv τα σημεια 
a erovet emt των ασθενουντων 
io, 
: ἀπηλθεν ovy εἰσ To οροσ tno 3 


(Fol. 122 5.) 


SEC IOHAN 107 
—— —- —- 


neque uocem eius umquam audistis 


neque speciem eius uidistis 


et uerbum eius non habetis 
manens in uobis. quoniam qem misit ille 


huic uos non creditis 


scrutate scripturas quoniam uos putatis 


habere in eis uitam aeternam 


et ille sunt quae testantur 


" deme etnon uultis uenire ad me 


ut uitam aeternam habeatis 
gloriam ab hominibus non accipio 
sed cognoui uos quoniam non habetis 


caritatem del in uobis 


Ego ueni in nomine patris mei 


et non me accipitis . si alius uenerit 
in nomine suo - illum accipietis 
quomodo potestis uos credere 
gloriam abinuicem accipientes 

et gloriam ab unico deo 

non queritis - nolite arbitrari 

quod ego accusaturus.sum uos 

ad patrem est qui uos accuset 
moyses in quem uos speratis 

si enim crederitis moysi crederetis utique 
et mihi*de me enim ille scripsi 

si enim illiuslitteris non creditis 


quomodo meis uerbis credetis 


post haec abiit ihs trans mare 


galilaeae - in fines tiberiadis 
sequebantur autem illum turba multa 
quoniam uidebant signa 


quae faciebat super infirmos 


abiit ergo in montem ihs 


(Fol. 1232.) 


Carp. V. 37—VI. 3. 


sass f 


και exaÜw Cero exet μετα Tov μαθήτων avrov ΥἹ. 


: eyyvo Se qv το πασχα ἡ €opr rov Ἰουδαίων 4 
: erapag ovy rove οφθαλμουσ o qe 5 


καὶ θεασαμενοσ ort οχλοσ πολυσ 
ἐρχεται προσ avrov - καὶ λεγει προσ φιλιππὸον 


ποθεν ἀγορασωμεν aprove “ἵνα φαγωσιν ovra 


τοῦτο δεελεγεν πειραζων avroy 6 


avroo yap 19€. τι ἡμελλεν ποιειν 


aroxpeverat avro φιλιπποσ 7 


διακοσίων Syvapusy - ovk apkovaty avTowr 


aprot "ἵνα εκαστοσ avrov Bpaxv Aag 


λεγει avro εἰσ ex των μαθήτων avrov 8 


ανδραιασ o αδελῴφοσ σιμωνοσ πετρου 

ἐστιν παιδαριον woe oo εἐχει πεντε aprova 9 
κριθινουσ και δυο οψαρια 

αλλα ravra εστιν εἰσ TOCOVTOUG 

εἰπεν ovy o - ποιήσατε Tove ανθρωπουσ 10 
αναπεσειν ἣν 0e xoptoo πολυσ 

εν TW TOTW - Ay€rreg ay ovy ανδρεσ τον apio 

wo πεντακισχιλιοι: eAa Bev ovy τουσ πέντε aprove 11 
o ine και ηυχαριστήσεν και edwxev 

Tou μαθηταισ οι δὲ μαθηται row ἀνακειμενοισ 
ομοιωσ Se καὶ ek των οψαρίων ocov ἡθελον 

wo δεενεπλησθησαν λεγει τοισ μαθηταιῖσ avrev 12 
σνυναγαγετετα περισσευσαντα κλασματα 

ἵνα py Tt απολήται εξ αυτων 

συνήγαγον δε και ἐγεμισαν 13 
δωδεκα κοφινουσ κλασματων 

εκ των TEVTE aprov των κρειθινων 


α επερισσευσαν τοισ βεβρωκοσιν 


a, ^ 
y : Otow ανθρωποι ἵδοντεσ o ἐποιησεν 14. 
—_ 


onpevov e€Aeyoy ort ovrog ἐστιν οπροφητὴσ 


ο εἰσ TOV κοσμον ἐρχομενοσ 


(Fol. 12335.) 


S 
-.- 


fas 
[Ξ 


HAN 
— 


et sedebat ibi cum discipulis suis 

iuxsta autem erat pascha dies solemnis iudaeora 

eleuatis ergo oculis ihs 

et uidens quod turbae multae 

ueniunt ad eum dicit ad philippum 

unde ememus panes ut manducent isti 

hoc autem dicebat temptans eum 

ipse autem sciebat quid esset facturus 
respondit illi philippus 

ducentorum denariorum non sufficiunt eis 

panes ut singuli modicum accipiant 
dicit illi unus ex discipulis eius 

andreas frater simonis petri 

est puer hic qui habet quinque panes 

hordiacios et duos pisces 

sed haec quid sunt in tam multos 

dixit ergo ihs - facite hominea 

recumbere erat autem faenum multum 

in loco recubuerunt ergo uiri numero 

fere quinque milia. accepit ergo panes - 

ihà et benedixit et dedit 

discipulis. discipuli autem recumbentibus 

similiter et de piscipus ‘quantum uolebant 

cum autem saturati essent. dicit discipulis sui 

congregate fragmentorum quae superarunt 

utne quid pereat ex eis 

congr egauerunt autem et inpleuerunt 

duodecim cophinos fragmentorum 

de quinque panibus hordiaciis 

quae superauerunt his qui manducarunt 
homines ergo uidentes quod fecit 

signum dicebant quia hic est propheta 

qui in saeculum uenturus est 

(Fol. 124 a.) 


Car. VI. 3— 14. 


- ουν yvoug ort μελλουσιν epxeaDat 


και εἰν αὐτὸν 

ἵγα ποιησωσιν avrov βασιλεα 
ανεχωρηῆσεν παλιν εἰσ TO opo 

GVTOG μονοσ κακει προσηυχετο 

wo 6€ οψια eyevero 

κατεβησαν ot μαθηται avrov 

ert τὴν θαλασσαν και evBavreo 

εἰσ TO TÀoioy ἤρχοντο εἰσ ro περαν 

Tyo θαλασσησ ισ καφαρναουμ, 

xareha Bey δε avrova ἡ σκοτια 

καὶ ovo εληλνθειο we προσ αντουσ 

ἢ δεθαλασσα ἀνεμου μεγαλουν πνεοντοσ 
διηγειρετο- εληλακοτεσ ovy σταδια 
ὡσει εἰκοσιπέντε ἢ τριάκοντα 

θεωρουσιν τον uy περιπατουντα 

ez tno θαλασσησ και evyva του πλοιου 
γείψομενον και εφοβηθησαν 


o δελεγει avrow eyw εἰμι 
μὴ φοβισθε Ἠθελον ovy avrov 


λαβειν εἰσ το πλοιον και evÜeoa 


To πλοιον eyernGy em τὴσ ygo 


: εἰσ NV υπηγον τὴ ἐπαύριον o οχλοσ 


o στηκωσ πέραν THE θαλασσησ 

€i&ev ort πλοιαριον αλλο ovx ην 

ἐκεῖ εἰ μὴ ev eur οενεβησαν 

οἱ μαθηται avrav ἣν καιοτι ου συνει σήλθεν 
Tow μαθηταισ avrov o "- wr TO πλοιον 
aAÀAa p.ovov ot μαθηται avrov ἀπηλθον 
ἄλλων πλοιαρειων eAÜoyrov 

ex τιβεριαδοσ ἐγγυσ Tov τοπον 


οπον εφαγον Toy aprov 


--- 
Ore ovv εἰδεν o οχλοσ ort eno ovk ἐστιν 


(Fol. 124 &.) 


VI. 15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24. 


Ι 


— 


QAN 109 


e— 0 


[o 


em, 
C 
omy 


“ 


ihs autem sciens quod uenturi essent 


et rapere illum 

ut faciant eum regem 

secessit iterum in montem 

ipse solus et ibi orabat 

cum aum sero factum esset 
descenderunt discipuli eius 

ad mare et ascendentes 

in nauem ueniebant trans fretum 
maris in cafarnaum 

adpraehendit autem eos tenebra 

et necdum uenerat ihs ad illos 

mare quoque magno uento flante in 
surgebat:sed cum remigassent stadia 
uigintiquinque uel triginta 

uident ihm ambulantem 

super mare et iuxta nauem 

fieri et timuerunt 

quibus ipse ait ego sum 

nolite timere. uolebant ergo illum 
accipere in nauem et confestim 
nauis facta est aterram 

in qua ibant altera die turbae 

quae stabant trans mare 

uiderunt quia alia nauicula non erat 
ibi nisi una in quam intrauerant 
discipuli ihu et quia non simul introibit cum 
discipulis suis ihs in nauem 


sed tantum discipuli eius abierant 


aliae nauiculae uenerunt 


de tiberiade prope locum 


ubi manducarunt panem 


cum ergo uidissent turbae quia ihs non est 


(Fol. 125 a.) 


Car. VI. 15—24. 


110 


3j 


[99] 


exer ovde οἱ μαθηται avrov 
ἐλαβον εαυτοισ πλοιαρια 


καιλθον «wr καφαρναουμ΄ 
ζητουντεσ rov uv και EUPOVTET avrov 
repay THO θαλασσὴησ εἰπὸν avro 
pa. ore woe εληλυθασ 


— 
απεκρειθη αντοισ o tno Kat εἰπεν 


αμην ἀμὴν Xeyo ὕμειν 

ζητειτε με ovx ore εἰδατε σημεια 
καιτερατα αλλ ort epayere 

€x τῶν aprav και εχορτασθητε 

ἐργαζεσθαι μη τὴν βρωσιν τὴν απολλυμενη 
αλλα την βρωσιν τὴν μενουσαν 


εἰσ ζωὴν αἰωνιον - qv οὕιοσ του ανθρωπον 
διδωσιν ὕμειν Tovrov yap 
o πατὴρ εσῴφραγισεν o ὃσ 


Curov ovv προσ avrov τιἐρσωμεθα 


—Á 
iva ποιήσωμεν Ta. epya rov θυ 


—, 
απεκριθη o ino Kat εἰπεν αυτοισ 


— 
TOVTO εστιν TO epyov Tov θυ 


ἵνα MLOTEVTNTAL εἰσ OV ATETTELAEY εκεινοσ 


:€urev ovy avro Tt ovy σοι ποιεισ σήμειον 


iva ἴδωμεν και πιστευσωμεν σοι 


: τιεργαζη : οἱπατερεσ ἡμων 


TO μαννα εφαγον ev τὴ ερημω 
καθωσ ἐστιν γεγραμμενον ἐστιν 
aprov εκ του ovpavov εδωκεν avrag 


--. 
φαγειν * εἰπεν ovv avrow o tno 


ἀμὴν αμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν 


ov μωῦσησ εδωκεν ὕμειν τον αρτον εκ ToU 
ovpayov * αλλα o πατὴρ pov διδωσιν ὕμειν 
TOV apToy εκ του ovpayov Toy αληθινον 


— 
o yap aproc o rov Gu ἐστιν 


(Fol. 1255.) 


VI. 


49 


ibi neque discipuli eius 
acceperunt sibi nauiculas 
et uenerunt in cafarnaum 
quaerentes ihm et inuenientes eum 
tras mare dixerunt illi 
rabbi quando hoc uenisti 

respondit illis ihs et dixit 

- amen amen dico uobis 
quaeritis me non quia uidistis signa 
et prodigia sed quia manducastis 
de panibus et saturati estis 
operamini non escam quae perit 
sed escam quae manet 
in uitam aeternam: quem filius hominis 
dat uobis hunc enim 
pater signauit deus 

dixerunt ergo ad illum quid operemur 
ut faciamus opera dei 

respondit ihs et dixit illis 
hoc est opus dei 


ut credatis in eum quem misit ille 


dixerunt ergo illi quod ergo facis tu signum 


ut uideamus et credamus tibi 
qui doperaris- patres nostri 
manna manducauerunt in eremo 
sicut scriptum est 
panem de caelo dedit illis 
manducare dixit ergo illis ihs 
amen amen dico uobis 
non moyses dedit uobis panem de caelo 
sed patpater meus dat uobis 
panem de caelo uerum 
panis enim del est 
| (Fol. 126 a.) 


Cap. VI. 24— 33. 


[31/3] 


[3j 


P 


o καταβαινων ex Tov ovpavov 


καὶ Cergy διδωσ Tw Koo juo 


— 
Curov ovv προσ avrov Ke 


mavrore Soo new Tov aprov rovrov 


— 
: Εἰπεν ovv avrow o ino eyw εἰμι 0 aprog 


Tyo Cuno : οἐρχομενοσ προσ με 

OU μη πεινασει πώποτε και O πιστευων ELC ἐμε 
ov μη διψασει πωποτε αλλ ειπον ὕμειν 

OTL και EWPAKATE με και OU πιστευετε 


παν o διδωσιν μοι ο πατηρ- προσ ἐμεήξει 
καὶ τὸν €pXop.€vov προσ ju ov μη ἐεκβαλω 


sore καταβεβηκα εκ rov ovpayov 


ovx ἵνα ποιήσω 70 θελημα ro ἐμὸν 
αλλατο θελημα του πεμψαντοσ με 


ἑπατροσ : Tovro δε ἐστιν ro θελημα 


του πεμψαντοσ μεΐνα παν 

o δεδωκεν μοι μη ἀπολεσω μηδεν 

aÀA iva αναστήσω avro 

εν TH ETXATH ἡμέρα τουτο yap ἐστιν 

To θελημα rov πατροσ pov ἵνα rac o θεωρων 
TOV ὕιον καὶ πιστενων εἰσ avroy ey» ζωὴν 


QUOVLOV Καὶ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸν 


εν τῇ ea xor) ἡμερα 


:εγογγυζον δε οι ἴουδαιοι περι avrov 


OTL εἶπεν €yo εἰμι οαρτοῦ 
ο καταβασ εκ του ουρανου 

—, 
Kat ἐλεγον οὐχ ουτοσ ἐστιν ιησ' 


οὕιοσ TOV wand ov ἡμεισ οιδαμεν 


τον πατέρα καὶ τὴν μήτερα πωσ ovy λέγει εαυτὸ 


απο Tov ουρανου καταβεβῆηκεναι 


—, 
απεκρειθὴ ovy o ιησ xa ειπεν avTOW 


μη γογγύζετε per ἀαλληλων 
ουδεισ Suvaras ελθειν προσ με 
(Fol. 126 b.) 


VI. 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


42 


43 


δ᾽ Io 


— 0 


un 
“1 
e 


HAN 


f 


qui descendit de caelo 

et uitam dans mundo 

dixerunt ergo ad illum dme 

semper da nobis panem hunc 
dixit-ergo illis ihs ego sum panes 

uitae qui uenit ad me 

non esuriet umquam ‘et qui credit in me 

non sitiet amplius sed dixi uobis 

quoniam et uidistis me et non creditis 

omne quod mihi dat pater ad me uenit 

et eum qui_uenit ad me non abiciam 

quoniam descendi de caelo 

non ut faciam uoluntatem meam 

sed uoluntatem eius qui me misit 

patris. haec est autem uoluntas 

qui me misit ub omne 

quod mihi dedit non perdam nihil 

sed ut resuscitem illud 

in nouissima die haec est enim 

uoluntas patris mei . ut omnis qui uidet 

filium et credit in illum habeat uitam 

aeternam et resuscitem illum 

in nouissima die 

murmurabant ergo iudaei de illo 

quoniam dixit ego sum panis 

qui descendi de caelo 

et dicebant nonne hic est ihs 


filius ioseph cuius nos scimus 


patrem et matrem quomodo ergo dicit seipsum 


de caelo descendisse 
respondit igitur ihs et dixit illis 
nolite murmurari inter uos 
nemo potest uenire ad me 
(Fol. 127 a.) 


Car. VI. 33—44- 


111 


119 KAT 


€ay μὴ o Tra Typ οπεμψασ με VL 
eAKvoy avrov Kayw ἀναστήσω avroy 
εν τὴ €C Xa T7) ἡμέρα. EOTLY γεγραμμενον 45 


εν Tour προφηταισ Kat ἐσονται ravreo 
— 
διδακτοι Ov mac οακονων rapa. rov πατροσ 


καὶ μαθων epxeras προσ με 


ς OUXOTLTOV TATEpa εωρακεν τισ 46 


[Ὁ 


—- 
€t 1) o ov apa Tov θυ ουτοσ ewpaxey 
— 
: Tov Óv -αμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 47 


οπιστενων εἰσ Ene exec ζωὴν 


SBS 


: αἰώνιον : €yo εἰμι o aproa tha Cuno 48 
ot πατερεσ ὕμων εφαγον Tov aproy 49 


εν TY Epypw To μαννα καὶ azreÜayoy 


fef 


OUTOO ἐστιν O Gp'TOG' O EK TOU ουρανον 50 


και καταβαινων iva wr εξ avrov φαγη 


[rl 


: Kat μη αποθανη : €yo ειμι 0 aprod- 51 
o (v o «x rov ovpayov kara jac 
«ay ovy Tia ayy €x Tov aprov Tovrov 
(nore ew τον αἴωνα καὶ oapror 
ov eyw δωσω ἡ σαρξ pov ἐστιν ὕπερ THE 
ἐς : τουκοσμουζωησ: ἐμάχοντο ουν 52 
ot ἵουδαιοι προσ αλληλουσ λεγοντεσ 
wwe δυναται ουτοσ ἡμεῖν τὴν 
σαρκα δουναι φαγειν 
Corey ovy avrow o ue αμην ἀμὴν 53 
Aeyo ὕμειν eay μὴ λαβητε 
τὴν σαρκα Tov ὕιον του ανθρωπου 
και TO αἱμα CUTOV πιητε 
ουκ εἐχεται ev εαυτοισ τὴν ζωὴν 
οτρωγων αντου τὴν σαρκαν 54 
και πεινων GUTOV TO QULA. 
ἔχει ζωὴν αἰωνιον * Kayo ἀναστήσω avrov 
& t τή ἐσχατή ἡμέρα ' ἡ γαρσαρξμουαληθωσ em Bpe 55 
(Fol. 127 δ.) ni 


Scum, 


fm 
[ à 


i 


I 


nisi pater qui me misit 
adtraxerit illum et ego resuscitabo illum 
in nouissima die  estscriptum 
in prophetis et erunt omnes 
dociuilesdel omnis qui audit a patre 
et didicerit uenit ad me 
non quod patrem uidit quisquam 
nisi qui a deo est hic uidit 
deum amen amen dico uobis 
qui credit in me habet uitam 
aeternam ego sum panes uitae 
patres uestri manducauerunt panem 
in deserto mannam et mortui sunt 
hic est panis qui de caelo 
descendit ut si quis ex illo manducet 
et non moriatur ego sum panis 
uiuus qui de caelo descendit 
si quis manducauerit de hoc pane 
uiuet in aeternum et panis 
quem ego dabo caro mea est 
pro mundi uita litigabant ergo 
iudaei adinuicem dicentes 
quomodo potest hic nobis 
carnem dare manducare 
dixit autem illis ihs amen amen 
dico uobis nisi acceperitis 
carnem fili hominis 
et sanguem eius uiueritis 
non habebitis in uobis uitam 
qui edet eius carnem 
et uibet eius sanguem 
habet uitam aeternam: et ego resuscitabo tiu 
nouissimo die: caro enim mea uere est esca 
(Fol. 128«.) 


Cap. VI. 44—55. 


[3 


& : Tovro ὕμασ σκανδαλίζει : tay ovy θεωρητε 62 
Tov ὕιον Tov ανθρωπου αναβενοντα 
— oH 
© : ουηντοπροτερον : To TVG ἐστιν TO ζωοποιουν — 63 
ἢ cape ovk ὠφελει οὐδεν 
— — 
9a : Ta pypara a eyw λελαληκα ὕμειν πνα ἐστιν 
Com ἐστιν adda εξ ὕμων εἰσιν τινεσ 64 
—À oo om, 
of > OL ov πιστεύουσιν : noe yap εξ apyna o tne 
TIVES εἰσιν OL μὴ πιστευοντεσ 
καιτισ ἐστιν οπαραδιδουσ avrov 
— 
oy : και eeyev δια Tovro εἰρηκα ὕμειν 65 


0 TparyoV μον τὴν σαρκα" και πεινων μου VI. 56 
TO Gia. - εν ἐμοι EVEL καγω εν avra 
καθωσ ev ἐμοι o πατὴρ Kayw ev ro πατρι 
ἀμὴν ἀμὴν Xeyo ὕμειν 
cay μὴ λαβητετο σωματου ὕιου 
του avOpwrov wo τον aproy tye ζωησ 


οὐκ exere ζωὴν ev avro 


καθωσ απεσταλκεν με o ζων πατὴρ 57 


Kayo ζω δια rov warepa ‘Kat ολαμβανων με 
κακειψοσ fn δι ἐμε- ουτοσ ἐστιν οαρτοσ 58 
0 εκ του ovpayov καταβασ ov καθωσ 

εφαγον οἱ πατερεσ ὕμων και ἀαπεθανον 

0 Tpwywy Tovrov τον aprov ζήσεται εἰσ τον 

αιωνα -ταντα ειπεν ev τῇ συναγωγή διδασκω 59 
ἐν καφαρναουμ σαββατω 

πολλοι ovv ex των μαθητων avrov όο 
ακουσαντεσ euray ᾿σκληροσ ἐστιν 0 Xoyog ουτοσ 
τισ δυναται avrov axovely ‘wo ovy eyvw o ine 61 
οτι εν εαυτοισ γονγυζουσιν περι rovrov 


ot μαθηται avrov ειπεν αντοισ 


ort ουδεισ δυναται ελθειν προσ με 
—- 
«ay μὴ ἡ δεδομενον avro εκ Tov προσ 


εκ τουτου ουν πολλοι των μαθητων αντου 66 


(Fol. 128 δ.) 


SEC IÓHAN 115 


— — 


qui edet meam carnem et uibet meum 
sanguem in me manet et ego in eum 


Sicut in me pater et ego in patre 


amen amen dico uobis 


nisi acceperitis corpus fili 

hominis sicut panem uitae 

non habetis uitam in aeo 

sicut me misit uiuus pater 

et ego uiuo propter patrem - et qui me accipit 
et ille uiuet propter me. hic est panis 

qui de caelo descendit - non sicut manducauerant 
patres uestri et mortui sunt 

qui manducat hunc panem uiuet in aeternum 
haec dixit in synagoga docens 

in cafarnaum sabbato 

multi ergo ex discipulis eius 

audientes dixerunt. durus est sermo hic 

et quis potest illum audire ut cognouit ergo ths 
quod intra se murmurant de illo 

discipuli eius dixit illis 

hoc uos scandalizat quid si uideritis 

filium hominis. ascendentem 

ubi ante erat - spa est qui uiuificat 

caro nihil prodeest 

uerba quae ego locututus sum uobis sps est 
uita est sed ex uobis sunt aliqui 

qui non credunt sciebat enim ab initio ihs 
qui sunt qui non credunt 

et quis esset qui eum traderet 


et dicebat propter hoc dixi uobis 


" quoniam nemo potest uenire ad me 


nisi illi datum fuerit a patre 
ex hoc ergo multi discentium eius 
(Fol. 129 a.) 


Cap, VI. 56—66. 


JR f 


απηλθον eur Ta οσπισω καὶ OUKETL μετ αὐτου 
περιεπατουν - €urey δεο ine Tour δωδεκα 

pa καιὕμεισ ÜcXere ὕπαγειν 

:€urey 9e avro σιμὼν rerpoo - xe προσ Twa 
απελευσομεθα.-ρηματα (aya: αἰωνιουν ex ewr 
και ἡμεισ πεπιστευκαμεν - καὶ €yVOKOGUEV σε 
OTL OV ει οαγιοστου bv 

samexptOn o Ὡσ λεγων. ovx eyo ὕμασ τουσ * uS 
efeXefapny και «wr e£ ὕμων διαβολοσ eorw 
€Xeyev Se tovday σιμωνοσ oxapw - 

ovrog yap ἡμελλεν παραδιδοναι avrov 


εἰσ εκ των OwoeKa - 


VI. 


67 


68 


69 


70 


--- 
pera ravra, περιεπατει o ino εν τὴ γαλιλαια ΥἹΙ 1 


ov yap ἤθελεν ev τη ἴουδαια περιπατειν 

ort εζητουν avrov οι ἵουδαιοι 

αποκτειναι nv δὲ εγγυσ ἢ eopry 

τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἡ σκενοπηγεια 

εἰπὸν ovy προσ αντον οἱ adeAdot avrov 
μεταβηθι ἐντευθεν και ὕπαγε εἰσ την γαλιλαα 
ἵνα καὶ ot μαθηται cov θεωρησουσιν τα epya 


α 77OLELO - ουδισ γαρ €V KpuTTO TL ποίει 


και ζητει ev παρησια avro εἰναι. εἰ ravra ποιίεισ 


φανερωσον σεαυτὸν τω κοσμω 

owe yap ot αδελῴοι avrov 

επιστευσαν εἰσ avrov Tore 

λεγει avrow o ino 0 καιροσ O €J400 ονπω 

παρεστιν - o δε καιροσ οὕμετεροσ 

πάντοτε ἐστιν ετοιμοσ 

ov δυναται o κοσμοσ μίσειν ὕμασ ene Se purer 

OTt ἐγω μαρτυρω περι αὐτου 

OTL τὰ ἐεργα αὐτου πονήρα ἐστιν 

ὕμεισ αναβητε εἰσ τὴν εορτὴην 

eyw ovk avaBaww εἰσ τὴν €oprqv Ταυτὴν 
(Fol. 129 δ.) 


SEO' IO 


p 


abierunt retro. et amplius cum illo non 
ambulabant. dixit autem ihs ad duodecim 


numquid et uos uultis ire 


dixit autem illi simon petrus dme ad quem 


ibimus. uerba uitae aeternae habes 
et nos credidimus et cognouimus te 


quia tu es sanctus del 


respondit ihs et dixit.nonne ego uos duodeci 


elegi - et unus ex uobis diabolus est 
dicebat autem iudan simonis scarioth 
hic enim incipiebat tradere eum 


unus de duodecim 


post haec ambulabat ibs in galilaea 


non enim uolebat in iudaea ambulare 
quoniam quaerebant illum iudaei 
occidere erat autem prope dies festus 
iudaeorum scenopegia 

dixerunt ergo ad eum fratres sui 
transi hinc et uade in iudaeam 

ut et discipuli tui. uideant opera 
quae facis nemo enim in occulto aliquid facit 
et querit illut in palam esse. si haec facis 
ostende teipsum mundo 

neque enim fratres eius 

crediderunt tunc in illum 


dicit ergo illis ihs tempus meum nondum 


uenit-tempus autem uestrum 
semper est paratum 
non potest mundus odisse uos. me autem‘odit 
quoniam ego testimonium dico de illo 
quia opera eius mala sunt 
uos ascendite in diem festum 
ego non ascendo in hunc diem festum 
(Fol. 130a.) 


Carr. VI. 66—VII. 8. 


OTL O €JLOC' καιροσ OVTTOO VII. 


WETANPWTAL> TAVTO. εἰπὼν AUTOT 

ἐμεινεν εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 

wo δεανεβησαν οἱ αδελφοι avrov 

τοτε καὶ avroo ανεβὴ εἰσ τὴν εορτὴν 

ον φανερωσ αλλ εν κρυπτω 

ot ovy ἴουδαιοι εζητουν avrov 

εν Τὴ ἑορτὴ Kat €Aeyov που ἐστιν ἐκεινοῦ 
καὶ γογγυσμοσ ἣν περι avrov εν τω οχλω 
ot μεν eXeyov ort αγαθοσ ἐστιν 

αλλοι eAeyov ov. adda πλανα τον οχλον 
ovÓeur μεντοι παρησεια ἐλαλει πέρι avrov 
δια τον φοβον των Ἰουδαίων 

79 Se rye copre μεσαζουσησ 

avef9 o ine εἰσ To iepov και εἐδιδασκεν 
εθαυμαζον ovy οι ἵουδαιοι λεγοντεσ 


aoc ovrog γραμματα oer’ μὴ μεμαθηκωσ 
απεκριθη αυτοισ o ine ‘Kat εἰπεν ἢ ἐμὴ διδαχὴ 
OVK ἐστιν ἐμὴ αλλα του πεμψαντοσ με 
eay Tix θελη το θελημα avrov ποιειν 
γνώσεται περι THO διδαχησ΄ ποτερον ex Ov errs 
ἢ €yo aw epavrov Aadw- o ad eavrov λαλων 
τὴν δοξαν την ἴδιαν (reco δε Cyro 
τὴν δοξαν του πεμψαντοσ avrov 
ουτοσ αληθησ ἐστιν 
Kat αδικια εν αυτω OUK ἐστιν 
ov μωῦσησ εδωκεν ὕμειν TOV νομον 
xat ουδισ εξ ὕμων ποιει TOV γομον 
τι με ζητειτε αποκτεινε 
απεκριθη o οχλοσ Kat eurev - δαιμονιον exeur 
τισ σεζητει ἀποκτειναι 
απεκρειθὴ o ine και εἰπεν - εν €pyov ἐποιήσα 
και ὕμεισ θαυμαζεται. δια rovro edwxev 


ὕμειν μωῦσησ 


(Fol. 130 5.) 


13 


16 


22 


— — 
SEC 


— 


116 


quoniam tempus meum nondum 
impletum est haec cum dixisset ipse 
mansit in galilaeam 

cum autem ascenderunt fratres eius 
tune et ipse ascendit in diem festum 
non palam sed absconse 

iudaei ergo querebant eum 

in die festo et dicebant ubi est ille 

et murmurerat deilloin turba 

aliqui dicebant quia uonus est 

ali dicebant non sed seducit populum 
nemo tamen palam loquebatur de illo 
propter timorem iudaeorum 

lam autem cum dies festus medius esset 
ascendit ihs in templum et docebat 
mirabantur ergo iudaei dicentes 
quomodo hic litteras nobit . qui non didicit 


respondit illis ihs et dixit mea doctrina 


non est mea - sed eius qui me misit 

8i quis uoluerit uoluntatem eius facere 
sciet de doctrina "utrum ex deo est 

an ego & me loquor. qui ab se loquitur 
gloriam suam quaerit. qui autem quaerit 
gloriam eius qui eum misit 

hic uerus est 

et iniquitas in eo non est 

nonne moyses dedit uobis legem 

et nemo ex uobis facit legem 


quid me quaeritis occidere 


respondit turba et dixit. daemonium habes 


quis te quaerit occidere 


respondit ihs et dixit-unum opus feci 


et uos miramini ideo dedit uobis moyses 
(Fol. 131 a.) 


CAP. VII. 8—22. 


116 


J 


Ι 


J A4 


(3 


[4 


τὴν περιτομὴν ovx oTt EK μωύσεωσ εἐστειν 
αλλα εκ των πατερων 

και εν σαββατω περιτεμνετε ανθρωπον 

εἰ ουν περιτομὴν λαμβανει ανθρωποσ 

ev σαββατω ἵνα μὴ λυθὴ ονομοσ μωύσεωσ 
Two ἐμοι xoAare οτὶ ολον avÜpwrror 
ὕγιη eroujca ev caf Baro 

po kpwere kar οψιν 

αλλα την Ówatay κρισιν kpeuwere 

εἐλεγον ovv τινεσ'᾿ εκ των 

ἱεροσολυμειτων ovx ovrog ἐστιν 

ov ζητουσιν αποκτειναι και ἴδε παρρησια 


Aadet* και οὐδεν avro λεγουσιν 


μὴ τι αληθωσ ot ἀαρχοντεσ ἐγνωσαν 


— 
OTL OVTOG' ἐστιν o xpo 


αλλα rovrov οἰδαμεν ποθεν ἐστιν 


Cu EN 
o Oe xpa orav epyrrat ovÓeur γεινωσκει ποθεν ἐστι 


os : Expaley ovv o ine διδασκων ev Tw iepo 


και λεγων καμε οιδατε. και οἰδατε ποθεν εἰμι 
και a:r ἐμαντου ovx εληλυθα 

αλλ ἐστιν αλήθινοσ οπεμψασ με 

ον ὕμεισ οὐδατε. €yo δε oio. avrov 

OTt παρ αντοὺ εἰμι. κακεινοσ με απεσταλκεν 
e{yrovy ovv avrov πιασαι. 


και ουδεισ ἐπεβαλεν em avrov 


τὴν χείρα ort ovmo εληλυθει 


: 17) «pa avTov ; πολλοι δε επιστευσαν 


εκ TOV oxAov εἰσ avrov Kat eAeyay 
— 

ο χρσ oray ελθὴ μὴ πλεονα 

σημεια ποιησει. GV OUTOG ποιεί 

ἤκουσαν de ot φαρισαιοι 


του οχλου γογγυζοντοσ περι avrov 


: καιαπεστειλαν ὕπηρετασ 


(Fol. 131 6.) 


VIL 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


30 


“SEC TOHAN 

—— -. = 
circumcisionem ‘non quod ex moyse sit 
sed ex patribus 
et in sabbato circumciditis hominem 
si ergo circumcisionem accipit homo 
in sabbato ut non solbatur ex moysi 
quomodo mihi irasmini . quod totum homine 
sanum feci in sabbato 
nolite iudicare secundum personam 
ged iustum iudicium iudicate 
dicebant ergo quidam de 
hierosolymitis nonne hic est 
quem querunt occidere. et ecce palam 


loquitur et nihil illi dicunt 


num quid uere principes cognouerunt 


. . — 
quoniam hic est xps 
sed hunc nobimus unde sit 


— e. . a 
xps autem cum uenerit. nemo scit unde sit 


clamabat ergo ihs docens in templo 


et dicens et me nostis et scitis unde sim 
et a me non ueni 

sed est uerus qui me misit 

quem uos ignoratis ego autem scio eum 
quoniam ab eo sum et ille me misit 
quaerebant ergo eum adpraehendere 
et nemo inmisit in eum 

manum quoniam nondum uenerat 
hora illius multi autem crediderunt 

de turba in eum et dicebant 

xps cum uenerit num quid plura 

signa faciet quorum hic facit 
&udierunt autem pharisaei 

turbas murantes de eo 

et miserunt ministros 


(Fol. 132a.) 


Cap. VII, 233—312. 


KAT IOAN 


ot αρχειερεισ Kat ot φαρισαιοι 
ἕνα TEATWOLV GUTOV 
T iÉurev ow o ine €rt μεικρον xpoyoy 
n ped υμων expe και ὕπαγω 
πα: προσ TOV πεμψανταμε: ζητησετε με 
B και ουχ EUPNOETE καὶ ὁποὺ ειμι ἐγω 
ὕμεισ ov δυνασθαι ελθειν 
Curov ovv ot tovdatot προσ eavrova 
πον μελλει ουτοσ Tropevea Da, ort ovx evpra opa 
GVTOV - μήτι εἰσ THY διασποραν των ελληνων 
μελλει πορενεσθαι και διδασκειν τουσ 
ελληνασ Tur ἐστιν 0 λογοσ ovrog ov eurey 
ζητήσετε με kat ovx ευρησετε 
και οπον εἰμί Eyw ὕμεισ ov δυνασθαι ελθειν 
Ev δε τη ἡμέρα τὴ peyady τὴ ἐσχατη 
THe εορτὴσ ἵστηκει o ine και expafey 
Aeyov eav rur Supa ερχεσθω 
καὶ TELVETW O πιστενων ELT ELE 
καθωσ eurev ἢ ypadn - roras.ot εκ THO 
κοιλιασ avrov ρευσουσιν ὕδατοσ ζωντοσ 


—, 
Tovro δε eurey περὶ Tov yo 


ov ἐμελλον Aap Bavety ot πιστενοντεσ εἰσ avro 
ovrw yap ἣν τὸ va αγιον er avTow 
οτι ne ovr εδοξασθη 

=B : € rov oxXov ovv ακουσαντεσ avrov 


TOV λογων TOUTWY eXeyov 


ort ovrog ἐστιν αληθωσ o προφητησ 
αλλοι eAeyov ort ovrog ἐστιν o χρσ 
o 
Ty άλλοι eAcyay μὴ yap εκ THO γαλιλαιασ 
o χρσ ἐρχεται ovxet ἢ γραφὴ λεγει 
ort €k σπερματοσ δανειδ. και απὸ βηθλεεμ 
e 
TNO κωμήσ - 0 XPT epxeraa orrov ἣν Saved 
πὸ: σχισμα ουν €y€vero Eur TOV OXAOY 
t 


(Fol 132 5.) 


43 


OHAN 


— oa, 


117 


—, 
S 
— 


[8 


principes sacerdotum et pharisaei 
ut adpraehenderent eum 

dixit ergo ihs adhue modicum tempus 
uobiscum sum et uado 
ad eum qui me misit quaeretis me 
et non inuenietis* et ubi ego uado 
uos non potestes uenire 

dixerunt ergo iudaei inter se 
ubi incipiet hic ire. quoniam non inueniemus e. 
num quid in dispersionem grecorum 
incipiet ire et docere grecos 
quis est iste sermo quem dixit 
quaeritis me et non inuenietis 


et ubi ego sum uos non potestis uenire 


in nouissimo autem die magno 


diei festi stabat ihs et clamabat 

dicens si quis sitit ueniant 

et bibat qui credit in me 

sicut dixit scriptura. flumina dentre 
eius fluent aquae uiuae 

hoc autem dixit dixit de spu 

quem accepturi erant. credentes in eum 
nondum enim erat Eps santus in eos 


quoniam ihs nondum fuerat honoratus 


de turba autem audientes eius 


' uerborum horum dicebant 


quoniam hic est uere propheta 

ali dicebant quoniam hic est xps 

ali dicebant num quid de galilaea 

xps uenit nonne scriptura dicit 
quoniam de semine dauid . et a bethleem 
castello xps uenit ubi erat dauid 


dissensio itaque facta est in turba 
(Fol. 133a.) 


Cap. VII. 32— 43. 


: Se avrov :τινεσ Se nOeAov εξ avray 


VII. 44 
πιασαι αντον αλλ ovbewr 
επεβαλεν ex avrov rac χειρασ : ἦλθον ovy 45 
οι ὕπηρεται προσ τουσ apxtepeur | 
και φαρισαιουσ Kat εἰπὸν avrour EKELVOL 
δια τι ovx ἤγαγατε avrov 

απεκριθησαν δε οι ὕπηρεται ονδεποτε ουτωσ 46 
ἀνθρωποσ εἐλαλησεν wo ουτοσ λαλει 

απεκριθησαν αντοισ οἱ φαρισαιοι 42 
μὴ xevpeo πεπλανησθαι 
μὴ τισ €K των ἀρχόντων πιστευει 48 
εἰσ avrov ἡ εκ των φαρισαιων 
αλλα o oxAog ovroc o μὴ γεινωσκων 49 
TOV νομὸν ETLKATAPATOL εισιν 

λεγει νεικοδήμοσ προσ αντουσ.- εἰσ ov εξαυτω so 


0 ἐλθων προσ avrov νυκτοσ τὸ πρωτὸν 


μὴ ονομοσ ἡμῶν κρεινι τὸν ανθρωπον 51 
€«ay μὴ akova mpuroy παρ avrov 
και ἐπιγνωσθὴη τι εποιησεν 

ἀπεκριθησαν και εἰπαν αυτω. μὴ και σοι ἐεκτηὴ 52 
γαλιλαιασ eu: ἐρευνησον και ἴδε rac γραφασ 
οτι προφητὴσ ex rgo γαλιλαιασ 
ουκ ἐγειρεται καὶ ετορενθησαν 53 
€KATTOO εἰσ TOV OLKOV αὐτου “ne Se ἐπορεύθη VIIL 1 
εἰσ To οροσ των eAausy - opÜpov δε 2 
παλιν παραγεινεται εἰσ TO ELEPOV 
και tao ολαοσ ἤρχετο προσ avrov 
ayouo δε ot γραμματεισ καὶ οι φαρισαιοι 3 
ἐπι agua preu, - γυναικα εἰλημμενὴν 
και στήσαντεσ αὐτὴν εν μεσω. λεγουσιν αὐτο 4 


ἐκπειραζοντεσ avrov οιΐἵερεισ ἵνα ἐεχωσιν 
κατηγορειαν αὐτου διδασκαλε αὐτὴ ἡ γυνὴ 


κατείληπται επαυτοφωρω μοιχενομενὴ 
(Fol. 1328.) 


am 


—, 


propter eum quidam autem ex illis uolebant 
adpraehendere eum sed nemo 
misit in illum manums uenerunt ergo 
ministri - ad principes sacerdotum 
et farisaeos et dixerunt eis illi 
quare non adduxistis illum 
responderunt autem ministri - num quid sic 
homo locutus est quomodo hic loquituitur 
responderunt illis pharisaei 
num quid et uos seducti estis 
num quid aliquis de principibus credit 
in eum aut de pharisaeis 
sed turba haec quae nescit 
legem maledicti sunt 
dicit nicodemus ad illos unus ex illis 
qui uenit ad illum nocte ante hoc 
num quid lex nostra iudicat hominem 
si non audiat ante ab ipso 
et cognoscatur quid fecit 
responderunt et dixerunt ei . num quid et tu de 
de galilaea es scrutina et uide scripturas 
quoniam propheta de galilaea 
non surgit et abierunt 
unus quisque in domum suam -ihaautem abiit 
in montem oliuarum . mane autem 
iterum uenit in templum 


et omnis populus ueniebat ad eum 


. adducunt autem scribae et pharisaei 


in peccato muliere mulierem conpraehensam 
et statuentes eum in medio 
dicunt illi temptantes eum sacerdotes ut haberent 
&ccusareeum magister haec mulier 
conpraehensa est palam in adulterio 

(Fol. 134.) 


Carp. VII. 43—VIII. 4. 


VIII. 


μωῦσησ δε εν τω vopw εἐκελευσεν Tag τοιαντασ 
λιθαζειν - ov δε νυν τι λεγεισ 

Ο δε ine κατω kvijjag - ro δακτυλω kareypadevy 
εἰσ τὴν yqv wo δε ἐπεμενον eporovrea 
avexuiey καὶ εἰπεν avrow - o ἀναμαρτητοῦσ 
ὕμων πρωτοσ ex αὐτὴν BaXero λιθον 
και παλιν κατακυψασ τω δακτυλω 
κατεγραφεν εἰσ τὴν γῆν" ἐἑκαστοσ δε 
τῶν iovóawv ἐξήρχετο ἀρξαμενοι aso roy 
πρεσβυτέρων wore ravrac εξελθειν 
και κατελειφθὴ uovoa - και ἡ γυνὴ «v edo ovea 


ανακυψασ Seo ine €UT €y TH γυναίκει 
που εἰσιν ουδεισ σεκατεκρεινεν 
κακειγὴ εἰπεν avro οὐδεισ χε 
o δεειπεν ovde eyw σε κατακρεινω 
ὕπαγε απὸ του νυν μήκετι αμαρτανε 
παλιν ovy ἐλαλησεν avrow ο ine λεγων 
ἐγω εἰμι To φωσ του κοσμονο ακολουθων eju 
OV μὴ περιπατήσει εν τὴ σκοτεια 
αλλα εξει το φωσ τησ ζωησ 
Ειπον ovv avro οἱ φαρισαιοι 
OV περι σεαυτου μαρτυρεισ 
ἡ μαρτυρια σοὺ ovx ἐστιν αληθησ 
απεκρειθη o ie καὶ εἰπεν αντοισ 
Kay €yo μαρτυρω περι ἐμαυτου 
αληθεινη μου ἐστιν ἡ μαρτυρεια 
ort oda ποθεν ἡλθον και που ὕπαγω 
υμεισ δεονκ οιδατε ποθεν ἐερχομαι 
3] rov ὕπαγω .ὕμεισ κατα τὴν σαρκα κρεινετε 
€yo ov κρεινω οὐδενα. και eay κρίνω Se eyw 
ἢ κρισισ ἡ ἐμὴ αληθινὴ ἐστιν - ort μονοσ eyo 
οὐκ εἰμι: αλλα €yo kato πεμψασ με 
καὶ εν Tw vopw Se Tw ὕμετερω 


(Fol. 134 5.) 


5 


12 


15 


SE 


A— ὑπαὶ 


HAN 


[2 


moyses autem inlege praecepit tales 
lapidare:tu autem nunc quid dicis 
ihs autem inclinatus. digito suo scribebat 
in terram cum autem inmanerent interrogantes 
erexit se et dixit illis quis est sine peccato 
uestrum prior super eam mittat lapidem 
et iterum inclinatus digito suo 
scribebat in terram unusquisque autem | 
iudaeorum exiebant incipientes 
a presbyteris uti omnes exire 
et remansit solus. et mulier in medio cum esset 
Erigens autem se ihs dixit mulieri 
ubi sunt nemo te condemnauit 
ad illa dixit illi nemo dme 
ad ille dixit nec ego te condemno 
uade et ex hoc iam noli peccare 
iterum ergo loquebatur ad illos ihs dicens 
ego sum lux mundi. qui me sequitur 
non ambulauit in tenebris 
sed habebit lucem uitae 
dixerunt autem illi pharisaei 
tu de te testimonium dicis 
testimonium tuum non est uerum 
respondit ihs et dixit illis 
etai ego testificor de me 
uerum est testimonium meum 
quoniam scio unde ueni et ubi uado 
uos autem nescitis unde uenio 
et ubi uado. uos secundum carnem iudicatis 
ego autem neminem iudico: et si iudico tamen ego 
iudicium meum uerum est : quoniam solus ego 
non sum: sed ego et qui me misit 
sed et in lege uestra 
(Fol. 135 a.) 


Cap. VIII. $— 17. 


119 


γέγραπται ort δυο ανθρωπων VIII. 
ἡ μαρτυρια αληθησ ἐστιν 

ἐγω εἰμι o μαρτυρων πέρι ἐμαντου . 18 
KaL μαρτυρι περιεμου οπεμψασ με πατὴρ 
ἐλεγον ovy avro που ἐστιν οπατὴρ σον 19 


— 
amekpiU tno και ειπεν avTow 
ovre e.c OLOATE ovre roy πατερα μου 


€t Ewe NOELTE και TOY πατερα μον NOELTE 


— 
πη : Tavra τὰ ρήματα ἐλαλησεν ev τω γαζοφυλακίῳ 20 


διδασκων εν τω ἵερω" και ουδεισ ἐπίασεν αὐτὸ 


ort ovrw εληλυθει ἡ wpa avrov 


--Ἴ 
πθ : εἰπεν ovy παλιν avrow eyo ὕπαγω καὶ ζησετεμε 21 
— 


καὶ εν Ty αμαρτια ὕμων αποθανεισθε 
οπου eyo ὕπαγω ὑμεισ ov δυνασθε ελθειν 
Ελεγαν ovy οι ἴουδαιοι- μητει ἀποκτενεῖ αυτον az 


ort λεγει οπου eyo ὕπαγω .ὕμεισ ov δυνασθε dba 


και ἐλεγεν avrow ὕμεισ εκ των κατω 23° 


core eyw Be ex rov ayo ειμει 
ὕμεισ EK TOU KOT AOU TOUTOV ἐστε 
ἐγὼ οὐκ εἰμι EK TOU KOT POV τουτου 
εἰπὸν ovy ὕμειν ort αποθανεισθαι 24 
εν ταισ αμαρτιαισ ὕμων 
€ay yap μὴ πιστευσήτε μοι ort ἐγὼ ειμι 
αποθανεισθε. εν Taw αμαρτιαισ ὕμων 
ἔλεγον ovv avro ov rio εἰ 25 


om, 
Curev ovv avrote o uno τὴν ἀρχὴν 


ort καὶ λαλω Uj.ew -πολλα exo περι ὕμων λό 

λαλειν + καὶ kpeweuw αλλοπεμψασ με 

αληθησ εστιν καγω a ἤκουσα 

παρ avrov Tavra, λαλω εἰσ TOV κοσμον 

OUK ἐγνωσαν OTL TOV πατεραντον 27 
— 

Aeyecrov Oy εἰιπεν ovv avrow 48 


---- 
παλιν oujg οταν ὕὑψωσητε 
(Fol. 135 δ.) 


SEG IOHAN 


scriptum est quoniam duum hominum 
testimonium uerum est 
ego sum qui testimonium do de me 
et testimonium dat de me qui me misit pater 
dicebant ergo illi ubi est pater tuus 
respondit ihset dixit illis 
neque me nostis neque patrem meum 
8i me nossetis et patrem meum nossetis 
haec uerba locutus est in gazophylacio docens 
in templo. et nemo adpraehendit illum 
quoniam necdum uenerat hora eius 
dixit ergo iterum illis: ego uado et quaeretis me 
et in peccato uestro moriemini 
ubi ego uado uos non potestis uenire 


dicebant ergo iudaei . numquid occisurus est se 


quoniam dicit ubi ego uado *uos non potestis uenire 


Et dicebat illis uos de inferioribus estis 
ego de superioribus sum 
uos de hoc mundo estis 
ego non sum de hoc mundo 
dixi ergo uobis quoniam moriemini 
in peccatis uestris 
si enim non credideritis mihi . quoniam ego su 
moriemini in peccatis uestris 
dicebant ergo illi tu quis es 
dicit illis ihs initium 
quoniam et loquor uobis: multa habeo de uobis 
loqui-et iudicare sed qui me misit 
' uerax est et ego quae audiui 
ab illo haec loquor in hoc mundo 
non cognouerunt quod patrem suum 
dicitdm. dixit ergo illis 
iterum ihs cum exaltaueritis 
(Fol. 136 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 17— 38. 


“KAT IOAN SEC IOHAN 


Toy ὕιον Tov avOpwrov- rore γνωσεσθαι VIII. filium hominis tunc scietis 
OTL ἐγὼ ειμι- καὶ απ ἐμαντου ποιω οὐδεν quia ego sum. οὔ ἃ me facio nihil 
αλλα καθωσ εδιδαξεν με o πατὴρ sed sicut docuit me pater 
ravra. λαλω και οπεμψασ pe 29 haec loquor et qui me misit 
μετ ἐμον ἐστιν - ovx αφηκεν με mecum est non me reliquid 
μονον οτι €y€ TG. ἀρεστὰ GUT OO solum quoniam ego quae illi placent 
Tow πάντοτε. ravra avrov λαλουντοσ 30 facio omnia. haec eo loquente 
πολλοι επιστευσαν εἰσ avTov multi crediderunt in eum 
Ελεγεν ovv o ine προσ TOUT πεπιστευκοτασ 31 dicebat ergo ihs ad eos qui crediderant ei 
avro “Ἰουδαιουσ. εαν ὕμεισ peras | iudaeis si uos permanseritis 
ev ro ej) Xoyo αληθωσ μαθηται μον «στε in meo uerbo uere discipuli mei eritis 
Kat γνώσεσθαι τὴν αληθειαν 32 et cognoscetis ueritatem 
Kat ἢ αληθεια ελευθερωσει ὕμασ et ueritas liuerabit uos 
απεκριθησαν προσ avroy και €uray 33 responderunt ad eum et dixerunt 
σπερμα αβρααμ᾽ ἐσμεν semen abraam sumus 
καὶ ov δεδουλευκαμεν ovdert πωποτε et numquam seruiuimus nemini umquam 
πωσ ov Aeyeur ort ελευθεροι yevqo cote | quomodo tu dicis quod liueri eritis 
απεκριθὴ avrour o ino αμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμει 334) Tespondit illis ihs amen amen dico uobis 
οτι GO 0 ποιων τὴν ἀμαρτιαν δουλοσ ἐστιν quoniam omnis qui facit peccatum seruus est 
o δε δουλοσ ov μένει εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν - 35 seruus autem non manet in domum 
εἰσ Tov αἰωνα o δεῦιοσ μενει in aeternum filius autem manet 
εἰσ TOV αἰωνα «av ovy οὕιοσ ὕμασ 36 inaeternum si ergo filius uos 
ελευθερωσει οντωσ ελευθεροι liuerabit. uere liueri 
ἐσεσθαι" osa. ort σπερμα αβρααμ᾽ ἐστε 37 eritis scio quia semena abraham estis 
αλλα ζητιτε με αποκτείναι ort O λογοσ sed quaeritis me occidere quoniam uerbum 
0 ἐμοσ Ov χωρει ἐμειν meum non capit in uobis 
€yo à ὡρακα Tapa Tw πατρι μου 38 ego quae uidi aput patrem meum 
ravra λαλω και ὕμεισ ovy a ewpaxare haec loquor et uos ergo quae uidistis 
παρα Tw πατρι ὕμων ταντα ποιειτε aput patrem uestrum haec facite 
απεκριθησαν και evray avro o πατὴρ juo 39 | responderunt et dixerunt illi pater noster 
αβρααμ' ἐστιν eurev ovv o ine abraham est dixit ergo ihs 


εἰ τέκνα Tov aBpaapy εστε- ra. epyya. rov a pasy. si fili abraham estis. opera abraham 


erovecre- vuy δε ζητειτε με azrokrewaa 40 faceretis nunc autem quaeritis me occidere 


(Fol. 136 5.) (Fol. 137 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 28—40. 
16 


121 


122 


— ον — 
KAT IOAN 
—S — ---. ώοΟο-.. 


ανθρωπον og τὴν αληθειαν λελαληκα ὕμειν 
ἣν ἤκουσεν παρα του θυ rovro αβρααμ. 
OVK εποιησεν ὕμεισ δεποιειτε 
τα ἐργα Tov πατροσ ὕμων 
€urav ovy avro ἡμεισ εκ πορνειασ 
οὐκ ἐγεννηθημεν eva. πατερα ἐχομεν Tov ep 
€urev ovv avrowr o ine eLo Oo πατὴρ ὕμων nV 
ἤγαπατε ay EME Eyw yap εκ του θυ εξηλθον 
καὶ ἡκω: OU Yap απ euavrov ἐληλυθον 
αλλα εκεινοσ μεαπεστειλεν 
δια τι τὴν αληθειαν την ἐμὴν 
Qv γεινωσκετε ort ov δυνασθαι 
GKOVELV TOV Xoyov Tov ἐμὸν 
ὕμεισ εκ Tov πατροσ Tov διαβολον 
ἐστε και τασ επιθυμειασ του πατροσ ὕμων 
θελετε ποιειν ἐεκεινοσ ανθρωποκτονοσ ἣν 
ar ἀαρχὴσ και εν τη αληθεια ovk ἐστῆκεν 
ort αληθεια ovx ἐστιν εν avro 
oray AaX το ψευδοσ εκ των ἴδιων λαλει 
OTL ψευστησ ἐστιν καὶ 0 πατὴρ αντου 
eyw οτι τὴν αληθειαν Aadw- ov πιστευετε μοι 
ὕμεισ 0 wy εκ του θυ ταρηματατου θυ 
axover δια TovTO ὕμεισ ovk akovere 
απεκριθησαν οι tovdatot kat εἰπαν avro 
ov καλωσ ἡμεισ λεγομεν ort σαμαρειτῆσ ει 
συ και δαιμόνιον exeur 
απεκριθὴη o ine eyw δαιμονιον ovk exw 
αλλα τειμω μου TOV πατερα 
και ὕμεισ ατειμαζετε με 
eyo δεου ζητω τὴν δοξαν μου 
ἐστιν o ζητων καὶ κρεινων 
αμην αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
og av Tov ἐμον λογον τηρησὴ 
(Fol. 137 6.) 


VIII. 


41 


43 


45 
47 


50 


51 


SEC IOHAN 
SoS OS 
hominem qui ueritatem locutus sum uobis 
quam audiuit a deo hoc abraham 
non fecit uos autem facitis 
opera patris uestri 
dixerunt ergo illi nos de fornicatione 
non sumus nati unum patrem habemus dm 
dixit ergo illis ihs sids pater uester erat 
diligebatis utique me ego enim de deo exiui 
et ueni. nec enim ἃ me ueni 
sed ille me misit 
quare loquellam meam 
non agnoscitis quia non potestis 
audire uerbum meum 
uos de patre diauolo 
estis et concupiscentias patris uestri 
uultis facere ille homicida fuit 
ab initio et in ueritate non stat 
quoniam ueritas non est in eo 
cum loquitur mendacium de suo loquitur 
quoniam mendax est et pater eius 
ego quia ueritatem iem loquor non creditis mihi 
uos. qui est ex deo uera dei 
audit propter hoc uos non auditis 
responderunt iudaei et dixerunt ei 
nonne nos bene dicimus quod samaritanus es 
tu et daemonium habes 
respondit ihs ego daemonium non habeo 
sed honorifico patrem meum 
et uos speratis me 
ego autem non quaero gloriam meam 
est qui quaerit et iudicat 
amen amen dico uobis 


quicumque uerbum meum custodierit 
(Fol. 138 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 40—51. 


Üavarov ov μη θεωρησὴ εἰσ Tov awa 
Euray ovv avro ot tovdatot 
γυν ἐγνωκαμεν ort δαιμονιον exeur 
aBpaap απεθανεν και ot προφηται 
και ov λεγεισ eay μον TU Tov λογον 
τηρήσει ov μὴ γευσηται θανατου 
μὴ ov μειζων εἰ του aBpaap - ort απεθανεν 
και οἱ προφήηται ἀπεθαναν τινα σεαντον ποιεισ 
απεκριθη o ino eay eyo δοξασω 
ἐμαυτον ἡ δοξα μου οὐδεν ἐστιν 
ἐστιν o πατὴρ μου o δοξαζων με 
ov ὕμεισ λεγετεοτι 6c ὕμων ἐστιν 
και OUK ἐγνωκατε avTOv - eyw δε oda avTOV 
Kay εἰπω OTL OUK οιδα GUTOV OMOLOT 
εσομαι ὕμειν Wevorya -adAa οιδα avTov 
καὶ Tov λογον avrov τήρω 
aBpaay οπατὴρ ὕμων ἡγαλλιασατο 
ἵνα ἴδη τὴν ἡμεραν την ἐμὴν καὶ εἰδεν 
και €exapy : Curav ovv οιἴουδαιοι προσ αὐτὸ 
πεντήκοντα ETH ovOero exeur 
και αβρααμ᾽ ewpaxac 
Ειπεν ovy avrow o ino apny apny Acyw ὕμει 
πριν aBpaap eyo eua - Tore npav MÜovo 
tva βαλωσιν er avrov 
ine δε expuBy και ἐξηλθεν ex roviepov 
καὶ παραγων ἴδεν ἄνθρωπον 
τυφλον ex γενετησ καθημενον 
και ηρωτῆσαν avrov oc μαθηται 


ραββειτισημαρτεν ουτοσ 
ἡ οἱ γονεισ avrov ἵνα τυφλοσ γεννηθὴ 


C 
απεκριθὴ o ino ovre ovroc ἡμαρτεν 
OVT€ ot γονεισ avrov αλλ iva φανερωθὴ 
Ta €pya rov £v «v avro δι ἡμασ epyaler Oar 


(Fol. 138 δ.) 


VIII. 


53 


55 


57 


58 
59 


IX. 1 


M 


4 


SEC IOHAN 


mortem non uideuit in aeternum 


dixerunt ergo illi iudaei 


nunc cognouimus quia daemonium habes 
abraham mortuus est et prophetae 
et tu dicis si quis meum uerbum 


seruauerit non gustabit mortem 


123 


numquid tu maior es abraham 'quoniam mortuus 


et prophetae mortui sunt quem te facis 


respondit ihs si ego honorificauero 


me ipsum gloria mea nil est 
est pater meus qui honorificat me 
quem uos dicitis quia ds uester est 
et non cognouistis eum - ego autem scio eum 
et si dixero quia nescio eum similis 
ero uobis mendax . sed scio eum 
et uerbum eius seruo 
abraham pater uester exultabit 
ut uideret diem meum et uidit 
et gauisus est: dixerunt ergo iudaei ad eum 
quinquaginta annos nondum habes 
et abraham uidisti 
dixit ergo illis ihs amen amen dico uobis 
ante abraham ego sum ‘tunc tulerunt lapides 
ut mitterent super eum 
ihs autem abscondit se et exiuit de templo 
et transiens uidit hominem 
caecum ex natiuitate sedentem 
et interrogauerunt illum discipuli. 
rabbi quis peccauit hic 


aut parentes eius ut caecus nasceretur 


— . . 
respondit ihs neque hic peccauit 


neque parentes eius sed ut- manifestaretur 


— . e 
opera dei in eo oportet nos operari 


(Fol. 139 a.) 


Carr. VIII. 51—IX. 4. 


124 


τὰ epya Tov πεμψαντοσ pe-ewo epa egrw IX. 
ἐρχεται vv£ - ore ovócur Suvarat epyaler Oar 

OTAY ὦ EV TW KOT LW Guo εἰιμει 5 
TOV KOT LOU - TLVTO, εἰπὼν ἐεπτυσεν χαμαι 6 
και ἐποίησεν πήλον εκ του πτυματοσ 

και ἐπεχρεισεν avro TOV πήῆλον 

ert τουσ οφθαλμουσ avrov και eurey 7 
ὕπαγενιψαι εἰσ τὴν κολυμβηθραν 

TOV σιλωαμ ο μεθερμηνενεται 

απεσταλμενοσ ἀπῆλθεν ovv 

και εγιψατο και ηλθεν βλεπων 


οι ουν γειτονεσ Kat ot θεωρουντεσ avrov 8 
TO προτερον οτι προσετὴσ ἣν 

ελεγον ovx ovrog ἐστιν o καθημενοσ 

καὶ προσαιτων αλλοι ελεγον ort 9 
οντοσ ἐστιν ετεροι δε ort ομοιοσ - 


GUTO ἐστιν Exetvor €À€yev ort €yo εἰμι 

Ειπον ovv avro o0 ovy 10 
ηνεωχθησαν aov οἱ οφθαλμοι 

απεκριθη exewog ανθρωποσ λεγομενοσ I1 
ine πῆλον εποιήῆσεν Kat emexpua ey 
μου rove οφθαλμουσ και ecrey μοι 


ὕπαγε ew τον σειλωαμ Kat νιψαι 
arn) ov ovy και ἐενιψαμὴν Kat nAGov 


βλεπων - εἰπαν ovy avro που ἐστιν 12 
εκεινοσ λεγει avrour ovk oua. 
Kat αγουσιν avroy προσ Tove φαρισαιουσ 13 
TOV wore TudAov nv δεσαββατον 14 
or€ TOV πῆλον εποιῆσεν o ino 
και ἡνυξεν avrov Tove οφθαλμουσ 
παλιν ovy επηρωτων avrov και οι 15 
φαρισαιοι πωσ ανεβλεψεν 
οδεειπεν αντοισ πηλον ἐπεθῆκεν 

(Fol. 130.) 


S 
— 


sas 
{5 


HAN 


opera eius qui me misit. cum dies est 
uenit nox .cum nemo potest operari 
cum sum in saeculo lumen sum 
mundi haec cum dixisset inspuit in terram 
et fecit lutum de sputamento 

et linuit ei lutum 

super oculos eius et dixit 

uade ablue in natatoriam 

siloam quod interpraetatur 

missus abiit ergo 

et abluit et uenit uidens 

uicini ergo et qui uidebant eum 
prius quoniam mendicus erat 
dicebant nonne hic est qui sedebat 

et mendicabat alii dicebant quoniam 
hic est alii autem quoniam similis 


ipsi est ille dicebat quoniam ego sum 


dixerunt ergo illi quomodo ergo 


aperti sunt tibi oculi 


respondit ille homo qui dicitur 


ihs lutum fecit et linuit 

mihioculos: et dixit mihi 

uade in siloam et ablue 

abii ergo et ablui et ueni 

uidens dixerunt ergo illi ubi est 

ille dixit eis nescio 

et adducunt aeum ad pharisaeos 

qui ante erat caecus erat autem sabbatum 

quando lutum fecit ihs 

et aperuit ei oculos 

iterum ergo interrogauerunt eum et 

pharisaei quomodo uidit 

ad ille dixit illis lutum inposuit 
(Fol. 140a.) 


Cap. IX. 4—15. 


emi τουσ οφθαλμουσ μου και ενιψαμὴν 


και Brerw - ελεγον ovy ex των φαρισαιων 
τινεσ OUK ἐστιν ουτοσ παρα bv 
οανθρωποσ ort ro σαββατον ov τηρει 
αλλοι δε eAeyay πωσ δυναται ανθρωποσ 
αμαρτωλοσ τοιαντα σημεια TTOLELV 
καὶ σχισμα ἣν εν avTOLT ελεγον ovy 
TO τνφλω ov Tt λεγεισ περι eavrov ort 
qveéev σου τουσ οφθαλμουσ.ο δε eurev 
οτι προφητὴσ ἐστιν ovk επιστευσαν 
οιἵουδαιοι περι avrov ews ov εφωνηῆσαν 
Tove γονεισ του αναβλεψαντοσ 


καὶ ἐπηρωτησαν αντουσ λεγοντεσ 
εἰ ἐστιν OVTOT οὕιοσ ὕμων ον ὕμεισ 
λεγετε οτιτυφλοσ eyevyn050 moo ovy 
βλεπειαρτι απεκριθησαν avrow 
οι γονεισ' avTOv καὶ €uroy οἰδαμεν 
οτι OUTOG ἐστιν οιοσ μων καὶ OTL 
τυφλοσ εἐγεννηθη πωσ δενυν βλεπει 
ovx οιδαμεν ἡ Tur avrov ἡνοιξε 
τουσ οφθαλμουσ ἡμεισ ovk οιἰδαμεν 
avrov erepwrngare ἡλικίαν exet 
αὐυτοσ rept avrov λαλήσει 

TAVTG εἰπὸν OL γονεισ αὐτου OTL 
εφοβουντο rove tovdatove 999 yap 


συνετεθιντο ot Ltovoatot ἵνι eay TU 
— 


ομολογηση avrov xpy εἰναι 
αποσνυναγωγοσ᾽ γενήται δια rovro 

- οἵ γονεισ avrov εἰπαν ἡλικίαν exec 
avrov ἐρωτατε εφωνήῆσαν ovy avroy 
ex Sevrepov oo nv τυφλοσ Kat ecray avro 
Soc δοξαν τω Ou nye odapev ort 
οανθρωποσ ovrog ἀμαρτωλοσ ἐστιν 

(Fol. 140 ὁ.) 


‘SE 


— 


fas 


IOHAN 
—, — 
super oculos meos et ablui 

et uideo dicebant ergo de pharisaeis 
quidam non est hic & deo 


homo quoniam sabbatum non serbat 


alii autem dicebant quomodo potest homo 


peccator talia signa facere 
et schisma erat inter eos dicebant ergo 
caeco tu quid dicis de eo quoniam 
aperuit tibi oculos ad ille dixit 
quoniam profeta est non crediderunt 
iudaei de illo usque quo clamauerunt 
parentes eius qui uiderat uisum 
et interrogauerunt eos dicentes 
si est hic filius uester quem uos 
dicitis quoniam caecus natus est quomodo ergo 
uidet modo responderunt illis 
parentes eius et dixerunt scimus 
quoniam hic est filius noster et quoniam 
caecus natus est quomodo autem nuno uidet 
nescimus aut quis ei aperuit 
oculos nos ignoramus 
ipsum interrogate aetatem habet 
ipse de semet ipso loquetur 
haec dixerunt parentes eius quoniam 
timebant iudaeos iam enim 
cogitauerant iudaei ut si quis 
confessus fuisset xpm eum esse 
de synagoga eiciatur propter hoc 
parentes eius dixerunt aetatem habet 
ipsum interrogate clamauerunt ergo eum 
iterum qui erat caecus et dixerunt illi 
da gloriam deo nos scimus quoniam 
homo hic peccator est | 

(Fol. 141 a.) 


Cap. IX. 15— 24. 


125 


απεκρειθὴ ovy εκεινοσ εἰ αμαρτωλοσ 
ἐστιν ovk oda εν ovda ore τυφλοσ μὴν 
καὶ apr. βλεπω εἰπὸν ovy avro 

τι εποιήησεν σοι και rod ἡνυξεν σου TOUT 


οφθαλμουσ οδε ειπεν εἰπὸν vpew 907 


και ουκ ἠκουσατε τι θελετε παλιν 


ακουσαι μὴ και ὕμεισ θελετε μαθηται 
avrov γενεσθαι οι δε ελοιδορῆσαν avrov 
και euray συ μαθητησ εκεινοῦ εἰ 

ἡμεισ rov μωῦσεωσ ἐσμεν μαθηται 

npeo obapev ore μωῦσει λελαληκεν 

o ὃσ και ort Oo αἀμαρτωλων ουκ GKOUEL 
τουτον δε ovx οἰδαμεν ποθεν ἐστιν 
απεκριθη o avOpurrog και ειπεν 

εν Tovro ovy θαυμαστον εστιν οτι ὕμεισ 
οὐκ οιδατε ποθεν τιν και ἡνυξε μου 

τουσ οφθαλμουσ - οιἰδαμεν ort o Oa 
αμαρτωλων ovk axover add «ay Ti 
θεοσεβησ 7 και τὸ θελημα avrov ποιή 
TOVTOU AKOVEL EX του αἰωνοσ OUK 

ἠκουσθὴη ort qvuge rwr οφθαλμουσ 
Tudou γεγεννημένον εἰ μη ovrog 

παρα ϑυην - ovk ἡδοινατο ποίειν ουδὲν 
απεκριθησαν avro και εἰπαν εν ἁμαρτιαισ 
συ εγεννηθησ ολοσ και συ διδασκεισ ἡμασ 
και εξεβαλον avrov εξω και ἠκουσεν 

o ine ort ἐξεβαλον avrov και evpev avtov 
και ELEY συ TUTTEVELT' εἰσ TOV ὕιον TOV 
avÓpenrov* απεκριθὴη exewoa Kat eurey 

ἵνα πιστευσω εἰσ αὐτὸν 


--- 
απεκριθὴ avro otvjo καὶ εῳὡωρακασ'᾽ avrov 


— 
και TLO €OTLV-K€ 


και 0 μετα σου λαλων εκεινοσ ἐστιν 


Sammy, - 
o Se εφη rurrevo κε Kat προσεκυνῆσεν avro 


(Fol. I41 b.) 


IX. 25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


38 


"REG IOHAN 
— 


respondit ergo ille si peccator est 


nescio unum scio quoniam caecus eram 
et modo uideo dixerunt ergo illi 

quid fecit tibi e& quomodo aperuit tibi 
oculos ad ille dixit dixi uobis iam 

et non audistis quid uultis iterum 
audire num quid et uos uultis discipuli 
ipsius fieri ad illi maledixerunt illum 
et dixerunt tu discipulus illius es 

nos moysi sumus discipuli 

nos scimus quoniam moysi locutus est 
ds et quoniam ds peccatorum non audit 


hunc autem nescimus unde sit 


respondit ergo homo et dixit 


in hoc ergo mirabile est quoniam uos 
nescitis unde sit et aperuit mihi 
oculos scimus quoniam ds 
peccatorum non audit sed si quis 

dm timet et uoluntatem eius facit 
hune audit a saeculo non est 
auditum quoniam aperuit quis oculos 
caeci nati si non hic 


a deo esset non poterat nihil facere 


responderunt illi et dixerunt in peccatis 


tu natus es totus et tu doces nos 


et eiecerunt eum foras et audiuit 


T . . . . 
ihs quoniam eiecerunt eum et inuenit eum 


et dixit tu credis in filium 
hominis respondit ille et dixit 


. — . 
et quis est dme ut credam in eum 


respondit illi ihs et uidisti eum 


et qui tecum loquitur ipse est 
ad ille dixit credo dme et adorauit eum 
(Fol. 142 a.) 


Cap. IX. 25—38. 


KAT IDAN SEC OHAN 127 


— - ee, TERT T" . 
KaL evrev ovg eyo ew κριμαηλθον εἰσ rovKogpolX.39 | et dixit ihs: ego in iudicium ueni in mundo 


Tovrov iva. ot μη βλεποντεσ hunc ut qui non uident 

βλεπωσιν και οἱ βλεποντεσ τυφλοι uideant et qui uident caeci 

γενωνται ἤκουσαν δε ex των φαρισαιων 40 fiant audierunt autem de farisaeis 

OL μετ G.UTOV OVTET και ELTAY AUTW qui cum eo rant et dixerunt ei 

μὴ καιημεισ τυφλοι ἐσμεν eurev ovy 41 numquid et nos caeci sumus dixit ergo 

o ine avrour εἰτυφλοι yre ovk euxere ihs eis si caeci essetis non haberetis 

apapriay νυν δε Xeyere ori βλεπομεν . peccatum nunc autem dicitis quia uidemus 

αι αμαρτιαι ὕμων μενουσιν peccata uestra manent 

anny αμην Xeyo ὕμειν o μὴ εἰσερχομενοσ' X.1 | &menamen dico uobis qui non intrant 

δια qo θυρασ εἰσ την avXqy των προβατων ᾿ perosteum in ouile ouium 

αλλα αλλαχοθεν ava[Jevov εκεινοσ Bed alia parte ascendens ille 

kXerrgo ἐστιν και ληστησ ο δεεισερχομενοσ 2 fur est et latro qui autem intrat 

δια τησ θυρασ avroc «art οποιμην | per osteum ipse est pastor 

τῶν προβατων rovr« o Üvpovpoc ανοιγει 3 ouium huic ostiarius aperit 

και τα προβατα THE φωνὴσ avrov axovet et obis uocis eius audiunt 

και ra. προβατα τα ἴδια φωνει kar ονομα et obes suas uocat ad nomen 

και ἐξαγει avra καὶ oray Ta ἴδια ravra. 4 et eicit eas et cum sua omnia 

exBady evmpoaÜ«v avrov ropeverat eiecerit ante eas uadet 

kas Ta προβατα avrw axoXovÜet ort. et oues eum secuntur quoniam 

odacw avrov τὴν φωνὴν αλλοτριω δε 5 sciunt illius uocem alienum autem 

ov μη ακολουθησουσιν aXXa φευξονται non sequentur sed fugient 

QT avrov ort οὐκ οιἰδασιν των αλλοτριων ab eo quoniam sciunt alienorum 

THY φωνὴν ταυτὴν THY παροιμιαν ό uocem hoc prouerbium 

eurey avTOU 0 ine exewvot δε ovk εγνωσαν dixit illis ihs illi autem ignorauerunt 

τινα 2v α ἐλαλει avrow — Curev ow παλιν 7 quae erant quae dicebat eis dixit ergo iterum 

αντοισ O ae αμὴν ἀμὴν Aeyw ὕμειν illis ihs amen amen dico uobis 

ort eyw exp ἡ Óvpa rov προβατων quoniam ego sum osteum ouium 

oco: λθον προ ἐμου κλεπται εἰσιν 8 quodquod uenerunt ante me fures sunt 

kat λησται aAXa ovx ἤκουσαν avroy et latrones sed non audierunt eorum 

ta TpoBara eyw ειμι ἢ θυρα d eov cay rwr 9 oues. ego sum osteum per me ai quis 

εἰσελθη σωθήσεται και εἰσελευσεται introierit salbus erit et introibit 

και εἐξελευσεται καὶ νομὴν εὑρήσει et exiet et pascua inueniet , 
(Fol. 142 6.) (Fol. 143 a.) 


Carr. IX. 39— X. 9. 


128 


0 κλεπτὴσ ovk «pxeraa εἰ μη ἵνα κλεψη 
και Quon και απολεσὴ eyo δε ηλθον 

ἵνα ζωὴν ἐεχωσιν . eyw εἰμι o ποιμὴν 

o καλοσ᾽ o ποιμὴν o καλοσ τὴν ψυχὴν 
αντου διδωσιν ὕπερ των προβατων 

o δε μισθωτοσ και ovk ὧν ποιμὴν 

ov ovx εἰσιν τα προβαταΐϊδια θεωρει Tov 
λυκον ἐερχομένον και acbinow 
ταπροβατα και φευγει και o λυκοσ 
aprafe: και σκορπιζει ort μισθωτοσ 
εστιν καὶ OU μελει GUTO πέρι των 
προβατων. - eyw εἰμι o καλοσ ποιμὴν 

και γεινωσκω τα ἐεμα᾽ καὶ γεινωσιν ἐμετὰ ἐμα 
καθωσ γεινωσκει με o πατὴρ καγω 
γεινωσκω τὸν πατερα" και τὴν ψυχὴν 
διδωμι ὕπερ των προβατων : και αλλα Se 


: rpoPara exw a ουκ ἐστιν Ex THE αυλησ 


raurno κακεινα Set μεαγαγειν καὶ THC 
φωνησ μον ακουσουσὶν καὶ γενήσονται 
μια ποιμνὴ εἰσ ποιμὴν δια Tovro pe 
οπατὴρ αγαπα ort eyo τιθημι τὴν 
ψυχὴν μον ἵνα παλιν λαβω αὐτὴν 
οὐυδεισ αἰρει αὐτὴν ax ἐμοῦ εξουσιαν exo 
θειναι αὐτὴν και efovatay exo παλιν 
ἀαραιαυτὴν -ταυτὴν τὴν ἐντολὴν ἐλαβον 
παρα του TTGTDOG - σχισμα OVV EYEVETO EV Tas 
τουδαιοισ δια rove λογουσ τουτουσ' 
eXeyov ovv πολλοι εξ avrov ort δαιμονιον 
ἔχει και μαινεται. TL αὐτου ἀκονεται 
αλλοι ελεγον ovk ἐστισ τὰ ρήματα ταυτα 
δαιμονιζομενου μὴ δαιμονιον 
δυναται οφθαλμουσ᾽ τνφλων ανοιγειν 
Eyevovro δε ra ἐνκαιψια ev ἵεροσολυμοισ 
(Fol. 143 δ.) 


I1 


13 


14 


16 


17 


I9 


41 


22 


[o 


Cc 
— 


[ 
[2 


fur non uenit nisi ut inuolet 

et occidat et perdat .ego autem ueni 

ut uitam habeant ego sum pastor 
bonus pastor uonus animam suam 

dat pro ouibus | 

mercennarius autem et qui non est pastor 
cuius non sunt oues propriae uidet 
lupum uenientem et dismittit 

obes et fugit et lupus 

rapit et dispargit quoniam mercennarius 
est et cura ei non est. de 

ouibus ego sum bonus pastor 

et cognosco mea. et cognoscunt me meae 
Sicut cognoscit me pater et ego 

cognosco patrem et animam 

do pro ouibus et alias autem 

oues habeo quae sunt de atrio 

hoc et ipsas oportet me adducere et 
uocis meae audient et fient 

unus grex unus pastor propter hoc me 
peter diligit quoniam ego pono 

animam meam ut iterum accipiam eam 
nemo tollit eam a me potestatem habeo 
ponere eam et potestatem habeo iterum 
tollere eam hoc mandatum accepi 

ἃ patre dissensio ergo facta est inter 
iudaeos propter uerba haec 


dicebant ergo multi ex illis quia daemonium 


habet et insanit quid illum auditis 
alii autem dicebant non sunt haec uerba 
daemonium habentis numquid daemonium 
potest oculos caecorum aperire 
facta sunt autem encenia in hierosolymis 
(Fol. 144 a.) 


Car. X. to—22. 


χειμων NY και zrepuemat o LNT 
εν Tw ἵερω ev TH στοα σολομωνοσ 
εκυκλωσαν ovv avrov οι ἴουδαιοι και 
eAeyav avro ews wore THV ψυχὴν 
— 

ἡμῶν ALPELT εἰ OV EL O KPO eure ἡμειν 

M - 
παρήσια απεκριθη o ino AaAw ὕμειν 
και OV πιστευετε μοι TA εργα α €yo) ?TOUD 
εν TO OVOLATLTOU πατροσ μον αντα 
μαρτυρι περι eov αλλ ὕμεισ ov πιστενεται 
OTL ουὅκ ἐστε EK των προβατων των ἐμων 
καθωσ eurov ὕμειν τα προβατατα ena 
THO φωνὴσ μον akovet καγω γεινωσκω 
avra Kat ἀκολουθουσιν μοι καγω 
ζωὴν αἰωνιον διδωμι avrowr και 


OU μη ἀπολωνται εἰσ TOV αἰωνα 


και OU μὴ apad) τισ ανταὰ εκ THO χειροσ μον 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


SEC IOHAN 
“SS — 


hiems erat et ambulabat ihs 

in templo in porticum solomonis 
circumierunt autem eum iudaei et 
dicebant ei usque quo animam 
nostram tollis si tu es xps dic nobis 
palam respondit ihs dico uobis 

et non creditis mihi opera quae ego facio 
in nomine patris mei ipsa 

testificantur de me sed uos non creditis 
quoniam non estis de ouibus meis 
sicut dixi uobis oues quae sunt meae 
uocis meae audiunt et ego gnosco 

eas et secuntur me et ego 

uitam aeternam do illis et 

non periet in perpetuum 


et non rapiet quisquam ea de manu mea 


o πατὴρ pov o δεδωκωσ μοι παντων 29 pater meus qui dedit mihi omnium 
μειζων ἐστιν και ουδεισ Suvarat maior est et nemo potest’ 
αρπαζειν €x THO χειροσ του πατροσ μον rapere de manu patris mei 
€yo και o πατὴρ ev ἐσμεν 30 ego et pater unum sumus 
εβαστασαν ovv λιθουσ οι ἵουδαιοι 31 baiulauerunt ergo lapides iudaei 
iva λιθασωσιν avrov. απεκρειθη 32 utlapidarenteum respondit 
GVTOLO O ine πολλα kaXa. epya. illisihs multa bona opera 
εδειξα ὕμειν ex Tov πατροσ δια ποιὸν ostendi uobis ἃ patre propter quod 
avrov epyov λιθαζετεμε eorum opus lapidastis me 
απεκριθησ αντω ot iovdatot λεγοντεσ 33 | responderunt ei iudaei dicentes 
περι καλου epryov ov λιθαζομεν σε de opere bono non lapidamus te 
αλλα περι βλασφημιασ και orc sed propter blasphemiam et quoniam 
| ανθρωποσ wy row σεαυτον ov homo cum sis facis te deum 
απεκριθη avrouw o ine και εἰπεν 34 | respondit illis iha et dixit 
OUK ἐστιν γεγραμμενον εν TO νομω non est scriptum in lege 
ort eyw eurov θεοι ἐστε εἰ EKELVOUT 35 quoniam ego dixi dii estis si illos 
eurey Üeova προσ ova 0 λογοσ eyevero dixit deos ad quos uerbum factum est 
(Fol. 144 5.) . (Fol. 145 4.) 
CaP. ΣΧ. 22—35. 


17 


129 


130 


fr 


(2 


rov θὺ και ov δυναται λυθηναι ἡ γραφὴ 
ον o πατὴρ ἡγίασεν και ἀπεστειλεν 

εἰσ TOV κοσμον ὕμεισ λεγεται 

ort βλασφημεισ ore εἰπὸν ὕιοσ ὃυ ειμι 
EL OV TOLW Τὰ εργα TOV πατροσ μου 


μη πιστενεταῖ μοι et δε row kay ἐμοι 


μὴ eere vio revew τοισ ἐργοισ πιστενεται 


ἵνα γνωτε ort εν ἐμοὶ o πατὴρ 


: Kayw εν τω πατρι᾿ καὶ εζητουν avrov 


πιασαι και εξηλθεν ex THE χειροσ avroy 
και ἀπῆλθεν παλιν περαν του ἴορδανου 
εἰσ TOV τοπον οπου ἣν Loa ya 


τοπρωτον βαπτιζων και εμεινεν exec 


: καὶ πολλοιλθον προσ avrov : και ἐλεγον 


Ἰωανησ μεν σημειον ἐποιησεν οὐδὲν 


παντα δε oca Ἰωανὴσ εἰπεν περὶ τουτου 


36 


37 
38 


39 


aX) qv και πολλοι ἐπιστευσαν εἰσ avTov «κι 42 


κωμησ -τὴσ μαριασ και THO μαρθασ THT 


αδελφησ αὐτησ v δε μαρια ἡ αλιψασα 
TOV KY μύυρω και ἐκμαξασα Trove ποδασ 
ταισ θριξιν αὐυτησ yo Kato αδελφοσ 
λαζαροσ ἡσθενει απεστειλαν ovy 

αι αδελφαι avrov προσ Tov ep λεγουσαι 
κεῖδεον φιλεισ ασθενει 


οὐκ ἐστιν προσ θανατον αλλ ὕπερ THT 
δοξησ του θυ iva δοξασθη o ὕιοσ του θυ 
δι αυτησ εφιλει δεο ine τὴν μαρθαν 

και τὴν αδελφην aurno και τον λαζαρον 
wo ovv ἤκουσεν ort ασθενει 


on, 
τότε μεν ἐμεινεν 0 ine ext TW τόπω δυο 


ἡμερασ eura μετὰ rovro λέγει Tour 
(Fol. 1455.) 


Hy de rw ασθενων λαζαροσαπο βηθανιασ €x τησ XI. 1 


om, 
axovoac Seino εἰπεν αυτή ἡ ασθενεια avrov 4 


SEC 


A — 


HAN 
— 


fr 


dei et non potest solui scriptura 

quem pater sanctificauit et misit 

in hunc mundum uos dicitis 

quoniam blasphemas quia dixi filius dei sum 
si non facio opera patris mei 

nolite mihi credere si autem facio etsi mihi 
non uultis credere operibus credite 

ut sciatis quoniam in me pater 

et ego in patre et querebant eum 
adpraehendere et exibit de manibus eorum 
et abiit iterum trans iordanen 

in locum ubi erat. iohanes 

primum baptizans et mansit ibi 

et multi uenerunt ad eum et dicebant 
iohannes quidem signum fecit nullum 


omnia autem quae iohannes dixit de eo 


. uera erant et multi crediderunt in eum ibi 
Erat autem quidam infirmus lazarus de bethania 


de castello mariae et martae 

Sororis eius erat autem maria quae unxerat 
dom unguento et exterserat pedes 

capillis suis cuius et frater 

lazarus infirmabatur miserunt ergo 

sorores eius ad ihm dicentes. 


MA . 
dme ecce quem amasinfirmatur 


audiens autem ihs dixit haec infirmitas eius 


non estad mortem sed propter 
gloriam dei ut glorificetur filius dei 

— 
per eam amabat autem ihs marthan 
et sororem eius et lazarum 
cum ergo audisset quoniam infirmatur 
tunc quidem mansit ihs in loco duo 
dies et post hoc dicit 

(Fol. 146 a.) 


Capp. X. 35—XI. 7. 


μαθηταισ avrov αγωμεν ισ τὴν Ἰουδαιαν ΧΙ. 
παλιν λεγουσιν avro οἱ μαθηται avrov pae. 8 


vuv εζητουν σελιθασαι οι ἴουδαιοι 
— 
καὶ παλιν ὕπαγεισ exe, απεκριθη ino 9 
ovxet δωδεκα ὡρασ exer ἡ ἡμερα 
€ay τισ περίπατὴ εν TH NEPA ov προσκοπτει 


oT. TO φωσ τον κοσμου τοντου βλεπει 


cay δε τισ περιπατὴ ev Ty νυκτι προσκοπτει 10 
OTLTO φωσ ovx ἐστιν εν avr; ravra eurey Ii 
kat pera Tovro Neyer avrow λαζαροσ 


o φιλοσ joy κοιμαται adda πορενομαι 
Tov efurvuratavroy Euroy ovy avro 12 


— 
ot μαθηται ke εἰ κοιμαται cwOnoerat 


εἰιρηκει 0e o ino wept tov Üavarov avrov 13 
εκεινοι Se eSofay ort περι rgo 
κοιμησεωσ TOV ὕπνου Aeyet 
TOT€ OVV εἰπεν AUTOLT O une παρρησια 14 
λαζαροσ o φιλοσ μων απεθανεν 
και χαιρω δι ὕμασ ἵνα πιστευσητε 15 
OTL οὐκ ἡμὴν exer αλλα ἀγωμεν προσ avrov 

€urev ovy θωμασ ο λεγομενοσ᾽ διδυμοσ τό 
Tow συνμαθητάισ avrov 
αγωμεν και ἡμεισ ἵνα αποθανωμεν 
per avrov. ηλθεν ovv o ine eo βηθανιαν 17 
και €upev avrov τεσσαρασ ").epao 
εν To jsvj.eus exoyvra. qv Sen 18 
βηθανια ἐνγυσ των Ἱεροσολυμων 
απὸ σταδιων δεκαπεντε πολλοι δὲ εκ των 19 


ἱεροσολυμων εληλυθεισαν προσ μαρθαν 

Kat μαριαμ ἵνα παραμυθήσωνται αντασ 

περι Tov αδελῴονυ ἡ ovv μαρθα wo ἤκουσεν 20 
— 


OTL LO ἐρχεται ὕπηντησεν avro 
papa δε ev τω ow w exabeLero 


(Fol. 1465.) 


SEG IOHAN 131 
— A .-. — 


discipulis suis eamus in iudaeam 
iterum dicunt ei discipuli eius rabbi 
nunc quaerebant te lapidare iudaei 
etiterum uadisibi respondit ihs 
nonne duodecim horas habet dies 

8i quis ambulat in die non offendet 
quoniam lumen mundi huius uidet 

si quis autem ambulat in nocte offendet 
quoniam lumen non est in ea. haec dixit 
et post hoc dicit illis lazarus 

amicus noster dormiuit sed eo 
utexcitem eum dixerunt ergo illi 
discipuli dme si dormit salbus erit 
dixerat autem ihs de morteius 

illi autem putauerunt quoniam de 
dormitione somnus dicit 

tunc ergo dixit illis ihs palam 

lazar amicus noster mortuus eet 

et gaudeo propter uos ut credatis 


quoniam non eram ibi sed eamus ad eum 


dixit ergo thomas qui dicitur didymus 


condiscipulis suis 

eamus et nos ut moriamur 

cum eo uenit ergo ihs in bethaniam 
et inuenit eum quattuor dies 

in monumento habentem erat autem 
b:thania proximum hierosolymis 

a stadiis quindecim multi autem de 
hierosolymis uenerant ad martham 
et mariam ut consolarentur eas 

de fratre martha ergo cum audisset 
quoniam ihs uenitobiabit ei 


maria autem in domo sedebat 


(Fol. 147 a.) . 


Cap. XI. 7— 20. 


a oo 
eurev ovy ἡ μαρθα προσ Tov Un κε 


ει no woe ovx ay οαδελῴφοσ μου 

απεθανεν αλλα καὶ νυν oda 

οτι οσααν αιτησὴ TOV ὃν δωσει σοι o ὅσ 
λεγει avr o ino αναστήσαιται σου o αδελῴοσ 

λεγει avro ἡ μαρθα οιδα ort αναστησεται 

εν τή αναστασει εν TH ETXATH ἡμέρα 
Ειπεν αὐτὴ o une ἐγω εἰμι ἡ αναστασισ 

καὶ ἢ ζωὴ οπιστευων εἰσ eye 

«ay ἀποθανὴ ζησεται και rac 0 ζων 

και πιστενων εἰσ ἐμε ov μὴ αποθανη 

εἰσ TOV αἰωνα πιστενεισ᾽ TOVTO λεγει ναι Ke 

€yo WETLOTEVKG τισνειο χρσ o itc του bv 

0 εἰσ TOV κοσμοσ ἐρχομενοσ 
«a, Tavra εἰπτουσα ἀπῆλθεν και εφωνησεν 

τὴν ἀδελφην αντησ μαριαμ σιωπὴ 

evrovca. ort o διδασκαλοσ παρεστιν 

καὶ φωνει σεεκεινὴ WO ἤκουσεν 

ἤγερθη raxv και ἐρχεται προσ avrov 

0v γαρ ine εληλύυθει εἰσ τὴν κωμὴν 

αλλα qv εν τωτόπω οπου ὕπηντησεν 

avro μαρθα. οι ovy ἴουδαιοι οἱ οντεσ 

μετ αυτὴσ εν ry oua παραμνθουμενοι αυτή. 

ἵδοντεσ τὴν μαριαμ᾽ οτι ταχεωσ ἀανεστὴ 

και ἐξηλθεν ἠκολουθησαν αὐτὴ 

δοξαντεσ ort ὕπαγει εἰσ TO μνημιον 

ἵνα κλαυσὴ exec. ἡ ovv μαρια wo ἢλθεν 

οπου nV ine ἵδουσα ἐπεσεν προσ τουσ 

ποδασ avrov λεγουσα κέ ει oe no 

ovk ay μου 0 adeAdog απεθανεν 

ine OVV wo εἰδεν avr yv κλαιουσαν 

και Tove Ἰδοιουσ κλαιοντασ' 


Tove συνεληλυθοτασ μετ αυτὴσ 


(Fol. 147 5.) 


XI. 21 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


33 


dixit ergo martha ad ihm dme 


si fuisses hic non fuisset frater meus 
mortuus sed nunc scio 


. Φ e — . e UD 
quia quaecumque petieris dm dabit tibi ds 


dicitilliihs resurget frater tuus 


dicit illi martha scio quia resurget 


in resurrectione in nouissima die 


JP . 
dicit illiihs ego sum resurrectio 


et uita qui credit in me 

et si mortuus fuerit uiuet et omnis qui uiuit 
et credit in me non morietur 

in aeternum credis hoc dicit ei etiam dme 
ego credidi quoniam tu es xps filius del 
qui in mundum uenit 
Et haec cum dixisset abiit et clamauit 
sororem suam mariam silentio 

dicens quoniam magister uenit 

et uocat te illa ut audiuit 

surrexit cito et uenit ad eum 

nondum enim ihs uenerat in castellum 
sed erat in locum ubi obuiauit 

ipsi martha iudaei autem qui erant 
cum ea in domo consolantes eam 
uidentes mariam quia cito surrexit 

et exiit secuti sunt eam 

putabant enim quoniam uadit in monumenta 
ut ploraret ibi maria autem ut uenit 
ubi erat ihs uides caecidit ad 

pedes eius dicens dme ai fuisses hio 

non fuisset frater meus mortuus 

ihs ergo ut uidit eam plorantem 

et iudaeos plorantes 

qui simul uenerant cum ea 

(FoL 148 a.) 


Cap. XI. 21— 33. 


εταραχθὴ ro Tvevpart wo ἐνβρειμουμενοσ 


και eurev που τεθεικατε avroy - Aeyovowavrw 34 


Ke e€pxov καὶ ede και ἐδακρυσεν o - 
€Xeyov ovv οι tovdacor eie πω 
εφειλει avrov rwea δε εἰπὸν e£ ov 
OvK eOvvaro ουτὸσ oavvéag Tove 
οφθαλμουσ rov τυφλου ποιησαι ἵνα 
Kat ουτοσ μὴ αποθανὴ ine ovy 
παλιν ενβρειμωμενοσ ev eavro 
ἐρχεται ert τὸ μνήμειον yy δε 
σπήλεον και λιθοσ erexecro ex avro 
λεγει io apare Toy λιθον Aeyev avro 
ἢ papOa 3 αδελῴφη rov rereXevrqkoroa 
xe dn οζει τεταρταιοσ ἐστιν 
λεγει avr o ine. OUK εἶπον σοι OTL Eay 
πιστευσὴσ οψη τὴν δοξαν rov bv 
ore ovv pay τον λιθον kat o ino npe 
Tove οφθαλμουσ avrov avw και ειπεν 
πάτερ EVXAPLOTW σοι OTL YKOVTAT μου 
€yo nde ort παντοτε μου akoveur 
αλλα δια rov oxXoy τον περιεστωτα eurovy 
ἵνα πιστευσωσιν OTL συ με απεστειλασ 
καὶ ravra εἰπὼν φωνὴ μεγαλὴ ἐκραυγασεν 
λαζαρε δευρο εξω και evÜvo εξηλθεν 
o τεθνηκωσ δεδεμενοσ rove ποδασ 
και TOT χειρασ κειριαισ καὶ ἡ Oto avrov 
σουδαριω περιδεδετο λεγει αυτοισ o ue 
Avoare avrov και αφετε ὕπαγειν 
πολλοι ovy των Ἰουδαίων των ελθοντων 
προσ τὴν paplap. εωρακοτεσ o εποιῆσεν 
ο ing επιστευσαν ew avroy τινεσ δε 
εξ avrov ἀπηλθαν προσ Tove φαρισαιουσ 
— 


Και €LTAY αντοισ᾽ O ἐποίησεν oo 


(Fol. 1486.) 


38 


39 


41 


43 


45 


46 


SEG IOHAN 


conturbatus est spiritu sicut ira plenus 
et dixit ubi posuisti eum dicunt ei 

— . . *. — 
dme ueni et uide et lacrimatus est ihs 


dicebant ergo iudaei ecce quomodo 


amabat eum quidam autem dixerunt ex ipsis 


non poterat hic qui aperuit 
oculos caeci facere ut 

. uc 
et hic non moreretur ihsergo 
iterum ira conuersus in semet ipsum 
uenit in monimentum erat autem 


spelunca et lapis superpositus erat 


dicitihs tollite lapidem dicit illi 


martha soror defuncti erat 


dme iam putet quadriduanus est 


dicit illi iha non dixi tibi quoniam si 


credideris uidebis gloriam del 
cum ergo tulerunt lapidem et ihs tulit 
oculos suos susum et dixit 
pater gratias ago tibi quia audisti me 
ego sciebam quoniam semper me audiebas 
sed propter populum qui circumstat dixit 
ut credant quoniam tu me misisti 
et haec cum dixisset uoce magna clamauit 
lazare ueni foras et confestim exiuit 
qui mortuus erat ligatus pedes 
et manus institis et facies eius 
sudarioligataerat dicitilli ihs 
soluite eum et dimittite ut uadat 
multi ergo iudaeorum qui uenerant 
ad mariam uidentes quod fecit 
ihs-crediderunt in eum aliqui autem 
ex eis abierunt ad pharisaeos 
et dixerunt eis quod fecit ihs 

(Fol. 149 a.) 


CaP. XI. 33—46. 


134 


[05] 


συνήγαγον ovy ot αρχιερεισ και ot φαρισαιοι ΧΙ. 


συνεδριον και ελεγον τι ποιουμεν ovrog 

οανθρωποσ τοιαντα σημεια roue 

και εαν αφωμεν avrov ουτωσ 

παντεσ πιστευσουσιν εἰσ αὐτὸν 

Kat ελευσονται οἱ ρωμαιοι και αρουσιν 

τον τόπον ἡμῶν Kat TO εθνοσ 

eur δετισ ef avrov κιῴφασ apxuepeva wy 

TOU €VLOUTOVU EK€LVOV εἰπεν αὐτοισ' 

ὕμεισ ovx otfare οὐδεν ovde λογιζεσθε 

ore ouvpeper ὕμειν iva eur ανθρωποσ 

αποθανὴ ὕπερ rov Àaov kat μη oXov 

To εθνοσ ἀποληταῖι rovro δε ad» eavrov 

oux εἰπεν ἀλλα αρχιερευσ ov TOV ἐνιαντου 
— —- 

επροφητευσεν ort tno ἡμελλεν ἀαποθνησκι 

ὑπερ του εθνουσ και ovx νπερ rov εθνουσ μονο 


oy 
αλλ wa και τα Texva Tov θυ ra ἐσκορπισμενα 


: eu evowayayn arr εκεινησ ovy THO ἡμερασ 


εβουλευσαντο iva αποκτεινωσὶν avroy 

we OVV OUKETL παρησια περιεπατει 

εν Tour tovdarote - adXa. ἀπηλθεν εἰσ τὴν xupa. 

cap bovpew eyyvo Tyo ερημον eur εφραιμ. λέγομε 
v4 


πολιν κακει διετριβεν μετα των 


μαθητων "εγγυσ Se qv ro πασχα των tovBauo 


: aveByoay ovy ew ἱεροσολυμα πολλοι 


εκ THO χωρασ πριν τὸ πασχα ἵνα 
αγνισωσιν eavrove εζητουν ovv 

και TOV ay και eAeyay per αλληλων 

ev τωΐερω ἐστωτεσ τι δοκειτε 

ort ov μὴ ελθὴ εἰσ τὴν ορτὴν 

δεδωκεισαν δε και οἱ ἀρχιερεισ᾽ και ot 
φαρισαιοι ἐντολὴν ἵνα αν Tur γνοι wou ἐστιν 
μηνυση omo πιασωσιν αντὸν 


(Fol. 149 5.) 


47 


49 


55 


congregauerunt ergo scribae et farisaei 
concilium et dicebant quid facimus hic 
homo talia signa facit 
et si dimiserimus eum sic 
omnes credent in eum 
et uenient romani et tollent 
locum nostrum et gentem 
unus autem quidam ex illis caifas princeps 
anni illius dixit illis 
uos nescitis nihil neque cogitatis 
quoniam expedit uobis ut unus homo 
moriatur pro plebe et ne tota 
gens periet hoc autem ab se 
non dixit sed cum esset princeps anni illius 
profetauit quia ihs incipiebat mori 
pro gente et non pro gente solum 
sed ut et fili del qui disparsi sunt 
in unum congreget ab illo igitur die 
consilium fecerunt ut interficerent eum 
ihs ergo iam non palam ambulabat 
inter iudaeos sed abiit in regionem 
sapfurim iuxta desertum efrem quae dicitur 
ciuitas et ibi ambulabat cum 
discipulis iuxta autem erat pascha iudaeoru 
subierunt ergo in hierosolyma multi 
de regione ante pascha ut 
purificent semet ipsos quaerebant ergo 
et ihm et dicebant in semet ipsos 
in templo stantes quid putatis 
quia non ueniet in diem festum 
dederant autem et principes et farisaei 
mandatum ut si quis nosset ubi est 
nuntiaret ut adpraehenderent eum 

(Fol. 150a.) 


Car. XI. 47—57. 


s 


Cammy 


fa 


f f 


e 
O ovy ino προ εξ ἡμέρων rov πασχα 
λθεν eur βηθανιαν orov ἣν λαζαροσ 
o τεθνηκωσ ον ἤγειρεν εκ νεκρων 
-.-ς 


ς οιῆσ:και ἐποίησαν avro δειπνον €K€t 


και Sinxove μαρθα οδελαζαροσ 
εἰσ ἣν των ανακειμενων συν avro 
ἢ ovv μαρια λαμβανι λειτραν πιστικησ μνυρου 
πολυντειμονυ και ἡλειψε τουσ ποδασ 
του equ καὶ ἐξεμαξεταισ θριξιν avra 
Tovg ποδασ avrov Kat οἰκεια «πληρωθη 
εκ THT οσμὴσ τον μυρου λέγει ovy 
εἰσ εκ των μαθητων avrov ἴουδασ 
απὸ καρνωτου oo ἡμελλεν παραδουναι 
avrov δια τι τουτὸ τὸ μυρον οὐκ 
expaln τριακοσιων δηναριων καὶ 
εδοθη τοισ πτωχοισ rovro δε εἰπεν 
OUX OTL περι των πτωχων ἐμελεν 
avro αλλ ort κλεπτὴσ ἣν καὶ Τὸ 
γλωσσόκομον exov τα βαλλομενα 
εβασταζεν. | €Curevowo ino 
αφεσ avrqv iva εἰσ τὴν ἡμεραν Tov 
evradiac pov τηρησὴ avro 

:οχλοσ δὲ πολυσ εκ των Ἰουδαίων 
ἤκουσαν ort ἐκεῖ ἐστιν καὶ ηλθαν 
ov δια τον τῆν αλλ iva τον λαζαρον 
ἴδωσιν ον ἡγεῖρεν qe εκ TOV νεκρων 
εβουλευσαντο δε οι αρχιερεισ ἵνα 
καὶ Tov λαζαρον αποκτεινωσὶν 
ort πολλοι των ἴουδαιων δι avrov 


— 
ὕπηγον και ENLTTEVOY εἰσ TOY ujy 


: Ty eravptov οχλοσ πολυσ οελθων 


εἰσ τὴν «o 
ἐρχεται ine εἰσ ἱερουσαλημ eXo. Boy 
(Fol. 1g0 5.) 


eopr']yy ακονσαντεσ OTL 


XII. 


μή 
iN 


13 


SEC IOHAN 135 


fm 


Ergo ihs ante sex dies paschae 


uenit in bethaniam ubi erat lazarus 

qui mortuus fuerat quem suscitabit a mortuis 
ihs et fecerunt ei cenam bi 

et ministrabat martha lazarus autem 
unus erat ex discumbentibus cum eo 
ergo maria accipiens libram pistici unguenti 
pretiosi et unxit pedes 

ihu et tersit capillia suis 

pedes eius et domus repleta est 

de odore unguenti dicit ergo 

unus de discipulis eius iudas 

ὃ caryoto qui incipiebat tradere 

eum quare hoc unguentum non 

uenitum est trecentis denariis et 

datum est pauperibus hoc autem dixit 
non quia propter pauperes curat erat 

illi sed quoniam fur erat et 

loculum habens quae mittebantur 
baiulabat. dixitergoihs . 

dismitte illam ut in diem 

sepulturae seruet illud 

turba ergo plurima de iudaeis 

audierunt quoniam ibi esset uenerunt 
non propter ihn sed utlazarum 

uideant quem suscitauit ihs de mortuis 
cogitauerunt autem principes et 

ut lazarum occidant 

quoniam multi iudaeorum propter illum 
ibant et credebant in ihm 


postera die turba multa quae uenerat 


in diem festum audientes quia 
uenit ihs in hierusalem acceperunt 
(Fol. 151 a.) 


Cap. XII. 1— 1:3. 


136 


ses. 


— 


τα Baia των φοινεικων και εξηλθον 
εἰσ συναντησιν avrov και εκρανγαζον 
λεγοντεσ οσσανα εὐυλογητοσ 


ο ἐρχομενοσ ev ovopare KV Bac eva 


- . 59 — 
: Tov ἵστραὴλ " evpwy Se o ino οναριον 


εκαθισεν er avro καθωσ ἐστι γεγραμμενον 


μὴ φοβου θυγατὴρ σιων ἴδον o βασιλευσ 
σου ἐρχεται καθημενοσ emt πωλον ovov 


eB : ravra δε ovk evogaay ot μαθηται avrov 


Rs 


TO πρωτον αλλ ore εδοξασθη o ine 

Tort ἐμνήσθησαν ort ravra ἣν 

περι avTov γεγραμμενα και ταυτα 
erovgcay αὐτω Εμαρτυρι ov 

0 oxÀoc o ov μετ avrov ort τον λαζαρον 
εφωνησεν ex Tov μνήμειου 

και ἤγειρεν avrov EK vekpay 

δια Tovro και ὕπηντησαν avro 

οχλοι ort ἤκουσαν TOvTO avTOV 
πεποιήκεναι TO σήμειον οἱ ουν 
φαρισαιοι εἰπὸν προσ avrovo θεωρειτε 
ort ovk ὠφελειτεουδὲν ἴδε o κοσμοσ 
oXog oro avrov ἀπηλθεν σαν δε 

και eAAnveo Tied ex των αναβαινοντων 
ἵνα προσκυνήσουσιν EY τὴ ἑορτὴ 

ovrot ovv προσηλθαν τω φιλιππω 

τω απὸ βηδσαῖδα rgo γαλιλαιασ 

και ἡρωτων GUTOV λεγοντεσ κε 

θελομεν τον ay ioew 

epxerat φιλιπποσ και Aeye τω avdpea 


παλιν o ανδραιασ και φιλιπποσ 


— x. — 
: Aeyovcuy Tw unu : 0 δε ine ἀπεκρίνατο 


avrow λεγων εληλυθεν ἡ wpa ἵνα 
δοξασθη οὔιοσ του ανθρωπου 
(Fol. 151.) 


XII. 


14 


17 


18 


19 


20 


AI 


22 


23 


CAP. 


---Ἥ, — 
S 
— 


HAN 


fr 


——, 


ramos palmarum et exierunt 

in obuiam eius et clamabant 

dicentes ossana benedictus 

qui uenit in nomine dmi rex 
istrahel inueniens autem ihs asellum 
sedit super eum sicut scriptum est 
noli timere filia sion ecce rex 


tuus uenit sedens super pullum asinae 


haec autem non cognouerunt discipuli eius 


primum sed cum glorificatus est iha 
tunc rememorati sunt quia haec erant 
dee o scripta et haec 
feceruntei testificabantur ergo 
populus qui erat cum eo quoniam lazarum 
clamauit de monumento 
et suscitauit eum de mortuis 
propter hoc et obviauerunt ei 
turbae quoniam audierunt hoc illum 
fecissesignum igitur 
pharisaei dixerunt ad eos uidetis 
quoniam nihil prodefacitis ecce mundus 
totus post illum abiit erant autem 
et graeci quidam de his qui ascendebant 
ut adorent in die festo 
hic ergo accesserunt ad philippum 
qui erat a bedsaida galilaeae 
et rogabant eum dicentes dme 
uolumus ihm uidere 
uenit philippus et dicit andreae 
iterum andreas et philippus 
dicuntadihm ihsautem respondit 
illis dicens uenit hora ut 
glorificetur filius hominis 

(Fol. 152a.) 


XII. 13—23. 


f24 


Ι 


[Ξ Rf 


: ἀμὴν αμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν εὰν μὴ 


XII. 24 
O KOKKOG TOU σίτου πεσων ELT τὴν γὴν 
αποθανη avroc μονοσ μενει 


«ay δε αποθανὴ πολὺν καρπον φερει 


: οφιλωντην ψυχὴν avrov ἀπολεσει αὐτὴν 25 


Και O μεισὼν Τὴν ψυχὴν αντοῦυ ἐν Tw 


κοσμω TOUTO εἰσ ζωὴν αἰωνιον 


: φυλαξει αὐτην᾽ ἐαν τισ μοι διακονη 26 


ἐμοι ακολονθειτω καὶ οπου ay eyo eui 
και 0 διακοσ 0 ἐμοσ εσται 


— 
cay Tio ἐμοι διακονὴ τειμησει αὐτὸν 0 Tap 


: vu ἡ ψυχὴ μου τεταρακταῖι Kat Tt euro 27 


TATED TWTOV LE EK THO ὡρασ TavrT)O 


: ἀλλα δια rovro ἡλθον eur THY opay ταυτὴν 


πατερ δοξασον σον ro ογομα 28 
ev T Soy ἡ εἰχον παρα σοι προ rov Toy 
Koo pov γενεσθαι και ἐγένετο φωνη 


εκ Tov ουρανον λεγουσα και εδοξασα 


“καὶ παλιν δοξασω 


0 ovy οχλοσ 0 εστηκωσ ἀκουσασ ελεγεν 29 
ort βροντὴ γεγονεν αλλοι ἐλεγον 
ore αγγελοσ avro λελαληκεν 

απεκρειθη ine και εἰπεν ov Ot eue ᾿ς 30 
ἢ φωνὴ αυτή λθεν αλλα δι ὕμασ 
γυν κρισισ ἐστιν τοῦυκοσμν ὁ 31 
νυν 0 ἄρχων TOV κοσμου τοντου 
βληθησεται «£o και eyo cay ὕψωθω, . 32 

απὸ THO yno eAKvow παντα προσ ἐμαυτὸν 

Tovro δε eXeyey σημαινων Tou» - 33 
θανατω ἡμελλεν αποθνησκειν 

απεκριθη avro 0 οχλοσ ἡμεισ ἠκουσαμεν 34 
εκτουνομουοότιο χρσ μένει ur τον αἰωνα 


kat πωσ ov λεγεισ ort det ὕψωθηναι 


(Fol. 1525.) 


"SEG IOHAN 137 


amen amen dico uobis si non 


granum tritici cadens in terram 

moriatur solum manet 

8i autem moriatur multum fructum adferet 
qui amat animam suam perdet eam 

et qui odit animam suam in 

mundo hoc in uitam aeternam 

custodiet eam ai quis mihi ministrat 

me sequatur et ubicumque ego sum 

et minister meus erit 

8i quis mihi ministrat honoret illum pater 
nunc anima mea conturbata est et quid dico. 
pater salba me de hora hac 

sed propter hoc ueni in horam hanc 

pater glorifica tuum nomen 

in gloria quam habebam aput te antequam 
mundus fieret facta est uox 

de caelo dicens et glorificaui | 

et iterum glorificabo 

turbae ergo quae stabant audientes dicebant 
quoniam tonitrum factum est ali dicebant quia 


angelus illi locutus est 


respondit ihs et dixit non propter me 


uox haec uenit sed propter uos 

nunc iudicium est mundi 

nunc prineprinceps mundi huius 
mittetur foris et ego si exaltatus fuero 
de terra traham omnia ad me 

hoc autem dixit significans quale 


morte erat moriturus 


respondit illi turba nos audiuimus 


de lege quoniam xps manet in aeternum 
et quomodo tu dicis quia oportet exaltari 
(Fol. 153 4.) 


Cap. XII. 24—34- 


18 


138 


3j 


TOV ὕιον Tov ανθρωπου rwr ἐστιν ovy 
ovrog οὕιοσ του ayÜporrov 
— 
Curev ovv avrow o tno erc μεικρον xpovoy 
TO φωσ εν ὕμιν ἐστιν περιπατεῖτε ovy 
WO τὸ φωσ EXETE ἵνα μη ὕμασ σκοτια 
καταλαβὴη και o περιπατῶν εν TH σκοτεια 
ουκ otdey πον ὕπαγει wo TO uw εχεται 
πιστενετε εἰσ TO φωσ ἵνα ὕιοι φωτοσ 
— 
γενησθε — ravra eXaAgo ey ino 
Ka. ἀπηλθεν και expuBy ar avrov 
Toc'avra 8€ avrov σήμια πεποιήκοτοσ' 
ἐνπροσθεν avroy οὐκ επιστευον εἰσ avrov 
iva o λογοσ ἡσαΐου του προφητου πληρωθη 
— 
OV €UTEV- KE TUT επιστευσεν TH AKON 


— 
ἡμῶν και o βραχειων κυ τινι 


: ἀπεκαλυφθη * δια rovro ovx εδυναντο 


WUTTEVELY και YAP ειἰπεν NTALAT 
τετυφλωκεν avrov τὴν καρδιαν 

iva μη ἴδωσιν τοισ οφθαλμοισ 

και μη νοησουσιν Ty καρδια και στραφωσιν 
καιϊασομαιαντουσ : ταυτα δε ειπεν Ὁ 
noaiac ore edev τὴν δοξαν του ϑυ avrov 
kat ἐλαλησεν rep. avrov Opwo pevrot 
και εκ των ἀρχοντῶν πολλοι επιστευσαν 
eur avrov αλλα δια τουσ φαρισαιουσ 

ουχ ὠμολογουν ἵνα μη αποσνυναγωγοι γενωνται 
yyamnoay yap τὴν δοξαν των ανθρωπων 
μαλλον περ την δοξαν του Ov 


C 


: eno ovy expafey και eXeyev o πιστένων 


εἰσ ere ov πιστενει εἰσ ene αλλα 

εἰσ roy πεμψανταμε οθεωρων eje 
θεωρειτον πεμψανταμε: eyo poo 
eur Toy κοσμον εληλυθα ἵνα ac 


(Fol. 153 6.) 


4t 


43 


45 
46 


‘SEC IOHAN 


filium hominis quis est ergo 


hic filius hominis 


dixit ergo illis ihs adhuc modicum tempus 


lux in uobis est ambulate ergo 

cum habetis lumen ut non uos tenebrae 
adpraehendant et qui ambulat in tenebris 
nescit ubi uadit cum lumen habetis 
credite in lumen ut fili lucis 

sitis haec locutus est ihs 

et abiit et abscondit se ab eis 

tanta autem ab illo signa facta 

in conspectu eorum non credebant in eum 
et uerbum esaiae prophetae adinpleretur 
quod dixit dme quis credidit auditui 
nostro et bracchium dmi cui 

reuelatum est propter hoc non poterant 
credere etenim dixit eseias 

excaecauit eorum cor 

ut non uideant oculis 

et non intellegant corde et conuertantur 
etsanem illos haec autem dixit 

esaias quando uidit gloriam del sui 

et locutus est de eo facile autem 

et de principibus multi crediderunt 

in illum sed propter farisaeos ‘non confiteba 
tur ut non de synagoga eiciantur 
dixerunt enim gloriam hominum 


. e “ΠῚ 
magis quam gloriam dei 


ihs ergo clamabat et dicebat qui credit 


inme noncredit in mesed 

in eum quime misit qui uidet me 
uidet eum qui me misit egolumen 
in mundum ueni ut omnes 


(Fol. 154 a.) 


Cap. XII. 34—46. 


rhapky 


Lat EX 
ὁ τιστευ GF tot ὦ ““ἰ OGSTE LT MEDT ἊΣ. 


a 


EN as TIU MIN GREET TUM DORAEITUDS < 
κα, QLAL-T ἐὰν DE EE (557 

σι or τω DC «NEN Ter ee 

LAAE Kee TES ΘΓ Laer Le an. “4 
ET 22 up τε. prae m 

OTe ee. ürT€w* i aver 

@ CACANITL seer eel. CETUR 

e -r 887 WEE σ΄ τ εξ τὺ <x 
OMe TE EMLZWTE feet TE” et 

CEE OW at Ἐν τ fuum 


TO te. 4. EB. ice. eT 


Tes Meee ee Le 
L9 4.00 OO CSE a. Ty 
TW AAA  —D fw tow =z 


TJ τ τ aa 3-0 4— Tore ome 


TUMNLIN.METII-O-OE Wn Taur 


Se CRS i£ —LGAD ..-wT 
uS CE ee Df".  —E—5 


ar vaa apo τὶ it, o. 
LSD Ss. oan. 
at aMF" apo ee 


wr -. acer a ai eE 


ET. δ σαν wn um d NUT - 


Pere CET. UITIUM or eee 
CP Reem at. taro 


er a eee 


TE OT B.S 
Ct. oR Σὲ sree πο Σ ἢ oof rar” 
owen a" lm ae i, "UL 


- «τι στὰς 
aes : ow hl 
ll See ὦ. τα 

Tae dA o-—-——- Ow a 


Lord *., + hee’. 
eur ue 7 σππὰὸ " - 
a™ = t7 os 7 
At? da. 222 77. .74 
»". 5 5 . 

aua cO m oc.t -““ 

am en .. 5 a C 

Zola "oa Cos b P d 

e 3 "0. " 1 . 

- ot. -- " - 

-— 
n . “ome € . - 


"a “ΓΚ (M. 77 
gout T? 079 a e 
oS a£ £A € t9 - 
e -mecs. iuc mc 
a 77. 07 fc: 
ae. 7. 58 97 7 
.- »- JJ .» .»" 
a—- 77 


-* ct 
7 

a FF” 3.» 
T - 

t. * - 


a" Pom aa 
-— 
wer ron . 
- 
9 ^» 
. PL" $ ae 1 
ans en c 


140 


rovg ποδασ απεκριθη we και εἶπεν avro XIII. 7 

0 €yw ποιω σὺ οὐκ οιδασ apri 

yon δεμεταταυτα λεγει avro πετροσ 8 

Ke ov μὴ μον vujrew Trove T0000 εἰσ TOY αἰωνα 
απεκριθη ine €ay μη vujro σε ov exeuar 

μεροσ per εμον λεγει avro πετροσ 9 

κε μὴ μονον τουσ ποδασ αλλα και TG 

χειρασ και τὴν καιφαλην λεγει αυτω 10 

o ier o λελουμενοσ ov xpetay exer τὴν Kepady 

vajaaÓa. εἰ μη τουσ ποδασ μονον 


εστιν yap καθαροσ ολοσ και ὕμεισ καθαροι 


— 
ἐστε αλλ ουχι παντεσ ἡδεῖ yap vo II 
Tov παραδιδοντα avrov ore ovy ενιψεν 12 


Tove ποδασ' avrov και ἐλαβεν ra ἵματια 
αναπεσων παλιν €urey avrow 


γείνωσκεται Te πεποιῆκα ὕμειν 


. - 
> ὕμεισ φωνειτε με ο διδασκαλοσ και o ka 13 


και καλωσ λεγετε εἰμι yap * εἰ ουν €yo 14 
evuja rove ποδασ ὕμων o Ko καὶ o διδασκαλοσ 

Toc pa Xov και ὕμεισ οφειλετε 

αλληλῶων vurrew rovc ποδασ 

ὕποδειγμα yap εδωκα ὕμειν ἵνα 15 


kaDuc eyw emouoa ὕμειν και ὕμεισ 


: TOLELT€ ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 16 


ovx ἐστιν δουλοσ μειξων του κυ avrov 

οὐδὲ αποστολοσ μειζων Tov 

πεμψαντοσ avrov. εἰταντα οιδατε 17 

μακαριοι ἐστε εαν ποιήτεαντα 

ov περι παντων ὕμων λεγω eyw oda 18 

ove εξελεξαμην aÀA iva πληρωθη 

ἢ γραφὴ οτρωγων μετ ejov rov aprov 

ἐπῆρεν er ELE THY πτερναν avrov 

ἀπαρτι Xeyo ὕμειν προ τον γενεσθαι 
(Fol. 1566.) | 


SEC IOHAN 
“-- .-. -.-. — 


pedes respondit ihs et dixit ei 
quod ego facio tu ignoras modo 
Sciens autem postea dicit illi petrus 


dme non mihilababis pedes in aeuum 


respSndit ihs si non te lauero non habes 


partem mecum dicit illi petrus 
dme nontantum pedes sed et 
manus etcaput dicitilli 
ihs qui lauit non necesse habet caput 
labare nisi pedes tantum 
est enim mundus totus et uos mundi 
estis sed non toti sciebat enim ihs 
qui eum traditurus erat cum ergo labit 
pedes eorum et accepit uestimenta 
recumbens iterum dixit eis 
scitis quid uobis fecerim 
uos clamatis me magister et dms 
et bene dicitis sum enim si ergo ego 
laui pedes uestros dmi et magister 
quanto magis et uos deuetis 
inuicem lauare pedes exemplum 
dedi uobis ut 
sicut ego feci uobis et uos 
faciatis amen amen dico uobis 
non est seruus maior dmo suo 
neque apostolus maior eius 
qui misit eum si haec scitis 
beatiestis sifacitis ea . 
non de omnibus uobis dico ego scio ͵ 
quos elegi sed ut inpleatur 
scriptura qui edebat mecum panem 
leuabit super me calcaneum suum 
amodo dico uobis antequam fiat 

(Fol. 156 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 6—19. 


Ko ey πὶ 
KA IQA 


--- τ τ---ι.-ςἉ» 


ἵνα οταν γενηται TLTTEVOYTAL OTL ἐγω εἰμι 


ϑ..... 


px : αμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν ολαμβανων 
-ι ' . 

eay τινα πεμψω eje Xap avec 

και o Aap Bavwyv ene Xap avec 


— 


TOV TELWAVTA LE : Tavra €uroy o ijo 


ry 


-- 
€T apax0n TW πνι Και εμαρτυρῆσεν και €LTT EV 


ἀμὴν ἀμὴν Xeyo ὕμειν ort εἰσ εξ ὕμων 


ρκβ : παραδωσειμε: εβλεπον ovy εἰσ αλληλουσ 
— 


ot μαθηται ἀπορουντεσ περι τινοσ Aeyet 
pry : nv δε ανακειμενοσ εἰσ εκ των μαθητῶν 
-- —, 
GvTOV εν TW KOATW TOV U]U. OV και ἤγαπα 
— 
O τσ VEVEL OUV TOUTO σιμων πετρουσ 
πυθεσθαι τισ ay en οντοσ περι ov Aeye 
εἐπιπεέσων ovy εκεινοσ ert ro στηθοσ 
— ----ὄ 
του την λέγει avro κετισ ἐστιν 
— 
αποκρεινεται avrwotno Kat λεγει 
εκεινοσ᾽ ἐστιν w ay eyw ἐνβαψασ 
TO ψωμιον επιδωσω * και Baar 


pi: το ψωμίον διδωσιν iovda σιμωνοσ 
— 

απὸ kapvorov καὶ εἰσηλθεν εἰσ ekxewov 

— 


- — 
ρκε: gatavac : kAeyec avro o tno 

οποιεισ 7rOUG ταχεῖον τοῦτο δὲ 

ουδεισ eyyo των ανακειμενων 

προσ τι εἰπεν avro τινεσ γαρ εδοκουν 

oTt τὸ γλωσσόκομον εἰχεν o tovdac 

ort Aeyet avro ο ine ayopacoy wy 

χρειαν ExojLey eur THY εορτην 

1) τοισ πτωχοισ ἵνα τι δοι λαβων ovy 

TO ψωμειον εκεινοσ εξηλθεν ευθυσ 

ἣν Se vug- ore ovy εξηλθεν λέγει o we 

νυν εδοξασθη o ὕιοσ του ανθρωπον 

καιοθσ εδοξασθη εν avro 

καιο Oa δοξασει avrov ev «avro και ευθυσ 


(Fol. 156 δ.) 


XIII. 


20 


2I 


23 


24 


25 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


SEC IOHAN 


— 


ut quando factum fuerit credatis quia ego su 


amen amen dico uobis qui accipit me 


quemcumque misero me accipit 
etquiaccipit me. accipit 

. e e e . lI 
qui me misit haec cum dixisset ihs 


conturbatus est spu et testatus est et dixit 


amen amen dico uobis quia unus ex uestris 


tradet me inspiciebant ergo inuicem 
discipuli cogitantes de quo dicit 

erat autem recumbens unus ex discipulis 
eius in sinus ihu quem et diligebat 

ihs innuit ergo huic simon petrus 
interrogaret quis esset hic de quo dicit 
incumbens ergo ille super pectus 


ihu dicit ei dme quis est 


respondit illi ihs et dixit 


ille est cui ego intincta 

buccellam porrexero et intingens 

buccellam porrexit iudae simonis 

a caryoto et introibit in illum 

satanas et dixit illi ihs 

quod facis citius fac hoc autem 

nemo sciuit ex recumbentibus 

ad quid dixit ei quidam enim putauerunt 
quoniam loculum habebat iudas 

quoniam dicit illi ihs eme quorum 

opus habemus in diem festum 

aut ut pauperibus aliquid daret accipiens ergo 
buccellam ille exiuit confestim 

erat autem nox cum ergo exiuit dicit ihs 
nunc glorificatus est filius hominis 

et ds glorificatus est in illo 

et ds glorificauit eum in semet ipso et confesti 


(Fol. 157 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 19— 32. 


14] 


BAR BA BE Tomy 
και evo δοξασει avTov τεκνεῖα ert XIII. 33 | glorificauiteum  filioli adhuc 
pexpov peO vey ειμι ζητήσετε pe pusillum uobiscum sum quaeretis me 
και καθωσ eurov Tour Ἰουδαιοισ' et sicut dixi iudaeis 
οπον eyw ὕπαγω ὕμεισ ov δυνασθαι ubi ego uado uos non potestis 
ελθειν και ὕμειν Xeyo apre uenire et uobis dico modo 
ἐντολὴν καινὴν διδωμι ὕμειν 34 mandatum nouum do uobis 
ἵνα ἀγαπατεαλληλουσ καθωσ Kaye ut diligatis inuicem sicut et ego 
ἤγαπησα ὕμασ iva και ὕμεισ dilexi uos ut et uos 
a y απατε αλληλουσ ev rovro yap 35 diligatis inuicem in hoc enim 
γνωσονται παντεσ ort ἐμοι scient omnes quoniam mei 
μαθητὰι ἐστε cay ἀγαπην exnre discipuli estis si dilictionem habeatis 

ps : ἐν e aXXo" Xeyet avro σιμων av πετροσ 36 in inuicem dicit illi simon petrus 
κέπου ὕπαγεισ -λεγει avro 0 ine dme ubibadis dicit illi ihs 
Ὅπου ἐγω ὕπαγω ov δυνασαι pot συν ubi ego uado non potes tu me 
ακολονθησαι αρτι ὕστερον δε μοι sequim odo postero autem me 
ακολουθησεισ eye ovro κε 37 sequeris. dicit illi dme 
δια τι ov δυναμαι σοι νυν ακολουθησαι quare non possum te nunc sequi 
αρτι τὴν Wuxny μου ὕπερ σον θήσω modo animam meam pro te ponam 


ex LO. TET . 
απεκρειθη ine Kat εἰπεν avro τὴν ψυχὴν σον 38 | respondit ihs et dixit illi- animam tuam 


ὕπερ eov Ünaewr* αμην ay Xeyo σου prome ponis &men amen dico tibi 


OTL ov py ἀαλεκτωρ φωνήσει eom ov quoniam non gallus cantabit usque quo 

apvnon p€ pw - Kas evrev row μαθηταισ avrovXIV.1 negauis me ter. et ait discipulis suis 
ext :: μη ταρασσεσθω ὕμων 7] καρδια non conturbetur uestrum cor 

πιστεύετε εἰσ Tov Ov kat εἰσ ee crediteindm etinme 


credite indo mo patris mei. mansiones 


M 


WLOTEVETE ἐν Τὴ OLKELO, TOV TATPOT μου 


μοναιπολλαῖι εἰσιν εἰ δε μὴ εἰπὸν ay multae sunt si quominus dixissem 

Üp.ew ort πορενομαι erotjua aa uobis quoniam eo parare 

τόπον üpew Kay πορευθω ετοιμασαι 3 locum uobis οὐ si abiero parare 

τόπον ὕμειν ερχομαι παλιν locum uobis uenioiterum 

καὶ παραλημψομαι ὕμασ προσ «Lavrov et adsumam uos ad meipsum 

iva οποῦ εἰμι eyo και ὕμεισ εσθαι ut ubi ego sum et uos eritis 

Kat oTov ὕπαγω odare και τὴν οδον οιδατε 4 et ubi uado scitis et uiam scitis 
λέγει avro θωμασ o λεγομενοσ διδυμοσ s | dicitillithomasqui dicitur didymus 

(Fol. 157 5.) (Fol 158a.) 


Carr. XIII. 32—XIV. s. 


[3J 


K€ OK οἰδαμεν πον ὕπαγεισ και πωσ τὴν 
οδον οἰδαμεν λεγει avro o ine 

eyo εἰμι ἡ οδοσ και ἡ αληθεια και ἡ ζωὴ 
ovOeur ἐρχεται προσ Tov πατερα εἰ μὴ δι ἐμονυ 
€t ἐγνωκατε ELE καὶ TOV πατερα μου 
γνωσεσθαι και ἀπαρτι γεινωσκετε avrov 

και εωρακατε avroy * 


λεγει avro φιλιπποσ 


—, 
xe δειξον ἡμειν Tov πατερα και apke, mew 


Aeyet avro 0 ing TOCOUTU xpovo μεθ υμων 


ειμι και ουκ ἐεγνωκασ pe φιλιππε 

O EWPAKWO ELE eopake Tov πατερα 

και πωσ σὺ λεισ δειξον ἡμειν τον πατερα 
OV TLOTEVELT OTL εγω EV TW πατρι 

Kat 0 Warnp ἐν Eat ἐστιν 

τα ρηματα a eye λελαληκα ὕμειν 

a? ἐμαυτου ov λαλω o δε πατὴρ o εν eot 
μένων ποιετα ἐεργὰ avroV πιστενετε μοι 
OTL O TATHP EV ἐμοι καγω εν τω πατρι 


ec δε μηγε δια τα epya avra. πιστενετε 


αμην αμην λεγω ὕμειν οπιστευων 


εἰσ ἐμετα ἐργα α eyo Tou». κακεινοσ' 
ποιήσει καὶ μειζονα τουτων ποιήσει 
OTL €yw προσ TOV πατερα Topevopar 
και OTL αν αἰτησηται εν τω ονοματι μου 
Tovro ποιήσω ἵνα δοξασθηοπα τὴρ 
εν τω Uu» αν τι αἰτήσητε EV τω ονοματι μου 
ἐγω ποιήσω €ay ayarare pe rog εἐντολασ 
τασ ἐμασ τηρήσατε καγω ἐρωτήσω τὸν 
πατερα και aXXov παρακλητον δωσει ὕμειν 
ἵνα μενὴ εἰσ Tov auova, μεθ ὕμων το 

— 
TO Tryo, Tyo αληθειασ 00 κοσμοσ 
ov δυναται AaBetv ort ov θεωρει avroy 


οὐδε γεινωσκει αὐτὸν ὕμεισ δε 


(Fol. 138 δ.) 


XIV. 


9 


10 


12 


13 


17 


SEC 143 


= 


[6] 


HAN 


dme nescimus ubi badis et quomodo 
uiam nouimus dicit illi ihs 

ego sum uia et ueritas et uita 

nemo uenit ad patrem nisi per me 

si cognouistis me et patrem meum 
scietis et amodo cognoscite eum 

et uidistis eum dicit illi philippus 


dme monstra nobis patrem et sufficit nobis 


dicit illi ihs tanto tempore uobiscum 


sum et non cognouistis me philippe 

qui uidit me uidit patrem 

et quomodo tu dicis monstra nobis patrem 
non credis quoniam ego in patre 

et pater in me est 

uerba que ego locutus sum uobis 

a me non loquor pater autem qui in me 
manet facit opera sua credis mihi 
quoniam pater in me et ego in patre 


sin autem uel propter opera ipsa credite 


amen amen dico uobis qui credit 


in me opera quae ego facio et ille 
faciet et maiora horum faciet 
quoniam ego ad patrem uado 
et quodcumque petieritis in nomine meo 
hoc faciam ut glorificetur pater 
in filio si quid petieritis in nomine meo 
ego faciam si diligitis me mandata mea 
serbate et ego rogauo patrem 
et alium paracletum dauit uobis 
ut maneat in aeternum uobiscum 
Spa ueritatis quem mundus 
non potest accipere quia non uidet eum 
nec adnoscit eum uos autem 

(Fol. 159 a.) 


Cap. XIV. 5—17. 


144 


p 


γεινωσκετε avrov ort Tap ὕμειν μενει 
καὶ εν ὕμειν EO TLY OUK αφησω ὕμασ 
ορφανουσ εἐρχομαι προσ ὕμασ 

ETL μεικρον και ο κοσμοσ j4€ OUKETL 
θεωρει ὕμεισ δεθεωρειτε με 

ort eyo ζω και ὕμεισ ζησεσθε 

εν exe TH NEPA γνωσεσθαι ter 
OTL €y€ EV TO πατρι μον και ὕμεισ 

εν ἐμοι καγω EV ὕμειν o EXWV 


τασ ἐντολασ μου καὶ THPWY avra 


: EXELVOT ἐστιν οαγαπὼων με: o δε 


ayarwy με αγαπηθησεται ὕπο του 
πατροσ μου Kayo ἀγαπήσω AVTOV 


και ερφωνήσω avro ἐμαυτὸν 


:Aeyet avro ἴουδασ ovx o απὸ καρνωτου 


— 
KE TL €T TU OTL μελλεισ jew 


εγῴφανιζειν σεαντον Kat ovxt TW κοσμω 
— 
απεκριθὴ ino και eurev avri» eay TLC 
ayaa pe Tov Xoyov μου τηρήσει 


καὶ ὁ πατὴρ μου αγαπησει QuTov 


καὶ προσ avrov ελευσομαι καὶ προσ 


αντον μονὴν ποιήσομαι ο μὴ 
aya roy με Tov λογουσ μον ov τηρησει 


: Kato λογοσ᾽ οεμοσ ον akovere 


ov ἐστιν ἐμοσ ἀλλα rov πεμψαντοσ με 
᾿πατροσ * ταῦτα λελαληκα ὕμειν 

παρ pev μένων οδε παρακλητοσ 

ΤΟ πνα TO αγιον οπεμψει o πατὴρ μου 

εν τω OVOPATL μου εκεινοσ ὕμασ 

διδαξει παντα και ὕπομνησει ὕμασ 

πανταα αν euro ὕμειν εἰρηνην 

αφιημει ὕμειν εἰρηνὴν τὴν ἐμὴν διδωμι 

ὕμειν ον καθωσ ο κοσμοσ διδωσιν 

(Fol. 159 5.) 


XIV. 


18 


19 


20 


21 


25 
26 


27 


SEC IOHAN 
rn 
scitis eum quoniam apud uos manet 
et in uobis est non dismittam uos 
orphanos uenio ad uos 
adhuc pusillum et hic mundus me iam 
non uidet uos autem uidetis me 
quoniam ego uiuo et uos uiuetis 
in illo die cognoscetis uos 
quoniam ego in patre meo et uos 
in me et ego in uobis qui habet 
mandata mea et serbat ea 
ille est qui diligit me quiautem 
diligit me diligetur a 
patre meo et ego diligam eum 


et ostendam illi me ipsum 


dicit illi iudas non qui ascaryotes 


dme quid est quoniam incipies nobis 


ostendere te ipsum et non huic mundo 


diligit me uerbum meum seruabit 

et pater meus diligit eum 

et ad eum ueniam et ad eum 
habitaculum faciam qui non 

diligit me uerba mea non serbabit 

et uerbum meum quod auditis 

non est meum sed eius qui me misit 
patris haec locutus sum uobis 

apud uos manens paracletus autem 
Spa sanctus quem mittet pater meus 
in nomine meo ille uos 

docebit omnia et commouebit uos 
omnia quaecumque dixero uobis pacem 
dismitto uobis pacem meam do 

uobis non sicut mundus dat 


(Fol. 160a.) 


Cap, XIV. 157—247. 


eyo διδωμι üp.ew μη ταρασσεσθω 

ὕμων ἡ καρδια μηδε δειλειατω 

HKOVOTATE ort ἐγω euroy ὕμειν ὕπαγω 

καὶ ἐρχομαι προσ ὕμασ εἰ ἀγαπατε με 
ἐχαρητε ay ort πορευομαι προσ Tov πρα 
orto wap μειζων μου εστιν καὶ νυν 
εἰρηκα ὕμειν πριν yever Gaz iva οταν 
γενηται πιστευσητε μοι ovKert πολλα 
λαλησω μεθ ὕμων ἐρχεται yap 0 rov 
κοσμου ἀρχων και εν ἐμοι OUK ἔχει 

οὐδὲν eupew αλλ iva γνω 0 κοσμοσ 

ort ayarrw TOV «pa και kaÜuc ἐνετειλατο μοι 
ουτωσ TOU» εγειρεσθε αγωμεν 
ἐντευθεν - eyo expt ἡ ἀαμπελοσ ἡ αληθινή 
Kato παρ μου γεωργοσ ἐστιν παν 
κλημα ev enor μὴ φερον καρπὸν 

Gipel AUTO ka4 παν TO καρποφορον 
καθαριει avro ἵνα πλειονα καρπον φερη 


ad «avrov εαν μὴ jean εν TH 

ἀμπελω οντωσ οὐδε ὕμεισ cay μη 

ἐν eot μεινητε + eyo yap ete 

ἢ ἀμπελοσ ὕμεισ τα κληματα 

O EVV ἐμοὶ KAW εν αντω 

ovroc φερει καρπον πολὺν ort χωρεισ' 
ἐμου ov δυνασθαι ποιειν eay μη tur 
μενὴ εν enor ἐεπληθη εξω wo To κλημα 
και ἐξηρανθη και συναγουσιν avro 

«a4 εἰσ πυρ βαλλουσιν και καίετε 


: «av Se μεινῆτε εν ἐμοι Kat τα ρήματα μου 


εν ὕμειν pecvy o eay θελητε αἰτησασθαι 


: Kas γενήσεται ev rovro εδοξασθη o 


πατὴρ μον ἵνα πολυν καρπον φερητε 


και γενησθαι μου μαθηται καθωσ ἡγαπησεν 
(Fol. 1τόο ὃ.) 


28 


SEC IOHAN 
— — ω--ς — 


ego do uobis non conturbetur 

uestrum cor neque trepidetur 

audistis quoniam ego dixi uobis uado 

et uenio ad uos si diligatis me 

gaudebatis utique quoniam uado ad patrem 
quoniam pater maior me est et nunc 

dixi uobis antequam fiat ut cum factum 


fuerit credatis mihi iam non multa 


loquar uobis cum uenit enim huius 


mundi princeps et in me non habet 
nihil inuenire sed ut sciatis mundum 
quoniam diligo patrem et sicut nrandauit mihi 
sic facio surgite eamus 
hinc ego sum uites uera 
et pater meus agricula est omne sarmentum 
quod in me non adferet fructum 
tollit illud et omne quod fructum adferet 
purgauit illud ut ampliorem frum adferat 
ab se ai non manserit in 
uite sic nec uos si non 
in me maneatis ego enim sum 
uitis uossarmenta 
qui manet in me et ego in illo 
hic adferet fructum multum quia sine 
me non potestis facere si non aliquis 
maneat in me missus est foras sicut sarmentu. 
et aruit et congregant illud 
et in ignem mittunt et ardet 
si autem manseritis in me et uerba mea 
in uobis manserint quodcumque uultis petite 
et fiet in hoc glorificatus est 
pater meus ut multum fructum adferatis 
et sitis mei discipuli sicut dilexit 
(Fol. 161 a.) 


Capp. XIV. 27—XV. 9. 


19 


145 


146 


j Pu 


v 
o 
4 


J 


‘KAT IDAN 

—— ὦ -. 
μεο πατὴρ Kayw ὕμασ ἡγαπησα XY. 
μεινατε εν τὴ aya» τὴ ἐμὴ «ay TAT 10 
€vroÀagc μου THPHO TE pLeverre ey TY 
aya] μου καθωσ Kayw Tac ἐντολασ 
TOU πατροσ μου TETNPYKG Kat μενω 
avrov ev Ty αἀγαπὴ ταυτα δε λελαληκα I 
ὕμειν ἵνα xapa 1 ἐμὴ ev ὕμειν ἢ 
καὶ ἢ χαρα ὕμων πληρωθὴ αντὴ ἐστιν 12 
ἢ ἐντολὴ 7 ἐμὴ ἵνα ἀγαπατε αλληλουσ 


: καθωσ ἡγαπησα ὕμασ * μειξονα Tavryc 13 


ayamny ουδεισ exec ἵνα τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 


: θη ὕπερ των φιλων avrov : ὕμεισ yap 14 


φιλοι μου ἐστε eay ποιήσητε a ἐγω 

ἐντέλλομαι ὕμειν ovkeri ὕμασ λεγω 15 
SovAcve ort o δουλοσ οὐκ σιδεν 

τι ποιει αὐτου OKT ὕμασ δεειρηκα φιλουσ 

OTL TAYTG, OGG ἠκουσα παρα του πατροσ μου 
εἐγνωρισα ὕμειν ovx ὕμεισ με εξελεξασθε 16 
αλλα eyo εξελεξαμην ὕμασ και Onna 

ὕμασ ἵνα ὕμεισ ὕπαγητε και καρπον 


φέρητε και ο καρποσ ὕμων μενὴ 


> «Ψα οτιαν αἰτήσητε TOV πατερα 


εν τω ονοματι μου δω ὕμειν 


: Tavra ἐντελλομε ὕμειν ἀγαπατε 17 


αλληλουσ €t 0 κοσμοσ ὕμασ μισει 18 
γεινωσκετε ort ἐεμεπρωτον μεμεισῆκεν 

ει εκ του κοσμου ἤτεο κοσμοσ ay TO ἵδιον 19 
εφειλει ort ex του κοσμου NTE αλλ eyo 

εξελεξαμην ὕμασ εκ του κοσμον 


: δια Tovro μισει ὕμασ οκοσμοσ : μνημονεῦετε 20 


TOvG λογουσ ove eyw εἰπὸν ὕμειν 


— 
οὐκ ἐστιν pov δουλοσ μειζων TOV κυ avrov 


seu ene εδιωξαν και ὕμασ διωξουσιν 


(Fol. 161 ὁ.) 


— 


t 


EC 


f ej 


HAN 


me pater et ego uos dilexi 

manete in caritate mea si 

mandata mea seruaueritis manebitis in 

caritate mea sicut ego mandata 

patris mei seruabi et maneo 

in caritate ipsius haec autem locutus sum 

uobis ut gaudium meum in uobis sit 

et gaudium uestrum inpleatur hoc est 

mandatum meum ut diligatis inuicem 

sicut dilexi uos maiorem huius 

dilectionem nemo habet ut animam suam 

ponat pro amicis suis uos enim 

amici mei estis si feceritis quae ego 

mando uobis iam non dico uos 

seruos quoniam seruus nescit 

quid facit dms eius uos autem dixi amicos 

quoniam omnia quae audiui a patre meo 

demonstraui uobis non uos me elegistis 

sed ego elegi uos et posui 

uos ut uos eatis et fructum 

adferatis et fructus uester maneat 

ut quid quid petieritis patrem 

in nomine meo det uobis 

haec mando uobis diligite 

inuicem si mundus uos o dit 

scitote quia me primum o diuit 

8i de mundo essetis n:undus suum 

amabat quoniam de mundo eratis sed ego 

elegi uos de mundo 

propter hoc odit uos mundus mementote 

sermones quos ego dixi uobis 

non est seruus maior dmo suo 

si me persecuti sunt et uos persequentur 
(Fol; 162 a.) 


Cap, XV, 9—20. 


f! 


a) 
Es 


J 


J 


J 


ini m 


J 


pes - 
o 


εἰ Toy Xoyov μου ernpnoay Kat Tov 


: ὕμετερον τηρησουσιν: aÀAa ravra 


ποιήσουσιν εἰσ ὕμασ δια TO ονομα μου 


: ort οὐκ οἰδασιν τον πεμψαντα με 


εἰ μη λθον και : ἐλαλῆσα αντοισ' 


: Qpaptiay ovx εἰχαν vvv δε 


προφασιν ovk exovaw epi ro αμαρτιασ' 


> QUTWY ' O ELE μεισων Kat TOV TATEPA μον 


μεισει᾿ εἰ τα ἐργα μὴ ἐποιησα 

εν αυτοισ α ουδεισ αλλοσ ἐποιησεν 
αμαρτειαν οὐκ εἶχαν νυν δε και 
εωρακασιν και μεμεισηκασιν με 

καιτον πατερα μου αλλ iva πληρωθη 

0 Àoyoc o εν Tw vopu» avrov γεγραμμενοσ 
ort ἐμεισησαν με δωρεαν oray δὲ 

εἐλθη o παρακλητοσ ον eyo πεμπω ὕμειν 
παρατου προ μου TO ra Tyo αληθειασ 
οπαρα TOV πατροσ μου ἐκπορευετε EKELYOT 
μαρτυρήσει περι ἐμου και ὕμεισ 


μάρτυρειτε ort απ ἀαρχὴσ jer εμου ἐστε 
Tavra. λελαληκα ὕμειν ἵνα μη σκανδαλισθητε 


αποσυναγωγουσ ποιήσουσιν ὕμασ' 
αλλ epxerat wpa ἵνα rac o azrokrewaa 
— 
ὕμασ᾽ dofn Aarpeay προσφερειν ro 0o 
και TGUTO, ποιήσουσιν ὕμειν OTL OUK 
— 
ἐγνωσαν TOV πρα ουδεεμε 


Tavra. λελαληκα ὕμειν ἵνα oray ελθη 
7] epa. μνημονεντε OTL 


: eyw eurov ὕμειν : ravra δε εξ αρχησ 


ὕμειν ovk εἶπον ore μεθ᾽ ὕμων ἡμὴν 
voy δε ὕπαγω προσ τον πεμψαντα με 
και ονδεισ «£ ὕμων Epwra με 

που ὕπαγεισ αλλ ort ravra λελαληκα 


Fol. 162 δ.) 


XV. 


54 


25 


27 


SEC 


147 


[2f 


HAN 


si uerbum meum custodierunt et 
uestrum custodient sed haec 

facient in uos propter nomen meum 
quoniam nesciunt qui me misit 

8i non uenissem et locutus eis fuissem 
peccatum non habebant nunc autem 
excusationem non habent de peccato 
eorum qui rae odit et patrem meum 
odit si opera non feci 

in eis quae nemo alius fecit 

peccatum non habebant nunc autem et 
uiderunt et odierunt me 


et patrem meum sed ut inpleatur 


uerbum quod in leges eorum scriptum est 


quoniam odierunt me gratis cum autem 
uenerit paracletus quem ego mitto uobis 
a patre meo spa ueritatis 

qui a patre meo prodit ille 

testimonium dauit de me et uos 


testimonium datis quia ab initio mecum estis 


haec locutus sum uobis ut non scandalizemini 


de synagoga uos eicient 
sed uenit hora ut omns qui uos occiderit 
uos putet se hostiam offerre deo 
et haec facient uobis quoniam non. 
cognouerunt patrem neque me 
haec locutus sum uobis ut cum nenerit 
hora memores sitis quia 
egodixiuobis haecautem ab initio 
uobis non dixi quia uobiscum eram 
nunc autem uado ad eum qui me misit 
et nemo ex uobis interrogat me 
ubi uadis sed quoniam haec locutus sum 
(Fol. 163a.) 


Carr. XV. 20—XVI. 6. 


148 


J 


SRS 


ὕμειν ἡ λυπὴ πεπληρωκεν ὕμων 

τὴν καρδιαν αλλ eyw τὴν αληθειαν 

λεγω ὕμειν -συμφερει ὕμειν ἵνα 

eyo απελθω | ay yap μὴ απελθω 

o παρακλητοσ ovk €Aeva erat προσ ὕμασ 

eay Se zropevÓo πεμψω avroy προσ ὕμασ 

και ελθων exewoa ελεγξει Tov Koo pov 

περι αμαρτιασ και περι δικαιοσυνησ 

και περι κρισεωσ » TEPL αμαρτειασ μεν 

οτι OU πιστενουσιψ εἰσ ἐμε 

περι δικαιοσυνὴσ δε 

OTL προσ τὸν πατερα ὕπαγω και οὐκετι 

θεωρειτε με περι δε κρισεωσ 

OTL οαρχων TOV κοσμου TOVTOV κεκριται 
ἔτσι πολλα exw λεγειν ὕμειν 

αλλ ov δυνασθε avra. βασταζειν apri 


— 
oray €AOn exewoo To πνα 


Tyco αληθειασ εκεινοσ ὕμασ οδηγησει 

ev τή αληθεια racy ov yap λαλήσει 

αὠ «avrov αλλα oca ακουσει λαλήσει 
καὶ τὰ ἐρχομενα "αναγγελει ὕμειν εκεινοσ 


ἐμε δοξασει ort ek του eov λημψεται 


> και αναγγελει ὕμειν : παντα οσα 


: ἔχει ο πατὴρ ejua ἐστιν * δια τουτο 


εἰπὸν ort εκ του εμου λαμβανει 

και αναγγελει ὕμειν μεικρον 

και ovkert θεωρειτε με 

καὶ παλιν μεικρον καὶ οψεσθε με 
εἰπὸν ovv εκ των μαθητων avrov 

προσ αλληλουσ τι ἐστιν Tovro o λεγει 
ἡμειν μεικρον και ouKere οψεσθε με 
και παλιν μεικρον καὶ οψεσθε με 


καὶ OTL EYW v7ra yo προσ TOV WATEPA TL €O'TLV 
TOovTO 


(Fol. 1635.) 


XVI. 


13 


REC IOHAN 
-.-- .-- — 


. uobis tristitia adimpleuit uestrum 


cor sed ego ueritatem 

dico uobis expedit uobis ut | 

ego eam si enim non iero 
paracletus non ueniet ad uos 

si autem iero mittam eum ad uoa 
et ueniens ille arguet mundum 
de peccato et de iustitia 

et deiudicio de peccato quidem 
quoniam non credunt in me 

de iustitia autem 

quoniam ad patrem uado et iam 
non uidetis me deiudicio autem - 


quoniam princeps mundi huius iudicatus est 


adhuc multa habeo dicere uobis 


sed non potestis illa baiolare modo 
cum uenerit ille spiritus 
ueritatis ille uos diriget 
in ueritate omni non enim loquetur 
a semetipso quaecumque audierit loquetur 
et super uentura adnuntiauit uobis ille 
me glorificauit quoniam de meo accipiet. 
et adnuntiauit uobis omnia quae 
habet pater mea sunt propter hoc 
dixi quoniam de meo accipiet 
et adnuntiabit uobis pusillum 
et non me uidebitis 
et iterum pusillum et uideuitis me 
dixerunt ergo ex discipulis eius 
adinuicem quid est hoc quod dicit 
nobis pusillum et non uidebitis me 
et iterum pusillum et uidebitis me 
et quia ego uado ad patrem quid est hoc 
(Fol. 164 a.) | 


Car. XVI. 6—18. 


— 


TO μεικρον ovk οιδαμεν o λεγει 
€yvo o ie ort ort ἤθελον avrov 

ἐπερωτησαι περι TOUTOV Kat εἰπεν 

αντοισ περι rovrov ζητειτε 

μετ αλληλων oTt εἰπὸν μεικρον 


και ov θεωρειτε με και παλιν 


μεικρον και οψεσθε με 


py : ἀμὴν ἀμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν ort κλαυσετε 


και θρηνήσεται ὕμεισ * o δεκοσμοσ χαρησεται 
ὕμεισ λυπηθησεσθε- αλλα ἡ Xr jaw 

εἰσ χαραν γενήσεται | 

ἢ γυνὴ oray rur λυπὴν exec ort 

2ABev ἡ ἡμέρα αὐυτὴσ oray δε γεννησὴ 

TO παιδιον ονκετι μνημονευει 

Tye λυπησ δια τὴν χαραν οτι εγεννηθὴ 
ἀνθρωποσ εἰσ TOV κοσμον και ὕμεισ ovv 

vvv μεν Aviv edere παλιν δε 

οψομαι ὕμασ᾽- και χαρήσεται ὕμων ἡ καρδια 
και τὴν χαραν ὕμων ovOeur ape. ad vov 

καὶ εν ἐκεινὴ TY ἡμερα ELE ovk ερωτήσετε ovde 


ἀμὴν αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν «av τι αἰτησηται 
τον πατερα εν τω ονοματι μου δωσει ὕμειν 


€wo αρτι ovx ἤτήσατε οὐδεν εν τω 


ονοματι pov asrerre καὶ λήμψεσθε 
ἵνα ἢ χαρα ὕμων ἡ πεπληρωμενὴ 


pva : Tavra. ey παροιμιαισ λελαληκα ὕμειν 
p 


EPXETAL WPA OTE οὐκετι EV παροιμίαισ 
AaAnow ὕμειν adda ev παρησια περι του 
πατροσ ἀπαγγελω ὕμειν εν exer Τὴ "epa 
εν τω ονοματι μου αἰτήσεσθε 
και ov λεγω ὕμειν ort €yo ἐρωτησω 
TOV πάτερα μου περι ὕμων AUTOT yap 
o πατὴρ φιλιὕμασ ore vero eje 

(Fol. 164 5.) 


XVI. 


25 


SEC IOHAN 


— c — ==, — 


pusillum nescimus quid dicit 


cognouit ihs quoniam uolebant eum 


interrogare de hoc et dixit 

illis de hoc queritis 

in inuicem quoniam dixi pusillum 
et non me uideuitis et iterum 


pusillum et uideuitis me 


&men amen dico uobis quoniam plorabitis 


et plangetis uos: mundus autem gaudebit 
uos tristitiam habebitis sed tristitia uestra 
in gaudium transferetur 

mulier cum parit tristitiam habet quoniam 
uenit dies eius cum autem pepererit 
infantem iam non meminit 

tristitiae propter gaudium quia natus est 
homo in hunc inundum et uos ergo 

nunc quidem tristitiam habebitis iterum aute 
uideuo uos et gaudebit cor uestrum 

et gaudium uestrum nemo tollet a uobis 

et in illo die me non rogauitis nihil 


amen amen dico uobis si quid petieritis 


patrem in nomine meo dabit uobis 
usque nunc nihil petistis in | 
nomine meo petite et accipietis 


ut gaudium uestrum repletum sit 


haec in prouerbiis locutus sum uobis 


uenit hora cum iam non in prouerbiis 


loquar uobis sed in pala de 
patre adnuntiauo uobis in illa die 


in nomine meo petetis 


et non dico uobis coniam ego rogabo 

patrem meum de uobis ipse enim 

pater diligit uos quoniam uos me 
(Fol. 165 a.) 


Cap, XVI. 18—27. 


149 


150 


πεφιλήκατε και πεπιστευκατε OTL EYW 
παρα του πατροσ εξηλθον και ἡλθον 


εἰσ TOV κοσμον παλιν αφιημι TOY κοσμον 


XVL- 


Kat πορενομαι προσ TOV πατερα. λεγοῦσιν evra 29 


ot μαθηται avrov ide νυν ev παρρήσια λαλεισ 


καὶ παροιμιαν οὐδεμίαν λεγεισ 
νυν odapev ort οἰδασ παντα και ov χρεια 
εἐχεισ La. τισ σεερωτα εν Tovro πιστεύομε 


οτι παρα bv εξηλθεσ απεκριθὴ avrow 
— 


> omg αρτι TWUTTEVETE : Sov €pXerat wpa. 


και ἐληλυθεν iva σκορπισθητε 

€KQOTOO LT ταῖδια καὶ εμε μονον 

αφητε και ουκ εἰμι μονοσ ort 

0 πατὴρ μετ €J.OV ἐστιν : ταυτα λελαληκα 
ὕμειν ἵνα εν ἐμοι εἰρήνην exyre 

εν Tw κοσμω θλειψειν εξετε 

αλλα θαρσειτε εγω νενικηκα TOV κοσμον 


Tavra ἐλαλησεν o ino Kau ἐπαρασ' 


Tove οφθαλμονσ avrov «ur τὸν ovpavoy 
evrey. TaTep εληλυθεν ἡ wpa Sogacov 
cov TOV ὕιον ἵνα οὕιοσ cov δοξαση σε 
καθωσ εδωκασ avro εξουσιαν πασησ 
σαρκοσ ἵνα παν o δεδωκασ avro 

exn ζωὴν αἰωνιον αντη δεεστιν 

ἢ αιωνιοσ ζωὴ ἵνα γεινωσκουσιν σε 

τον μονον αληθινον ὃν και ον 


o Coens, 
απεστειλασ uj XPV ur TOUTOY TOV κοσμον 


eyo σε ἐδοξασα ex tno γησ 

και TO epyoy ετελειωσα o εδωκασ μοι 
tva ποιήσω και νυν δοξασον με 

συ πατὴρ παρα σεαντω Ty δοξη ἡ exov 
παρα σοι προ του γενεσθαι Tov κοσμον 


εφανερωσα To ονομα cov Tow ανθρωποισ᾽ 


(Fol. 165 δ.) 


XVIL 1 


SEC IOHAN 
—— — 
dilexistis et credidistis quoniam ego 

& patre exiui et ueni 

in hunc mundum iterum dimitto hunc munda 
et uado ad patrem dicunt ilii 

discipuli eius ecce nun in palam loqueris 

et prouerbium inullum dicis 

nunc cognouimus quia scis omnia et non opus 
habet ut aliquis te interroget in hocredimus 
quoniam a deo existi respondit eis 

ihs modo creditis ecce uenit hora 

et uenit ut dispargamini 

unus quisque in sua et me solum 

dismittatis et non sum solus quomam 

pater mecum est haeclocutussum 

uobis ut in me pacem habeatis 

in mundo tribulationem habebitis 


sed anime qui estote ego uici mundum 


haec locutus est ihs et adlebans 


oculos suos in caelum 

dixit pater uenit hora glorifica 

filium tuum ut filius honorificet te 

sicut dedisti ei potestatem omnis 

carnis ut omne quod dedisti ei 

habeat uitam aeternam haec est autem 

uita aeterna ut cognoscant te 

solum uerum dm et quem 

misisti ihs xpm in hunc mundum 

ego te honorificaui super terram 

et opus consummaui quod dedisti mihi 

ut faciam et nunc honorifica me 

tu pater ad teipsum gloria quam habebam 

aput te antequam fieret mundus 

manifestaui nomen tuum hominibus 
(Fol. 166 a.) 


Capp, XVI. 27—XVII. 6. 


-- — --- 
KAT IOAN 
fee Mee ..  :.. 


ove εδωκασ μοι εκ TOV κοσμου XVIL 
σοι σαν Kat ἐμοι αυτουσ ἐεδωκασ 

καὶ TOV λογον σον τετηρηκαν 

νυν ἐγνωκαν ort παντα οσα δεδωκασ μοι 7 
παρα σον ἐστιν OTL TA ρηματασον α 8 
εἐδωκασ μοι δεδωκα αντοισ και avroL 

ἐλαβον αληθωσ ort παρα σον εξηλθον 

και επιστευσαν OTL OV μεαπεστιλασ 

€yo περι avrov ἐρωτω ουπεριτου 9 
κοσμου €purro adda. περι ὧν εδωκασ μοι 

OTL σοι εἰσιν και TG. €40. παντα σα ἐστιν io 


και τὰ σα ἐμὰ cor και ἐδοξασασ pe ev avrout 
και οὐκετι εἰμι εν τουτω TW κοσμω 11 
και OUTOL EY TW KOT LW εἰσιν 
KAYW TPOT C'€ EPXOMAL OVKETL εἰμι EV τω 
κοσμω- καὶ EV TW KOT PLU ELLE 
TATE αγιε τήρησον avrovg εν ro ονοματι σου 
καὶ OTE μὴν μετ αὐτῶν €yo ετήρουν avTOUT 
εν To ὁνοματι σου. δεδωκασ μοι 
ἵνα wow εν καθωσ ner. OTE ἡμὴν μετ avrov equ 12 
ἐτήρουν αυτουσ εν τω ονοματι σου 
ove δεδωκασ μοι εφυλαξα και ουδεισ εξ avrov 


adero εἰ μὴ οὕιοσ THE απωλειασ' 


ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ πληρωθὴ νυν δε 13 
προσ σεέρχομαι καὶ ravra, λαλω εν τουτω TW κοσμω 
ἵνα €xwow τὴν xapay THY ἐμὴν 

πεπληρωμένην εν avrour. eyw de 14 


ἐδωκα Toy λογον gov ev avrow 

καὶ O KOO LOO JLELO EL αντουσ OTL ονκ €LO'LV 

εκ TOUTOV TOU κοσμον OUK ερωτω iva apne t5 
ανυτουσ εκ του κοσμον αλλ ἵνα τηρησησ 

αὐτουσ EX TOV πονήρου €KTOUTOV TOV κοσμον τό 


OUK εἰσὶν καθωσ KQYW OUK εἰμὶ EK TOU κοσμου 


(Fol. 166 5.) 


‘SEC IOHAN 


— 


151 


quos dedisti mihi de hoc mundo 

tui erant et mihi illos dedisti 

et uerbum tuum serbaberunt 

nunc cognouerunt quia omnia que mihi dedisti 
abs te sunt quoniam uerba tua quae 
dedisti mihi dedi eis et ipsi 

acceperunt uere quoniam abs te exiui 

et crediderunt quia tu me misisti 

ego pro eis rogo non pro hoc 

mundo rogo sed de quibus dedisti mihi 
quoniam tui sunt et omnia mea tua sunt 
et tua mea sunt et glorificasti me in eis 
etiam non sum in hoc mundo 

et ipsi in hoc mundo sunt 
etegoadteuenio iam non sum in 


mundo etin mundosum 


pater sancte serba eos in nomine tuo 


et cum essem cum eis ego serbabam eos 
in nomine tuo quod dedisti mihi 
ut sint unum sicut nos cum essem cum eis ego 
custodiebam eos in nomine tuo 
quos dedisti mihi . et custodiui et nemo ex eis 
periit nisi filius perditionis 
ut scriptura impleatur nunc autem 
ad te uenio et haec loquor in hoc mundo 
ut habeant gaudium meum 
inpletum in temet ipsis ego autem 
dedi uerbum tuum eis 
et mundus odit eos quoniam non sum 
de hoc mundo non rogo ut tollas ' 
eos de mundo sed ut serues 
eos de iniquo de hoc mundo 
non sunt sicut et ego non sum de mundo 
. (Fol. 167 a.) 


Car. XVII. 6—16. 


152 


Cam, 


αγιασον avrovg ev τὴ αληθεια 

o λογοσ o coc αλήηθεια ἐστιν καθωσ ene 
απεστειλασ εἰσ τοντὸν TOV κοσμον καγω 
απεστειλα αυτουσ εἰσ TOVTOY TOV κοσμον 
και ὕπερ αντων eyw αγιαζω ἐμαντον 

iva wou και αντοι ἡγιασμένοι 

εν αληθεια ov περι rovrov δε eporo 
μονον αλλα και περιτῶων πιστευοντων 

δια Tov λογον avrov εἰσ ene va παντεσ 
εν ὡσιν καθωσ av πατὴρ εν ἐμοι 


καγω €V σοι ἵνα και GUTOL EY ἡμειν ὠσὶν 


. ἵνα o κοσμοσ πιστευσὴ οτισὺυ με 


απεστειλασ' καγω τὴν δοξαν nv 

εδωκασ᾽ μοι δεδωκα αντοισ iva wow τὸ εν 
καθωσ ἡμεισ εν OV EV ἐμοι καγω EV αὐτοισ 
ἵνα ὡσιν τετελιωμενοι 

εισ TO εν ἵνα γεινωσκὴ 0 κοσμοσ 

OTL συ μεαπεστειλασ και ηγαπησα avrouT 
καθωσ συ με ηγαπησασ 


πατερ o δεδωκασ μοι θελω ἵνα οπου eun eye 


κακεινοι WOLY μετ ἐμου ἵνα θεωρωσι 


τὴν δοξαν ἣν δεδωκασ μοι ort ηγαπησασ με 


: προκαταβολησ κοσμου : πατερ δικαιε 


0 κοσμοσ τουτοσ σεουκ ἔγνω εγω δεσε 
εγνωκα Kat OVTOL eyvwray 

οτισυ μεαπεστειλασ᾽ : καὶ ἐγνωρισα 
αντοισ TO ονομα σοὺ και γνωρισῳ 


ἵνα ἡ ἀγαπὴ 7) ἡγαπήσασ με εν αντοισ ἢ 


Kayw εν GUTOWT 
—, 


evs: Tavra εἰπὼν o ine εξηλθεν συν row 


μαθηταῖσ avrov περαν τον χειμαρρον 


του κεδρου οπονυ ἢν κηποσ᾽ εἰσ ον εἰσῆλθεν 


pvt : auroo Kat ot pua pros avrov : nde. δε και 
aay 


(Fol. 167 5.) 


XVII. 17 


XVIII. 1 


2 


‘BEC IOHAN 


sanctifica eos in ueritate 

uerbum tuum ueritas est sicut me 
misisti in hunc mundum et ego 

misi eos in hunc mundum 

et pro eis ego sanctifico me ipsum 

ut sint et ipsi sanctificati 

in ueritate nunc autem propter istos rogo . 
solum sed et pro his qui credituri sunt 
per uerbum eorum in me ut omnes 
unum sint sicut tu pater in me 

et ego in te ut et ipsi in nouis sint 

ut hic mundus credat quoniam tu me 
misisti et ego gloriam quam 

dedisti mihi dedi eis ut sint unum 
Bicut nos unum tu in me et ego in eis 
ut sint perfecti consummati 

in unum ut cognoscat mundus 
quoniam tu me misisti et dilexi eos 
sicut tu me dilexisti 


pater quod mihi dedis uolo ut ubi ego sum 


et illi sint mecum ut aspiciant 

gloriam quam mihi dedisti quia dilexisti me 
ante constitutionem mundi - pater sancte 
mundus hic te non cognouit ego autem te 
cognoui et isti cognouerunt 

quoniam tu me misisti et manifestaui 

eis nomen tuum et manifestabo 

ut caritas quam dilexisti me in eis sit 


et ego in illis 


haec cum dixisset ihs exiit simul cum 


discipulis suis trans torrentem 

cedri ubi erat hortus in quem introibit 

ipse et discipuli eius sciebat autem et 
(Fol 168 a.) 


Carr, XVII. 1;7—X VIII. 2. 


— Af 


SS J 


[ἃ 


f5.f 


ΕΣ, 


Bs 


ἵουδασ' o παραδιδων avrov - TOV TOTTOV XVIII. 
— 

ort πολλακισ συνηχθὴ exer o eno 

pera Tov μαθητῶν avrov : o ovv iovdac 3 


λαβὼν τὴν σπειραν και εκ των ἀρχιερεων 


καὶ εκ των φαρισαιων ὕπηρετασ ερχεται 


«xe. μετα φανων καὶ λαμπαδων 


— 
: Kat oo : ino δε edwy παντα τα 4 


€pxoj.vo. em avrov εξηλθεν και Xeyet 

avrow τινα ξητειτε απεκριθησαν avro 5 
ty Toy ναζαρηνον ‘Neyer αντοισ €yo εἰμι 

ἵστηκει δε και ἴουδασ o παραδιδουσ avrov 

μετ QUTWV WO ουν €UT€V GUTOLT €yO εἰμι ἡ ό 
απηλθαν εἰσ τα οπεισω Kat ἐπεσαν χαμαι 

παλιν ovy avrove ἐτηρωτησεν Xeyuv 

τινα ζητειτε οι Se ειἰπαν παλιν uy TOV 

γαζωραιον απεκριθη avrowr o qu 8 
εἰπὸν ὕμειν OTL ἐγω EAL εἰ ovy eje 

ζητειτε adere rovrova ὕπαγειν iva 9 


πληρωθὴη o λογοσ ov evrev ort ova 
εδωκασ μοι ef avrwy ovdeva απωλεσα 


> TOTE σιμων TETPOT €exoy μαχαιραν 10 


εἰλκυσεν αὐτὴν καὶ ἐπαισεν roy δουλον 

τον ἀαρχιερεωσ και ἀπέκοψεν avrov 

τουτιον To δεξειον - v δὲ τονομα 

του δουλου ἐκεινου μαλχοσ εἰπεν ovy 11 
0 - Tw Terpo Bade τὴν μαχαιραν eur τὴν 

θηκην ^ ro ποτήριον o εδωκεν μοι 


: o πατήρ ov jx ruo avro ! ἢ ovy σπειρα 12 


Kat 0 χειλιαρχοσ και ot ὕπηρεται των 

Ἰουδαίων συνελαβὸον τον "y 

καὶ ἐδησαν avrov: Kat ἤγαγον προσ avvay 13 
πρωτον ἣν yap πενθεροσ rov καῖφα 

OC ἣν αρχιερευσ TOU €VUXUTOV EKELYOU 


(Fol. 168 5.) 


153 


[Desunt folia, octo, vicesimum secundum Codicis 
quaternionem complectentia, Quae a cap. XVII. 
13 usque ad cap. xx. 13 Graec), ef a cap. 
xvin. 2 usque ad cap. xx. 1 Latine, a posteriore 
manus per septem folia sunt scripta, huic volu- 
mint Appendicis loco subjicientur. | 


Car. XVIII. a—13. 


20 


164 “SEC TOHAN 


— 


[ 


CAP. XX. 1 essent ad monimentum et uidet 
lapidem sublatum ab osteo 
2 monimenti currit ergo et uenit 


ad simonem petrum et alium 
discipulum quem diligebat ihs et dicit illis 
tulerunt dom de monimento 
et nescimus ubi posuerunt eum 
3 exiuit ergo petrus et alius discipulus 
4 et ueniebant ad monimentum currebant aute 
ambo in se alius autem discipulus praecucurrit 
citius ante petrum et uenit prior 
5 in monimentum et prospiciens 
uidet posita lentiamina non tamen 
6 introibit uenit ergo simon petrus 
sequens eum et introibit 
in monimentum et uidet 
7 lentiamina posita et sudarium 
quod erat positum super capud 
elus- non cum lentiamine positum 
sed seorsus inuolutum in unum locum 
8| tuncergointroibit et alius discipulus 
qui uenerat prior in monimentum 
9 et uidit et credidit necdum enim 


sciebant scripturam quia oportet eum 


10 resurgerea mortuis abierunt ergo 
ad se iterum discipuli 
11 maria autem stabat ad monimentum 


foris et plorabat cum ergo ploraret 
12 prospexit in monimentum et uidet 
duos angelos in albis sedentes 
unum ad capud et unum ad pedes 
ubi positum erat corpus ihu 
13 |. dicunt ei illi mulier quid ploras 
(Fol. 177 a.) 


Cap, XX. 1—13. 


tome, 
τινα Gyrew Acyet avrows ort pay τον kv xx. 


μου και ovx οιδα rov τεθεικαν avrov 
ταυτα εἰπουσα ἐστραφὴ ew τα οπισω 14 
— 
και θεωρει Tov την ἐστωτα και ovk ηδι 
-- omy, 
οτι τηὴσ ἐστιν λέγει aurno ino yvvat TC κλαιίεισ 15 
τινα ζητεισ «xeu Soxovea ort o 
— 
κηπουροσ ἐστιν | Aeyer avro ke 


εἰ OV PED avTOV εἰπέ LOL WOU 


τεθεικασ avrov καγω avrov apo 


e 
λεγει αυτὴ ins papa στραφεισα δε τό 
εκεινῇ λεγει avro εβραΐστι ραββωνει 
ο λέγεται κε διδασκαλε λεγει aurn τσ 17 


pa] μου απτου ovmo yap αναβεβηκα 
προσ TOV πρὰ TOp€VOV Ovy προσ τουσ 
αδελῴφουσ καὶ eure avrow αναβαινω 
προσ TOV pa μου και πατερα ὕμων 
— — 
και θν μον και Ov ὕμων 
ἔρχεται μαρια ἡ μαγδαληνὴ απαγγελλουσα 18 
-- 
Tour μαθηταισ avrov οτι εωρακεν τον ky 
και α εἰπεν AUTY ἐμήνυσεν αὐτοισ 
Ovec ovv οψιασ τὴ ἡμερα εκεινὴ 19 
τὴ μεια Tov σαββατων και των θυρων 
κεκλισμέενων οπου noav οἱ μαθηται 
δια rov φοβον των Ἰουδαίων 
— 
1ÀÓev ing kat «ary εἰσ τὸ μεσον 
και Neyer αντοισ εἰρηνὴ ὕμειν 
και TOUTO εἰπὼν εδειξεν τασ χειρασ 20 
και τὴν πλευραν αυτοισ εχαρῆσαν ovv 
ot μαθηται avrov ειδοντεσ Tov kv 
€urev ovv avrow παλιν εἰρηνὴ ὕμειν 21 
καθωσ απεσταλκεν με o πατὴρ Kayw 
αποστελλω ὕμασ τουτο εἰπὼν 22 
ενεφυσησεν αντοισ και Aeyec avrow 


(Fol. 177 5.) 


S 


fos 


IOHAN 155 


— 


quem quaeritis dicit illis quia tulerunt dom 


meum et nescio ubi posuerunt eum 


haec dicens conuersa est retro 


et uidet ihm stantem et nesciebat 

quoniam ihs est dicit illi ihs mulier quid ploras 
quem queris illa putans quia 

hortulanus est dicit illi dme 

8i tu sustulisti eum dic mihi ubi 

posuisti eum et ego illum tollam 


* . . M 8 
dicit ei ihs maria conuersa autem 


illa dicit ei ebraice rabboni 

quod dicitur dme magister dicit illi ihs 
noli me tangere necdum enim ascendi 
ad patrem uade ergo ad 

fratres et dic illis ascendo 

ad patrem meum et patrem uestrum 


— —, 
et dom meum et dom uestrum 


uenit maria magdalena nuntians 


discipulis eius quia uidit dom 
et quae dixit ei adnuntiauit illis 


Cum esset ergo sero illo die 


una die sabbati et hosteis 
clusis ubi erant discipuli 
propter timorem iudaeorum 
— ΓῚ . . 
uenit ihs et stetit in medio 
et dixit illis pax uobis 
et hoc cum dixisset demonstrauit manus 
et latusillis gauisisunt autem 


discipuli eius uidentes dom 


dixit ergo illis iterum pax uobis 


sicut misit me pater et ego 

mitto uos et hoc cum dixisset 

insuflauit in eos et dit illis 
(Fol. 128a.) 


Cap. XX. 13—22. 


"7 


λαβετεπνευμα αγιον «ay τινων αφητε XX. 23 
Tag apaptiac αφεωνται avrow 


€ay τινων κρατήσητε κεκρατηντε 


θωμασ Oe er ex rov - LB - λεγομενοσ 24 


διδυμοσ ovx ἣν per avrov οτεηλθεν 
ino eXeyov ovv avro οἱ αλλοι μαθηται 25 
OTt ewpaxapev τον kv - o δε eurey avrour 
€ay μὴ εἰδω εἰσ TAT χειρασ᾽ αντου 
τον TVTTOV των λων καὶ βαλω μου 
τασ χειρασ «ur τὴν πλευραν avrov 
kat βαλω μου roy δακτυλον εἰσ Tov τυπὸν 
τῶν λων ov μὴ πιστευσω 
καὶ μεθ ἡμερασ οκτω παλιν σαν cao 26 
ot μαθηται αυτον και οθωμασ μετ avrov 
ἔρχεται ovv o ino των Üvpov 
κεκλισμενων και €T) εἰσ TO μεσον 
καὶ εἰπεν εἰρηνὴ ὕμειν eta λεγει 27 
τω θωμα φερετον δακτυλον σου woe 
και ide Tag χειρασ μου και φερε 
τὴν χειρα cov και βαλε εισ τὴν πλευραν μου 
και μη ἴσθι απιστοσ αλλα πιστοσ 
απεκριθη θωμασ και ειπεν avro 28 
οκσ μου και Oo μου 
λεγει avro 0 ine ort εωρακασ με 29 
πεπιστευκασ μακαρίοι οἱ μὴ ειἰδοντεσ 
και πιστευσαντεσ πολλα μεν ovv 30 
και αλλα σημεια εἐποιησεν ing 
€vorriov των aD «rav avrov 
α OVK ἐστιν γεγραμμενα εν ro 
βιβλω τουτῳ ταντα δε γεγραπται 31 
iva, πιστευσητεοτι ine xpo vlog ἐστιν 
rov θὺ και iva πιστενοντεσ Cony 


αἰώνιον EXIITE EV TO OVOL.GTL AYTOU 


(Fol. 1786.) 


SEC IOHAN 


ω-- --- 


με 


accipite spm sanctum si quorum dimiseritis 
peccata dimittentur eis 
si quorum tenueritis detentae sunt 
thomas autem unus ex ixil- qui dicitur 
didymus non erat cum eis quando uenit 
ihs dicebat ergo illi alii discipuli 
quoniam uidimus dom ad ille dixit illis 
8i non uidero in manus eius 
figuram clauorum et mittam 
manus in latus eius 
et mittam dicitum in figuram 
clauorum non credam 
et post dies octo iterum erant intro 
discipuli eius et tomas cum eis 
uenit ergo ihs hoste is 
clusis et stetit in medio 
et dixit pax uobis deinde dixit 
ad thoman adfers dicitum tuum hoc 
et uide manus meas et adfers 
manum tuam et mitte in latus meum 
et noli esse infidelis sed fidelis 
respondit thomas et dixit illi 
dms meus et deus meus 
dicit illiihs quia uidisti me 
credidisti beati qui non uiderunt 
et crediderunt multa quidem 
et alia signa fecit ihs 
in conspectu discipulorum suorum 
quae non sunt scripta in hoc 
libro haec autem scripta sunt 
ut credatis quia ihs xps filius est 
del et ut credentes uitam 
sempiternam habeatis in nomine eius 
(Fol. 179 a.) 


CAP. XX. 22— 31. 


pera ravra παλιν εφανερωσεν «avrov 


Tou μαθηταισ avrov ert THe 
θαλασσὴησ rye τιβεριαδοσ εφανερωσεν 
δεοντωσ σαν ομου σιμων πετροσ 
Kat θωμασ o λεγομενοσ διδυμοσ 
και ναθαναηλ᾽ oc ἣν απὸ Kava. THO γαλιλαιασ' 
και ot trot ζεβεδαιου και αλλοι €x των 
μαθητων αὐτουτου Óvo Neyer τουτοισ 
σιμων πετροσ ὕπαγω αλιενειν 

λεγουσιν avro ἐρχομεέεθα και ἡμεισ 
συν σοι εξηλθαν και ενεβησαν 
εἰσ TO πλοιον και εν EKELVY τὴ νυκτι 
ἐπειασαν ovdey πρωΐασ Se «99 
γενομενὴσ corn ne emt TOV αἰγιαλὸν 
ov μεντοι ἡδεισαν ot μαθηται 
οτι we ἐστιν eye. ov avrow o ine 
παιδια μητι προσφαγειον exere 
απεκριθησαν avro ov ο δε εἰπεν avrour 
βαλετε cio τα δεξεια μερη του πλοιουν 
TO δικτυον καὶ ευρήσετε 
ot δεεβαλον και ovxert avro εἰλκυσαι ἴσχυον 
απο Tov πληθουσ των ἴχθνων 


Aeye ovy ομαθητησ εκεινοσ 
ον ἤγαπα une TO TETPW 0 Ko ἐστιν μων 
σιμων OVV πετροσ ἀκουσασ οτιο KG. ἐστιν 
τον ἐπενδντην διεζωσατο 
ἣν yap γυμνοσ και ἡλατο 
εἰσ την θαλασσαν οι δεαλλοι μαθηται 
τω πλοιαρίιω λθαν ov yap σαν 
paxpay απὸ τὴσ γησ αλλ oc aro 
πήχων διακοσιων συροντεσ To 
δικτνον των ἴχθνων wo ovy 
απεβησαν εἰσ τὴν ynv βλεπουσιν 

(Fol. 170 δ.) 


"SEC IOHAN 157 
— -- — 


— 


post haec iterum manifestauit se ipsum 


discipulis suis super 

mare tiberiadis manifestauit 

autem sic erant simul simon petrus 
et thomas qui dicitur didymus 

et nathanael qui erat a cana galilaeae 
et fili zebedaei et alii de 

discentibus eius duo dicit illis 

simon petrus uado piscatu 


dicunt ei uenimus et nos 


tecum exierunt et ascenderunt 

in nauem et in illa nocte 

prendederunt nihil mane autem iam 
factostetitihs ad litus 

non tamen sciebant discipuli 

quia ihsest dicit ergo illis ihs 

pueri numquid aliquid manducare habetis 
dixerunteinon ad ille dixit illis 

mittite in dextram partem nauis 

retiam et inuenietis 

ad illi miserunt et amplius eam trahere poterant 


a multitudine piscium 


dicit ergo discipulus ille 


quem diligebat ihs petro dmi est noster 
simon ergo petrus audiens quia dms est 
tunicam cinxit se 

erat enim nudus et misit se et salibit 

in mare alii autem discipuli 

per nauiculam uenerunt non enim erant 
longe a terra sed sicut 2 

cubitis ducentis trahentes 

retiam piscium quomodo ergo 

exierunt a terram uident 


(Fol. 180 a.) 


Cap. XXI. 1—9. 


158 


ανθρακειαν κειμενὴν και οψαριον XXI. 
εἐπικειμενον καὶ αρτὸν eye avrour IO 
— 


O (NO ἐνεγκατε εκ Tov οψαριων av 
ἐπιασατενυν aveBn σιμων πετροσ y 
και εἰλκυσεν To Üucrvoy μεστον 

ee — 
ἐπι τὴν γὴν peyuv iQvov- pvy* 
Kat τοσουτων οντων οὐκ ἐσχισθη 

my 

το δικτυον  Àeyet avrou o uno Devre 12 


apurrgcare ουδεισ δε ετολμα των 
μαθητων εξετασαι avrov ov τισ € 

— --- 
edores OTLO KG ἐστιν ερχεται ino 13 
και λαμβανει roy aprov ευχαριστησασ εδωκε 
αυτοισ Kat TO οψαριον ομοιωσ 

wom, 

Tovro ἤδη rprrov epavepwhy ino 14 
Tou μαθηταισ avrov eyepÜew ex vexpwv 


ore ovv ἡηριστησαν λέγει o io TO σιμωνι WET pw 15 


Cuv twavou ayarac μεπλεον rovrov 


— 
Aeyet avro ναι κε av οιδασ' ort 


φιλω oe Xeyec avro 0 m Booxe ra προβατα pov 


— 
Aeyet avro Sevrepoy o xo σιμων iwavov 16 


— 
ayarag με: λεγει avro vat κε 
συ οιδασ ort φιλω σε: λεγει avro ποιμενε 
μουταπροβατα λεγει avro τοτριτον 17 
σιμων ἴωανου φιλεισ με 

TO τριτὸν 
ελυπηθη o πετροσ ort evrev avro φιλεισ με 
— 

και Neyet avro ke ravra ov οιδασ 


ov γεινωσκεισ ort Quo σε 


Aeyet avro βοσκετα προβατα pov 


ἀμὴν αμὴν Xeyo σοι ore o νεωτεροσ 18 


εζωνννεσ σεαυτον και περιεπατεισ οπον 

ε 
ἡθελεσ - oray δε γηρασησ εκτενεισ TAT χιρασ σον 
και addot σε ζωσουσει καὶ απαγουσιν σε 


οπουσνθελεισ — Tavra de eurev I9 


(Fol. 180 5.) 


“SEC IOHAN 

— — — — 
carbones positos et piscem 
impositum et panem dicit illis 
ihs adferte de piscibus quos 


cepistis nunc ascendit simon petrus 
et traxit retiam plenam 

super terram magnorum piscium cliil- 
et cum tanti essent non est scissa 
retia dicit illis ihs uenite 

prandete nemo tamen audebat de 
discipulis interrogare eum tu quis es 
&cientes quia dmsest uenit ibs 

et accipit panem et benedicens dedit 
illis et piscem similiter 

hoc iam tertium manifestatus est ihs 
discipulis suis surgens a mortuis 


cum ergo prandissent dicit ihs simoni petro 


simon iohannis diligis me plus quam istos 


dicit illi etiam dme tu acis quoniam 


amo te dicit illi ihs pasce oues meas 


dicit illi iterum dms simon iohanis 


amas me. dicit illi etiam dme 

tu scis quia amo te dicit illi pasce 

oues meas - dicit illi tertium 

simon iohanis amas me- contristatus 
est petrus quia dixit illi tertio amas me 
et dicit illi dme omnia tu scis 

tu scis quoniam amo te 


dicit illi pasce obes meas 


amen amen dico tibi quando eras iubenes 


cingebas teipsum ‘et ambulabas ubi 
uolebas . cum autem senueris extendes manus tuas 
etaliitecingent et ducent te 


ubitu non uis haec autem dixit 


(Fol. 181 a.) 


Cap. XXI. 9—19. 


— 
onpevov trou Üayaro δοξασει tov Ov 


και rovro εἰπὼν λέγει avro ακολουθει μοι 


επιστραφεισ δεοπετροσ βλεπει Tov μαθητὴν 


ον ἤγαπα ine ακολουθουντα 

oo και averecey εν τω δειπνω 

ἐπι τὸ στηθοσ αντου Kat εἰπεν avro 

Ke TUT ἐστιν 0 παραδιδων σε 

τοντον OVV εἰδων 0 πετροσ Aeyet avro wp . 
— 

ke ovrog Oe TL». Aeyec avro o ino 

eay avrov θελω pevety ουτωσ 

εωσ ἐρχομαιτι por σε cv μοιακολουθει 

εἐξηλθεν ovv ουτοσ o λογοσ εἰσ Tove 

αδελῴφουσ και εδοξαν ort o μαθητησ 

ἐκεινοσ ovk αποθνησκει kat οὐκ εἰπεν avro 

n ne ovk αποθνησκέισ aXXa cay avrov 

θελω pevew ewe Epxopat προσ oe 

στοῦ cory ομαθητησ ο paprupwy 


περι τουτων καὶ ογραψασταυτα 


και οιἰδαμεν ort αληθησ ἐστιν avrov 
ἡ μαρτυρια εστιν δε καὶ αλλα πολλα 
— ο- 


οσα εποιήῆσεν o χρσ ejm ατινα 
«ay γραφηται καθ εν ονδ avrov 
οιμαι TOV κοσμον χωρῆησε 

τα ypapopneva βιβλεια 


XXI. 


20 


000000 000000000C 0000000000 


(Fol. 181 5.) 


SEG IOHAN 


significans qua morte honorificabit dm 


Et hoc cum dixisset dicit illi sequere me 


conuersus autem petrus uidet discipulum 
quem diligebat ihs sequentem 

qui et recubuit in cena 

super pectus eius et dixit illi 

dme quis est qui tradidit te 

hunc ergo uidens petrus dicit ad ihm 
dme hic autem quid. dicitilli ihs 

si eum uolo sic manere 

usque dum uenio quid ad te tu me sequere 
exiuit ergo hic uerbus aput fratres 

et putauerunt quoniam discipulus 

ille non moritur et non dixit illud 

ihs non morieris sed si eum 

uolo manere usque dum uenio quid ad te 
hic est discipus qui testimonium dat 

de his et quiscripsit haec 

et scimus quoniam uerum est eius 
testimonium sunt autem et alia plura 
quae fecit xps iba quae 

8i scribantur singulariter nec ipsum 
facile puto mundum capere 

qui scribuntur libri 


lohanen explicit 
incipit euangelium 


(Fol 182a.) 


Cap. XXI. 19—215. 


159 


QQQQQQQ00000 000000 0000000092 


160 —— EYATTEA. KAT AOYKAN EUANG SEC LUCAN 
— ony πὶ ee ey — — — 0 —— = —_~ 
m Επειδηπερ πολλοι επεχειρησαν ava 11 quoniam quidem multi lemptauerunt 
---- 
ταξασθαι διηγησιν περι των conscribere narrationem de his quibus 
πεπληροφορημενων ev Ne conpleta sunt in nobis 


πραγματων καθα παρεδοσαν nev 


οἱ AT ἀρχῇσ ἄἀντοῖτται Kat ὕπηρετ αι 


ἐλαχετου θυμιασαι εἰσελθων 


— 
εἰσ Tov ναον Tov Gu και παν ro πληθοσ 


rebus sicut tradiderunt nobis 
qui ab initio ipsi uiderunt et ministri 


fuerunt uerbi uisum est et mihi 


yevoj.evot Tov Xoyov εδοξε καμοι 3 
παρηκολουθήκοτι ανωθεν mac w adsecuto desusum omnibus 
axptBwo καθεξησ σοι γραψαι diligenter ex ordine tibi scribere 
κρατιστε θεοφιλε ἵνα επιγνωσ 4 optime theofile uti cognoscas 
περι Tov κατηχηθησ Xoyov τὴν ασφαλειαν de quibus structus es uerborum ueritatem 
B : Eyevero ev rato ἡμεραισ npwdov 5 | fuitin diebus hierodis 
B του βασιλεωσ tho iov0auac ἵερευσ regis iudaeae sacerdos 
Tur ovopart ζαχαριασ e£ εφημεριασ quidam nomine zacharias de uice 
αβια. και γυνὴ avro ex των θυγατερων &bia etuxor illi de filiabus 
aapuy* καὶ TO ονομα avrgo: ελεισαβεθ aaron et nomen eius elisabet 
σαν δε δικαιοι αμφοτεροι ενωπιον 6 erant autem iusti ambo in conspectu 
του Ov πορενομενοι EV πασαισ dei ambulantes in omnibus 
ταισ ἐντολαὶσ Kat δικαιωμασιν TOV κυ mandatis et iustitiis dmi sine 
OpPeTTot Kat OUK NV αυτοισ TEKVOV , macula et non erat illis filius 
καθοτιν ἡ ελισαβεθ. creipa quoniam erat elisabed sterilis 
καὶ αμῴοτεροι noay προβεβηκοτεσ et ambo erant seniores 
ἐν Taur ἡμεραισ auTwy - eyeyero δε 8 in diebus suis factum est autem 
ev Tw iepa reve, avrov ev τὴ ταξει dum sacerdotio fungeretur in ordine 
TNO εφημεριασ avrov «vavrt rov 6 gacerdotii sui in conspectu dei 
xara ro εθοσ Tyo ἵερατειασ 9 secundum consuetudinem sacrificii 


forte accidit sacrificare intrantem 


in templum dmi et omnis multitudo 


TOV Aaov nv προσευχομενον populi erat orans 
«Co Ty wpa του θυμιαματοσ forans hora incensi 
ὠφθὴ 9c avro ayyedoo KV ἐστωσ 11 uisus est autem illi angelus dmi stans 
ex δεξιων ov θυσιαστηριου του θυμιαματοσ 8 dextris altari incensi 
καὶ erapax0» fayapiac ιδων 12 et conturbatus est zacharias uidens 
και φοβοσ ἐπέπεσεν em avrov et timor incidit super eum 

(Fol. 182 δ.) (Fol. 183 a.) 


Car. I. 1—12. 


KAT AOYK SEC LUCAM 161 
—— — a SSS 

και €UT€V προσ avrov o αγγελοσ I. 13 et dixit ad eum angelus 
μὴ φοβον ζαχαρια διοτι εἰσηκουσθη netimueriszacharia quia exaudita est 
ἡ δεησεισ cov και ἡ γυνὴ cov ελισαβεδ oratio tua et uxor tua elisabed 
γεννήσει ὕιον kat καλεσεισ pariet tibi filium et uocabis 
TO OVOLG GUTOV ἴωαγνην και ETTAL σοι I4 nomen eius iohanen et erit tibi 
Xapa καὶ ἀγαλλιασισ και πολλοι ert τὴ gaudium et exaltatio et multi super 
yevea et avrov χαρήσονται ἐστε yap 15 | natiuitate eius gaudebunt erit enim 
μεγαρ ενωπιον του KU Kat owvov magnus in conspectu dmi et uinum 
καὶ σικερα OV μὴ TU) και πνευματοσ et sicera non bibet et spiritu 
aytov πλησθήσεται ert ex κοιλειασ sancto replebitur adhuc de uentre 
parrpoc avrov και πολλουσ των ὕιων 16 matris suae et multos filiorum 
topanA ἐπιστρέψει emt xy rov ὃν avray istrahel conuertet ad dom dm eorum 
καὶ QUTOU 7f €TQL EYWHLOY αὐτου 17 et ipse antecedet in conspectu eius 
εν πνευματι και δυναμιλίιου in spiritu - et uirtute heliae 
επιστρεψαι καρδιασ πατερων em τεκνα conuertere corda patrum ad filios et non 
και απειθεισ - ev φρονήσει δικαίων consentientes in sapientia iustorum 
ετοιμασαι κὼ λαον κατεσκενασμενον. praeparare dmo plebem consummatam 
και εἰπεν ζαχαριασ προσ Toy ἀγγελον 18 et dixit zacharias ad angelum 
κατα τι γνωσομαιτουτο — €yo yap euis quomodo cognoscam hoc ego enim sum 
mpea Burne και ἡ γυνὴ pou προβεβηκυΐα senior et uxor mea praecedens 
εν ταισ ἡμεραισ αὐτησ Kat αποκριθεισ 19 indiebussuis et respendens 
o a yyeXoc eurev avro - eyo eus ya pu angelus dixit ei ego sum gabriel 
οπαρεστωσ ενωπιον rov Ov Kat απεσταλὴν qui adsisto in conspectu del et missus sum 
λαλησαι προσ σε και εναγγελισασθαι σοι loqui ad te et euangelizare tibi 
TavTa - και ov coy σιωπὼν και μὴ 20 haec - et eoce eris tacens et non 
δυναμενοσ λαλῆσαι axpur gpepaa no potens loqui usque in diem quo 
γένηται ravra, ay wy ovk επιστευσασ fiant haec quia non credidisti 
τοισ λογοισ μον ovrwea πλησθησονται uerbis meis qui conplebuntur 
εἰσ TOV καιρον αυτωὼν Kas nv 0 λαοσ 2? in temporesuo et erat plebs 
προσδεχομενοσ tov ζαχαριαν και expectans zachariam et 
εθαυμαζον ext τω xpovd;ew avrov mirabantur in eo quod tardaret 
«v ro vau εξελθων Se ovx nSvvaro 2i in templo exiens autem non poterat 
λαλησαι αντοισ Kat emeyvogay loqui illis et cognouerunt 

(Fol. 183 5.) (Fol. 184 a.) 

Carp. I. 13—22. 


21 


162 


Jrof 


oTt OP TATLAY EWHAKEVY EV TW YAW 


καὶ avrog nv διανενων avrour και διεμεῖνεν 


κωφοσ καὶ eyevero* wo ἐτλησθησαν at ἡμεραι 


tno λειτουργειασ αὐτοῦ τοτεαπηλθεν 
εἰσ TOV OLKOV QUTOU καὶ μετα τασ ἡμερασ 


ravrac συνελαβεν ελισαβεδ.. ἡ γυνὴ avrov 
και περιεκρυβεν εαυτὴν μηνασ πεντε" 


λεγουσα οτιουτωσ μοι πεποιῆκεν Ko 
ev ἡμεραισ aro εφειδεν αφελειν 
ονειδοσ μου ev ανθρωποισ 


Ey δετω ἐκτω μήνι area ra ογγελοσ 


γαβριηλ ὕπο rov θυ εἰσ πολιν γαλιλαιαν 
προσ παρθενον μεμνήσμενην ανδρι 
ωονομα ἴἸωσηφ e£ owov δανειδ 

καὶ TO ονομα THE παρθένου μαριαμ. 


Kat εἰσελθὼν o αγγελοσ προσ αντὴν εἰπεν 
— 


Xa4pe κεχαριτωμενὴ o κα μετα σου 
ευλογημενὴ av εν γυναιξιν 
ἣν δὲ ext τω λογω εταραχθὴ καὶ διελογιζετο 


εν εαυτὴ ποδαποσ αν én οασπασμοσ οντοσ 


και εἰπεν αντὴ οαγγελοσ' μὴ φοβου μαρια 


— 
evpec yap xapuw παρα τω Ow Kat idov 
ovvAnpiy ev γαστρι και τεξὴ ὕιον 
και καλεσεισ TO ονομα avrov τὴν 
OVTOC εσται μεγασ και ὕιοσ ὕψιστον 
κληθησεται και δωσει avro κα o 6a 
τον Üpovov δανειδ του πατροσ avrov 
και βασιλευσει ἐπι Tov οικον iaxof$ 
εἰσ Tovg αἰωνασ καιτὴσ βασιλειασ avrov 
ουκ ἐστετελοσ καὶ εἰπεν μάαρια προσ TOV 
ayyeXov Troc ἐεσταῖ rovro ἐπι ανδρα 

Ov γεινωσκω : και αποκριθεισ 0 ἀαγγελοσ 
ειἰπὲν avr») πνευμα αγιον ἐπελευσεται 


(Fol. 184.) 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


32 


33 


34 


35 


SEC LUCAN 
te οὕ... — 


quia uisionem uidit in templo 

et ipse erat adnuens eis et permanebat 
surdus et factum est ut conpleti sunt dies 
ministerii eius tunc abiit 

in domum suam et post dies 

istos concepit elisabed uxor eius 

et abscondebat se menses quinque 

dicens quoniam sic mihi fecit dmi 

in diebus quibus respexit auferre 


obprobrium meum in hominibus 


in mense autem sexto missus eet angelus 


gabriel a deo in ciuitatem galilaeam 
ad uirginem disponsatam uiro 

cui nomen erat ioseph de domo dauid 
et nomen uirginis maria 

et introiens angelus ad eam dixit 


habe benedicta dms tecum 


benedicta tu inter mulieres 


illa autem ‘super uerbo conturbata est et cogitabat 


in semet ipsa qualis sit salutatio haec 


Et dixit ei angelus ne timeas maria 


inuenisti enim gratiam apud dm et ecce 

concipiens in utero et paries filium 

et uocauis nomen eius ihm 

hic erit magnus et filius altissimi 

uocabitur et dabit ei dms ds 

thronum dauid patris eius 

et regnauit super domum iacob 

insaecula et regnieius 

non erit finis et dixit maria ad 

angelum quomodo erit hoc quia uirum 

nonnoui etrespondens angelus 

dixit ei spiritus sanctus superueniet 
(Fol. 185 a.) 


Car. I. 22—35. 


Sef 


— —  ῳςς — 
KAT AOYKAN 


ert σε και δυναμισ ὕψιστον επισκίιασὶι σοι 


dio καὶ To yevvaj.€yoy αγιον κληθήσεται 


ὕιοσ θυ : και ἴδου ελεισαβεθ᾽ ἡ συνγενισ σου 


καὶ avr?) συνειληφυΐα ὕιον ev npe αυτὴσ 


καὶ ουτοσ μὴν εκτοσ ἐστιν αὐτὴ T] 
καλουμενὴ στειρα ort ovk αδυνατησει 
παν ρημα παρα Tov θυ και εἰπεν μαρια 


ἴδον ἡ δουλη κυ yevotro μοι κατα TO 


ρήμα σου και areory απ avro 0 ayyedor 


avacTaca δε μαρια εν Tau ἡμαιραισ 


τανταισ επορευθὴ εἰσ τὴν ορεινὴν μετα 
σπουδησ εἰσ πολιν ἴουδα καὶ εἰσηλθεν 


εἰσ τὸν oov ζαχαριον καὶ ἡσπασατο την 


ελισαβεθ᾽ και eyevero wo ἠκουσεν 
τον ἀσπασμον TH μαριασ ἡ ελισαβεδ 
ἐσκιρτησεν ev τὴ κοιλεια THE ελισαβεὃ 


To βρεφοσ αυτὴσ και επλησθη αν 


αγιον ἡ λλισαβεδ και ανεφωνησεν 
φωνη μεγαλὴ και εἰπεν ευλογημενὴ 
συ εν γυναιξιν και ευλογημενοσ 
οκαρποσ THe κοιλιασ σον Kat ποθεν 
μοιτουτὸ ἵνα ελθη ἡ μητὴρ του κυ μον 
προσ με ἵδου yap wo eyevero ἡ φωνὴ 
του ἀσπασμου σον εἰσ τα (TO. μου 
ἐσκιρτησεν ey ἀγαλλιασει ro βρεῴφοσ 

εν τὴ κοιλια μον και μακαρια 

ἢ πιστενσασα oT εσται τελειωσισ 


τοισ λελαλημενοισ αὐτὴ παρα κυ 


και εἰπεν μαρια μεγαλυνει ἡ ψυχὴ 


-- ---. 

μου TOV Kv. και ηγαλλιασεν To 7rva. 
v 

μου ey To Ow τω σωτῆρι μον 


— 
ort ἐπεβλεψεν κσ ert THY ταπινωσιν 


moa Sovlnc avrov ἵἴδου yap απὸ Tov νυν 


(Fol. 1855.) 


36 


41 


42 


43 


44 


45 


"SEO LUCAN 163 
uA ey — — 

super te et uirtus altissimi obumbrauit te 

propter quod et quod nascitur sanctum uocabitur 

filius dei et ecc elisabet cognata tua 

et ipsa concepit filium in senectute sua 

et hic mensis sextus est ei quae 

uocatur sterilis quia non est difficile 

omne uerbum apud dm etdixit maria 

ecce ancilla dmi contingat mihi secundu 


uerbum tuum et recessit ab ea angelus 


Surgens autem maria in diebus 


istis abiit in montanam cum 
festinationem in ciuitate iuda ' et introibit 
in domum zachariae et salutabit 
elisabet et factum est ut audiuit 
salutationem mariae elisabet 
exultauit in utero elisabet 

infans eius et inpleta est spiritu 

sancto elisabet et exclamauit 

uoce magna et dixit benedicta 

tuinter mulieres et benedictus 
fructus uentris tui et unde 

mihihoc ut ueniat mater dmi mei 

ad me ecce enim ut facta est uox 
salutationis tuae 1n aures meas 
exultauit in laetitia infans 

in utero meo et beata 

quae crediderit quia erit consummatio 


quae dicta sunt ilia dmo 


Et dixit maria magnificat anima 


— .-. δ’ 

mea dom et exultauit sps 
— . 
meus in deo saluatori meo 
Φ “-- 16 
quoniam respexit dms super humilitatem 
ancillae suae ecce enim amodo 
(Fol. 186 a.) 


Car. I. 35—48. 


164 


μακαριουσιν με πασαι at γενεαι 

οτι ἐποιησεν μοι μεγαλα oÓc 

o δυνατοσ Kat αγιον ro ovopa avrov 

και TO ἐλεοσ αὐτου εἰσ yeveay 

γενεων Τοισ φοβουμενοισ avrov 

ἐποιήσεν κρατοσ εν βραχιονι avrov 

διεσκορπισεν ὕπερηφανουσ 

διανοια καρδιασ αυτων. καθειλεν 

δυναστασ aro θρονων και ὕψωσεν 

ταπεινουσ πεινωντασ᾽ ενεπλησεν 

ayaÜov και πλοντουντασ εξαπεστιλεν 

κενουσ αἀντελαβετο tapa - παιδοσ 

avrov μνησθηναι eXeove καθωσ 

ἐλαλησεν προσ Tove πατερασ ἡμων᾽ τω 

αβρααμ και τω σπερματι αντου εἰσ TOV auova, 
ἔμεινεν δε μαρια συν αὐτὴ μηνασ τρεισ 

καὶ ὕπεστρεψεν εἰσ TOV owoy αὐτησ 

τὴ δεελισαβετ επλησθη o χρονοσ 

TOV TEKELY αὐτὴν και €yevyna ev vuv 

και ἤκουσαν OL περιοικοι καὶ 

συνγενεισ αὐτὴσ ort ἐμεγαλυνεν Ko 

TO €À«oc avrov μετ αυτησ Kat 

συνεχαιρον αυτή- και €yevero Ty ἡμερα 

τὴ oydon λθαν περιτεμειν ro παιδιον 

και ἐκαλουν avro emt τω ονοματι 

του πατροσ avrov ζαχαριαν 

και αποκρειθεισα ἡ μητὴρ avrov εἰπεν 

ovxt αλλα κληθήσεται ro ονομα avrov 

Ἰωανὴσ και LAV προσ GUTTIV OTL 

ουδεισ ἐστιν ev r1] συνγεν ε]α σον 

og καλειται TO ονομὰ TOUTO 

evevevoy δετω πατριαντον orto ay 


θελοι καλισθαι αυτο Kat αἰτησασ 


(Fol. 186 ὁ.) 


49 


60 


beatam me dicent omnes generationes 

quoniam fecit mihi magna ds 

qui potens est et sanctum nomen eius 

et misericordia eius in generationes 

et generationes timentibus eum 

fecit uirtutem in brachio suo 

disparsit superbos 

cogitatione cordis eorum deposuit 

potentes a sedibus et exaltauit 

humiles esurientes ‘inpleuit 

bonorum et diuites dismisit 

inanes adiubauit israhel pueri 

sui memorare misericordiam sicut 

locutus est ad patres nostros 

abraham et semini eius in aeternum 

mansit autem maria cum ea menses tres 

et reuersa est in domum suam 

elisabet autem conpletum est tempus 

ut pariret et peperit filium 

et audierunt uicini. et 

cognati eius quoniam magnificauit dms 

misericordiam suam cum ea et 

congaudebant ei et factum est die 

octauo uenerunt circumcidere infantem 

et uocabant eum in nomine 

patris sui zacharian 

et respondens mater eius dixit 

nonsed uocabiturnom eius 

iohanes et dixerunt ad eam 

nemo est in cognatione tua 

qui uocatur nomen hoc. 

innuebant autem patri eius quid 

uult uocari eum et cum petisset 
(Fol. 187 a.) 


Cap. I. 48—63. 


a, — ey n] 
KAT AOYKAN 
-- ο-ἄὌὈὨὺ ι. --- 


πινακιδα ἐεγραψεν Ἰωανὴσ ἐστιν 

TO ὀνομα αντου και παραχρημα 

Avon ἡγλωσσα avrov και εθαυμασαν 

παντεσ ayeox07 Se ro στομα avrov 

και ἐλαλει evAcywy Toy ὃν και ἐγένετο 

φοβοσ μεγασ em παντασ rove 

περιοικουντασ G.UTOV και εν OX) TY ορεινὴ 

Tyo Ἰουδαιασ διελαλειτοὸ zayra τα ρηματα 

Tavra. και εθεντο παντεσ ot akovovreo- 

ev rau καρδιαισ αυτων λεγοντεσ τι apa 

TO παιδιον τοντο ἐσται καὶ γαρ χεὶρ κυ 

μετ avrov και ζαχαριασ οπατὴρ αὐτου 

ἐπλησθη πνευματοσ αγιον καὶ ειπεν 
Ευλογητοσ Ko o 0G rov im pay ort emeakejaTo 

και ἐποιησεν λυτρωσιν τω λαὼ avrov 

και ἤγειρεν κερασ σωτηριασ ἡμειὶν 

ev οικω δανειδ παιδοσ avrov καθωσ 

ἐλαλησεν δια στοματοσ αγιων mpopyraw 

αντου Των AT αἰωνοσ σωτηριαν 

€x χειροσ exÜpov ἡμῶν και παντων 

των μεισουντων ἡμασ ποιῆσαι 

ἐλεοσ μετα των πατέρων NOV 

μνησθηναι διαθηκησ αγιασ avrov 

ορκον ον ὡμοσεν προσ αβρααμ, 

TOV πατέρα μων TOv δουναι nev 

αφοβὼωσ εκ χειροσ εκθρων ἡμων 

ρυσθεντασ Xorpevew avro εν οστοτήτι 

και δικαιοσυνὴ ὠπῖίῖον αὐτου πασασ 

Tac ἡμερασ nuwy καισυ δεπαιδιον 

προφητησ ὕψιστου κληθησήη.. προπορευσὴ yap 

προπροσωπου κυ ετοιμασαι οδουσ avrov 

Tov δουναι γνωσιν σωτηριασ τω λαω avrov 

ev αφεσει ἀμαρτιων avrov δια σπλαγχνα 

(Fol. 187 b.) 


68 


77 
78 


‘SEC LUCAN 165 


tabulam scripsit iohanes est 

nomen eius et confestim 

soluta est lingua eius et mirati sunt 

omnes apertum est autem os eius 

et loquebatur benedicens dm et factum est 

timor magnus super omnes qui 

uicinos eius et in tota montana 

iudaeae loquebantur omnia uerba 

haec et posuerunt omnes qui audierunt 

incordibussuis dicentes quid utique 

eritinfanshic etenim manus dmi 

cum illo et zacharias pater eius 

inpletus est spirito sancto et dixit 
benedictus dms ds israhel quia uisitauit 

et fecit salutem populo suo 

et elebauit cornum salutis nobis 

in domo dauit pueri sui sicut 

locutus est per os sanctorum profetarum 

eius quia saeculo salutem 

de manu inimicorum nostrorum et omnium 

qui oderunt nos facere 

misericordiam cum patribus nostris 

memorari testamenti sancti eius 

iuramentum quod iurauit ad abraham 

patrem nostrum ut daret nobis 

sine timore de manu inimicorum nostrora 

liberatos seruire eiin sanctitate 

et iustitia in conspectu eius omnes 

dies nostros: Et tu autem infans 

propheta altissimi uocaueris antecedes eni 

ante faciem dmi parare uias eius 

dare intellectum salutis populi eius 

in remissione peccatorum eorum propter vin 

ra 


(Fol. 188 a.) 


Car. I. 63— 78. 


166 


iem &— ÀÀÀ nmn] 
KAT AOYKAN 
fam, Soe, ---" ao, 


edeove Gu ἡμῶν ev Ow ἐπεσκεψατο ἡμασ 
ayaToX εξ υψουσ επιφαναι doc 

TOO ἐν σκοτει Kat σκια θανατου 
καθημενοισ του κατευθυναι 

Tove ποδασ ἡμῶν εἰσ οδον εἰρηνησ 

To δεπαιδιον ἡνξανετο και exparatovro 
πνεύματι και NV EV TAL ερημοισ 

ewo ἡμερασ αναδειξεωσ avrov 


προσ τὸν Ἰσραὴλ εγενετο Se εν ταισ 


Ἡμεραισ εκειναισ εἐξηλθεν δογμα 

παρα καισαροσ αυγουστου απογραφεσθαι 
πασαν τὴν οἰκουμενὴν GUTN €yevero 
απογραφη πρωτὴ Ἠγεμονενοντοσ 

THO συριασ κυρήνιου καὶ ἐπορεύοντο 
παντεσ ἀπογραφεσθαι εκαστοσ 

εἰσ τὴν eavrov πατριδα aveBn δε και 
twond απὸ tno γαλιλαιασ᾽ εκ πολεωσ' 
γαζαρεθ εἰσ yyy ιουδα eur πολιν Saved 
ἡτισ καλειτε βηθλεεμ ἀπογραφεσθαι 
συν μαρια τὴ εμνηστευμενή avro 

ova €vkvo δια τὸ εἰναι avrov εξ owov 
καὶ πατριασ Saved wo δεπαρεγεινοντο 
ετελεσθησαν αἱ ἡμεραι τον τεκειν avrgy 
καὶ €T€K€V TOV ὕιον αντὴσ TOV πρωτότοκον 
και εσπαργανωσεν QUTOV καὶ ἀνεκλινεν 
avrov εν φατνη διοτι ovk ἣν avrow 
TOTOC εν Tw καταλυματι ποιμενεσ δε 
ἧσαν εν TH χαρα ταυτῃὴ ἀγρανυλουντεσ 
και φυλασσοντεσ rag φυλακασ Tho νυκτοσ 
ἐπι τὴν ποιμνὴν αὐτων και ἴδου 
αγγελοσ KU ereory avrouw και Sofa 


περιελαμψεν avrova και εφοβηθησαν 
φοβον μεγαν και ειπεν avrowr 


(Fol. 188 δ.) 


SEC LUCAN 
— o — ὕὄὕ.-. — 


misericordiae dei nostri in quibus uisitauit nos 
oriens ex alto inluminare lumen 

his qui in tenebris et umbra mortis 
sedentibus ut prosperefaciat 

pedes nostros in uiam pacis 

puer autem crescebat et inbaliscebat 
spiritu et erat in desertis 

usque in diem ostensionis eius 
adistrahel factum est autem in 
diebus illis exiuit edictum 
&caesareaugusto profiteri 

omnem orbem terrarum haec fuit 
professio prima ducatum agente 

Syriae cyrenio etibant 

omnes profiteri unusquisque 

insuam patriam ascendit autem et 
ieseph de galilaea de ciuitate 

nazared in terram iuda in ciuitate dauid 
quae uocatur uethleem profiteri 

cum maria disponsata ei 

praegnanti propter quod esset de domo 
et patria dauid cum autem aduenirent 
consummati sunt dies ut pariret 

et peperit filium suum primogenitum 
et pannis inuoluit eum et reclinauit 
eum in praesepio quia non erat illis 
locus indiuersorio pastores autem 
erantinregioneilla cantantes 

et custodientes custodias noctis 
super pascua sua  etecce 

angelus dmi adstitit eis et gloria 
circumluxit eis et timuerunt 


timorem magnum et dixit illis 
(Fol. 189 a.) 


Capp. T. 78—II. ro. 


oayyedoo py φοβεισθε — iov yap 
εναγγελιζομαι ὕμειν xapay μεγαλην 


ἡτισ ἐσται Kat παντι τω Aaw ori ετεχθὴ 
t a 


ὕμειν σημερον σωτὴρ οσ ἐστιν χρσ κα 
εν πολει Saved καὶ Tovro ὕμειν TO 
σήμειον ἐστω evpnoere βρεφοσ 
εσπαργανωμένον εν φατνὴ και εξαιφνησ 
eyevero avv ro aye πληθοσ στρατειασ 
oupayou αἰτουντῶν TOV ὃν και λεγοντων 
δοξα εν ὕψιστοισ Ou και em yne eq ᾿ 
ev ανθρωποισ εὐδοκιασ καὶ eyevero 
wo ἀπῆλθον ot ἀγγελοι ar αὐτων 
εἰσ TOv ovpavoy Kat ot ἀνθρωποι 
Ot ποιμενεσ €uroy προσ aAAnAove 
διελθωμεν Sn ewo βηθλεεμ 
και ἴδωμεν To ρημα TOvTO TO γεγονωσ' 
οοκσ ἐγνωρισεν new καὶ y Xov 
σπευδοντεσ καὶ ευρον τὴν μαριαν 
και τὸν Ἰωσηφ και το βρεφοσ κειμενον 
εν τὴ φατνη Borea δε ἐεγνωρισαν 
περι Tov ρηματοσ Tov λαληθεντοσ 
avroww περι TOU παιδιοῦ καὶ παντεσ' 
οἱ ἀκονοντεσ εθαυμαζον περιτων 
λαληθέντων ὕπο των ποιμενων 
προσ avrovg ἢ δεμαρια συνετήρει παντα 
Ta. ρηματαταντα συνβαλλουσα ev TH 
καρδια avro. καὶ ὕπεστρεψαν οι ποιμενεσ 
δοξαζοντεσ Kat aavovyrec Tov ὃν 
€T TOO οἱσ ἠκουσαν καὶ OV 
καθωσ ἐλαληθη προσ avrove 
Kat ore συνετελεσθησαν αἱ ἡμέραι 
Qt OKTW TOV περιτεμειν TO παιδιον 
«vop.agÓ» To ονομα avrov ine 

(Fol. 189 5.) 


14 
15 


19 


8 C LUCAN 167 


angelus nolite timere ecce enim 
euangelizo uobis gaudium magnum 
quae erit et omni populo quia natus est 
uobis hodie saluator qui est xpa ibs 
in ciuitate dauid et hoc uobis 
signum sit inuenietis infantem 
pannis inuolutum in praesepio et continuo 
facta est multitudo cum angelo militiae 
caeli laudantes dm et dicentium 
gloria in altis deo et super terra pax 
in hominibus consolationis et factum est 
ut abierunt angeli ab eis 
incaelum et homines 
pastores dixerunt ad alterutrum 
pertranseamus usque bethleem 
et uideamus uerbum hoc quod factum est 
quod dmi demonstrauit nobis et uenerunt 
festinantes et inuenerunt mariam 
etiosef. et infantem positum 
in praesepio uidentes autem cognouerunt 
de uerbo quod factum est 
adeos deinfante et omnes 
qui audiebant mirati sunt do his 
quae dicta sunt pastoribus 
ad eos mariaautem conseruauat omnia 
uerba haec conmittens in 
corde suo et reuersi sunt pastores 
honorificantes et laudantes dm 
in omnibus quibus audierunt et uiderunt 
sicut dictum est ad illos 
et cum consummati sunt dies 
octo ut circumciderent infantem 
nominatum est nomen eius ihs 

(Fol. 190a.) 


Cap. II. 10-—21. 


168 


KAT AOYKAN 

—— τ -, 
τὸ κληθεν vro rov ayyeAou po Tov 
συνλημῴφθηναι avrov. εν κοιλια μητροσ' 
καὶ ore επλησθησαν αι ἡμέραι 
του καθαρισμου avrov κατα TOV νομὸν 
μωΐύσεωσ ανήγαγον avrov eur Ἱεροσολυμα 
παραστῆσαι κω καθωσ γεγραπται 
εν τω νομω κυ * OTL παν αρσεν 
διανοῖγον μήτραν αγιον Kw 
KAnOnoera: και Tov Sovvat θυσιαν 
κατα TO εἰρήμενον εν To VOL KU 
ζευγοσ τρυγονων ἢ δνονεοσσουσ 
περιστερων καιην ανθρωποσ 
εν Ἱερουσαλὴμ w ovopa συμεων 
Kat οανθρωποσ οντοσ δικαιοσ 
και εὐλαβησ προσδεχομεμενοσ παρακλησι 
του Ἰσραὴλ και va αγιον ἣν ἐπ αὐτὸν 
κεχρηματισμενοσ δεὴν ὕπο TOV TUI 
TOv αγιον py dew θανατον πριν ἢ 
δὴ rov χρν κυ και ἤλθεν ev τω T 
εἰσ TO ἵερον και εν TW €. a-ya;yew 
TOVG *yoveur To παιδιον up 
του ποιησαι αὐτουσ — kara ro cor 
TOV νομου περι αὐτου Kat αυτοσ εδεξατο avre 
εἰσ Tag aykaÀag avrov και ηυλογησεν 
τον Oy καὶ eurev νυν ἀπολυεισ 
roy δουλον σου δεσποτα kara ro pua. 
cov εν eungvy ort «doy οἱ οφθαλμοι 
pov TO σωτήριον gov οητοιμασασ 
κατα προσωπὸν παντων των Losey 
gue εἰσ αποκαλυψιν και δοξαν 
λαου σον ἵστραὴλ και ἣν οπατὴρ avrov 
και ἢ μητὴρ θαυμαζοντεσ 
emt Tour λαλουμενοισ περι αὐτου 

(Fol. 1906.) 


SEC LUCAN 
ty ey — 


quod uocatum est ab angelo antequam 
conciperetur in uentre matris 
et cum consummati sunt dies 
purgationis eius secundum legem 
moysi adduxerunt eum in hierosolyma 
adsistere dmo sicut scriptum est 
in lege dmi quia omne masculinum 
aperiens bulbam sanctum dmo 
uocabitur et ut darent sacrificium 
secundum quod dictum est in lege dmi 
parturturum autduos nidos 
columborum οὗ erat homo 
in hierusalem cui nomen symeon 
et homo hic iustus 
et metuens expectans consolationem 
istrahel et spa sanctus erat super eum 
responsum autem fuerat super eum & spuü 
sancto non uidere mortem prius 
quam uideat xpm dmi et uenit in spo 
in templum et cum inducerent 
parentes infantem ihm 
ut facerent secundum consuetudinem 
legisdeeo et ipse accepit eum 
in alassuas et benedixit 
dm etdixit nunc dismittis 
serbum tuum dme secundum uerbum 
tuum in pace quia uiderunt oculi 
mei salutare tuum quod praeparasti 
in conspectu omnium populorum 
]umen in reuelationem et gloriam 
populi tuiistrahel et erat pater eius 
et mater mirantes 
in his quae dicebantur de eo 

(Fol. 191 a.) 


Cap. II. 21— 2. 


KAT AOYKAN 
———_ 


kat ευλογῆσεν avrova συμεων 

και εἰπεν προσ μαριαν THY μητερα avrov 
ἴδον ovrog κειται εἰσ πτωσιν 

και εἰσ αναστασιν πολλων εν τω Ἰσραὴλ 
καὶ εἰσ σήμειον αντιλεγομενον 

Kat σου δε αυτὴσ τὴν ψυχην διελευσεται 
ρομφαια ows ανακαλνῴφθωσιν 
πολλων καρδιων διαλογισμοι 

καὶ avva προφητισ θυγατὴρ φανονηλ 

εκ φυλησ ασὴρ και αντὴ προβεβηκυΐα 
εν ἡμεραισ πολλαισ ζησασα ern erra 
μετα ανδροσ απο rye παρθενειασ αὐτὴσ 
και QUTN χήρα ἐτων “πὸ Ἢ οὐκ αφιστατο 
TOV ναον νηστειαισ και δεησεσι 
λατρευουσα νυκτα και ἡμεραν 

καὶ αντὴ τὴ wpa επιστασα ανθωμολογιτο 
τω Ow και ελαλει πέρι QUTOU πασιν 
To, προσδεχομενοισ λυτρωσιν 

εν ἱἵερουσαλημ και ὡσ ετελεσαν 
απαντα kara TOV νομὸν κν ὕπεστρεψαν 
εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν ew πολιν εαυτων 
ναζαρεθ. καθωσ epeOn δια rov προφητου 


ort ναζωραιοσ κληθησεται το δεπαιδιον 
--- 


ino ekparasovro Kat yugavero πληρουμενο 


σοφιασ Kat apu θυ ἣν €v avro 
€ropevovro δε και οἱ yoveur &vrov 

κατα ετοσ εἰσ Ἱερουσαλὴμ ev τὴ «op 
TOU πασχα καὶ OTE €y€vero avro erg: ig 
aveBnoay ot yovewr avrov exovrea 
avrov κατα ro εθοσ THe εορτησ των 
αζυμων και τελεσαντων Tag ἡμερασ 

εν τω ὕποστρεφειν αὐτουσ απεμεινεν 


— 
o TAue τσ ἐν ιέρουσ αλημ 


(Fol. 1915.) 


και οὐκ €yvogav 


35 


36 


37 


40 


41 


43 


f aap 


σ᾽ LUCAN 169 
et benedixit eos symeon 

et dixit ad mariam matrem eius 

ecce hic positus est in ruinam 

et in resurrectionem multorum in istrahei 

etin signum contradicentem 

et tuam ipsius autem animam pertransiet 

gladius ut reuelentur 


multorum cordium consilia 


Et anna prophetis filia fanuel 


de tribu aser et haec processerat 
in diebus multis quae uixit annos septem 
cum uiro 8 uirginitate sua 
et haec uidua annorum :1xxxiiii. quae non recede 
detemplo ieiuniis et orationibus 
seruiens nocte et die 
et in ipsa hora instans depraecabatur 
deo et dicebat de eo omnibus 
qui spectabant saluationem 
in hierusalem et cum consummauerunt 
omnia secundum legem dmi reuersi sunt 
in galilaeam in ciuitatem suam 
nazared sicut dictum est per profetam 
quoniam nazoreus uocabitur infans autem 
ihs conualescebat et crescebat adinplebatur 
sapientia et gratia del erat cum eo 
ibant autem et parentes eius 
secundum tempus in hierusalem in die festo 
paschae et cum facti sunt ei anni xii 
ascenderunt parentes eius habentes 
eum secundum consuetudinem diei festi 
azymorum et consummatis diebus 
cum reuerterentur remansit 
puer ihs in hierusalem et nescierunt 

(Fol. 192 a.) 


Cap. II. 34—43. 


ts 
t» 


170 


J oof 


[^j 


Ot γονισ GUTOV και νομισαντεσ αὐτὸν 
εἰναι εν 17 συνοδια ηλθον οδον 
ἡμέερασ και ἀανεζητουν avroy 

εν τοισ συνγενεσιν καὶ εν TOUT γνωστοισ 
Kat μὴ ευρισκοντεσ ὕπεστρεψαν 

eur Ἱερουσαλημ αναζητουντεσ avrov 
καὶ eyevero μεθ ἡμερασ τρεισ 

evpov avrov καθημενον ev τω ἵερω 

εν μεσωτων διδασκαλων 

GKOVOVTO. αὐτῶν καὶ €reporuvTa 
avrove * ἐξεισταντο δε παντεσ 

OL ἀκονοντεσ αὐτου ἐπὶ TH συνέσει 
καὶ ταισ ἀποκρισεσὶν αὐτου 

και ἴδοντεσ avrov εἐξεπλαγησαν 

και εἰπεν προσ AVTOV ἢ μητὴρ avrov 
T€KVOV τι ἐποιησασ ἡμειν οντωσ 

ov οπατὴρ σον καγω οδυνωμενοι 
και λυπουμενοι εζητουμεν σε 

και εἰπεν προσ αντουσ τι ort εζητειτε με 
ουκ οἰδατε ort εν τοισ TOU προ μου 

δει με εἰναι αυτοι Se ov συνῆκαν 

TO p.a. οελαλησεν avrow 

και κατεβὴ per avrov εἰσ vapeÜ 


και ἣν ὑποτασσομενοσ αντοισ 


ἢ δὲ μητὴρ avrov Sternpe: τα ρηματα 
πανταὰ εν TH καρδια αυτὴσ 


— 
και ιησ προεκοπται ἡλικια και Copia 


Kat χαριτι παρα ϑω και παρα ανθρωποισ 


-ὦ 
.«{ δε 
il y ert δε πεντεκαιδεκατω τησ ηγεμονιασ 


τιβεριου καισαροσ επιτροπενοντοσ 
ποντιου πειλατου Tho Ἰουδαιασ 
npwoou φιλιππον δετον αδελῴου avrov 


τετραρχουντοσ THE ἱιτουραιασ 
(Fol. 192 5.) 


IL 44 


45 


46 


47 


48 


49 


£O 


5I 


Til. 1 


SEG L 
—— — 
parentes eius et putantes eum 
esse in comitatu uenerunt uiam 
diei unius et requirebant eum 
in cognatis et inter notos' 
et non inuenientes reuersi sunt 
in hierusalem requirentes eum 
et factum est post dies tres 
inuenerunt eum sedentem in templo 
in medio magistrorum 
audientem eos et interrogantem 
eos expauescebant autem omnes 
qui audiebant eum in intellecto 
et responsionibus eius 
et uidentes eum de mente facti sunt 
et dixit ad eum mater eius 
fili quid fecisti nobis sic 
ecce pater tuus et ego dolentes 
et tristes quaerebamus te 


et dixit ad eos quid quod quaerebatis me 
nescitis quoniam in his quae sunt patris mei 


oportet me esse ipsi autem non intellexerunt 


uerbum quod dixit illis 
et descendit cum eis in nazaret 
et erat subditus illis 
mater autem eius conserbabat uerba 
omnia in corde suo 
et ihs proficiebat aetate et sapientia 
etgratia ad din et ad hominibus 

in anno autem quintodecimo ducatus 
tiberi caesaris procurante 
pontio pilato iudaeae 
quaterducatus galilaeae 
herode philippi autem fratris eius 


(Fol. 193 a.) 


Capp. IT. 43— III. r. 


fef 


— — π-- — 
KAT AOYKAN 


fem See | Sey 


TETPAPXOUVTOT THO LToVpALAT 
και Tpa.xoveribog. χωρασ 


και λυσανιου τησ αβιλλιανησ 
τετραρχουντοσ επεαρχιερεωσ 

αννα καὶ καίφα — €yevero popa. ὃν 

emt ἵωανην Tov ζαχαριον ὕιον 

ἐν 7) ερημω: και λθεν εἰσ πασαν 

τὴν περιχωρον Tov topdavov 

κηρυσσων βαπτισμα μετανοιασ 

εἰσ αφεσιν αμαρτιων wo γεγραπται 

ev βιβλω Xoyov noaiov τον προφητου 
φωνὴ βοωντοσ ev τὴ ερήμω 
ετοιμασατετὴν odov κυ εὐθειασ᾽ ποιειτε 
rac τριβουσ ὕμων πασα φαραγξ 
πληρωθήσεται και παν οροσ και βουνοσ 
ταπεινωθησεται καὶ «orat Ta, σκολια 


εἰσ Gear και ετραχιαι εἰσ οδουσ' 


111, 


λειασ και οψεται aga σαρξτο σωτήριον κυ 6 


" : €Aeyey de row exrropevoj.evowr 
-- 


J af 


οχλοισ βαπτισθηναι ἐνωπιον avrov 
γεννήματα εχιδνων τισ ὕμειν 
ὕπεδειξεν φυγειν aro tho μελλουσησ 
οργῆσ ποιήσατε ovv καρπον afvov 
Tyo μετανοιασ Kat μὴ apénobe 

ex 


Àeyew avrowr πατερα exopev 


Tov αβρααμ  Xeyo yap jew 

ort δυναται oOo ex των λιθων τουτων 
ἔγειραι τεκνα τω αβρααμ 199 δε 

ἢ a£euw προσ τὴν ριζαν των δενδρων 
κειται παν ovy δενδρον μὴ ποιουν 


καρπουσ καλουσ εἐκκοπτεται καὶ εἰσ 


: πὺρ βαλλεται :και exnpwrycay avroy 


ot oxAot λεγοντεσ 
(Fol. 193 5.) 


τι ποιησωμεν 


7 


SEC LUCAN 171 
—— ς- — 
quaterducatus itureae 

ettrachonitidis regionis 

etlysaniae abillianetis 

quaterducatus su prineipe sacerdotum 

anna et caipha factum est uerbum dmi 

ad iohanen zachariae filium 

in deserto et uenit in omnem 

regionem iordanis 

praedicans baptisma paenitentiae — 

in remisionem peccatorum sicut scriptum est 

in libro uerborum esaiae prophetae 

uox clamantis in deserto 

parate uiam dmi rectas facite 

semitaselus omnis uallis 

adinpleuitur et omnis mons et collis 

humiliab eterunt praua 

in directum et aspra in uias 


lenes et uidebit omnis caro salutarem dmi 


dicebat autem qui egrediebantur 


populi baptizari in conspectu eius 

progenies uiperarum quis uobis 

ostendit fugere a uentura 

ira facite ergo fructum dignum 

paenitentiae et ne incipiatis 

dicere in semet ipsis patrem habemus 

abraham dico enim uobis 

quoniam potens est ds de lapidibus istis 

suscitare filiosabrahae iam autem 

securis ad radicem arborum 

posita est omnisergoarbor non faciens 

fructum bonum exciditur et in 

inignem mittitur Et interrogauerunt 

illum populi dicentes quid faciemus 
(Fol. 194 4.) 


Cap. III. 1— 10. 


Ss — τ. 
172 KAT AOYK 


Sf 


[6 


ἵνα σωθωμεν αποκριθεισ δε 
λεγει αυτοισ 0 χων δυο χιτώνασ 
μεταδοτω τω μὴ EXOVTL και ο ἐχων 
βρωματα ομοιωσ ποιειτω 

nAGov δε και τελωναι ομοιωσ βαπτισθηναι 
καὶ εἰπαν προσ avrov διδασκαλε 
τι ποιήσωμεν ἵνα σωθωμεν 
o δε eurey avrour μηδεν πλέον 
πρασσεται παρατο διατεταγμένον ὕμειν 
πρασσειν. exnpwrncay δε και 
στρατενομενοι λεγοντεσ τι ποιήσωμεν 
iva σωθωμεν οδε εἰιπεν avrow 
μηδενα διασεισητε μηδε 
σνυκοφαντησητε και αρκεισθετοισ 
οψωνιοισ ὕμων προσδοκωντοσ δε 
του Àaov και διαλογιζομενων παντων 
εν Tau καρδιαισ avrov περι iwavou 
μήποτε avrog εἴη ο χρσ επιγνουσ 
τα διανοηματα avrov εἰπεν eyo ὕμασ 
βαπτιζω ev ὕδατι ew μετανοιαν ο δε 
ἐρχομενοσ ta xvporepog" μον ἐστιν 
OU οὐκ ιμι ἵκανοσ λυσαι τὸν ἵμαντα 
του ὕποδήηματοσ avroc ὕμασ 
βαπτεισει εν πνευματι αγιω και πυρι 

OV TO πτνον εν τὴ χειρί GUTOV 

και διακαθαριει τὴν αλωνα avrov 
καὶ τον μεν σειτον avya£et 
eur αποθηκὴν ro δε αχυρον κατακανυσει 
πυριασβεστω πολλα μεν ovy Kat erepa 
παραινων ενηνγελιζετο Tov λαον 

: Ode npwono o rerpapyya eXeyxop.evoa 

Um avrov περι ηρωδειαδοσ THe 
γυναικοσ Tov ἀαδελῴονυ avrov και περι 


(Fol 194 6.) 


III. 11 


Cap. 


12 


1 


15 


19 


SEC LUCAM 


utsalbisimus respondens autem 
dixit illis qui habet duas tunicas 
detnon habentei. etqui habet 
escas similiter faciat 

uenerunt autem et publicani similiter baptizari 
et dixerunt ad eum magister 
quid faciamus ut salbi simus 
ad ille dixit illis nihil amplius 
exigatis aduersus quod praeceptum uobis 
estagere interrogauerunt autem et 
milites dicentes quid faciemus 
ut salbi simus ad ille dixit illis 
neminem concusseritis neque 
calumniaueritis et sufficientes estote 
stipendiis uestris expectantes autem 
populo etcogitantium omnium 
in cordibus suis deiohane 
ne forte ipse esset xps conoscens 
intellectum eorum dixit ego uos 
baptizo in aqua in paenitentiam qui autem 
uenit fortior me est 
cuius non sum dignus solbere corregiam 
calciamenti ipse uos 
baptizabit in spirito sancto etigni 
cuius uentilabrum in manu eius 
et purgabit aream 
et quidem triticum congregabit 
in repositione m paleam autem conburet 
igni inextintibili multa quidem et alia 
consolans euangelizabat populum 


herodes autem quaterducatus cum argueretur 


ab eo de herodiade 
uxore fratris sui et de 
(Fol. 195 a.) 


III. 10—19. 


[89] 


πάντων ὧν ἐποίησεν πονήρων 


o ηρωδησ προσεθηκεν Kat Tovro 


emt aw evekÀug Tov twavyy ev φυλακὴ 


: eyevero δε ey τω βαπτισθηναι arayro, 


τον λαον Kat ine βαπτισθεντοσ και 
καὶ προσευχομένου ανοιχθηναι Tov 
ovpavoy και καταβηναι το πνευμα 

TO αγιον σωματικω Eder wo περιστεραν 


€u7 avrov Kat φωνὴν εκ Tov ουρανου 


γενεσθαι ὕιοσ μον «(av eyw σήμερον 


e — — 
: γεγεννηκα σε ἣν δειησ wo ero" À* 


apxopevog wo ενομειζετο eua 


vioo" wand 
του ιακωβ 
του μαθθαν 
του eXcalap 
Tov eAcovà 
του ἰαχειν 
του σαδωκ 
του αζωρ 
του ελιακειμ 
του αβιουδ 
του ζοροβαβελ 
του σαλαθιηλ 
του | LEXOVLOV 
Tov ιωακειμ 
του ἐλιακειμ 
του ιωσεια 
του αμωσ 
του μανασση 
του εζεκεια 
του αχασ 
του ιωαθαν 
(Fol. 195 δ.) 


SEC LUCAM 


omnibus quibus fecit malis 
herodes adiecit et hoc 


in omnibus inclusit iohanen in carcare 


173 


21 factum est autem cum baptizatus esset omnis 
populus et ihü baptizato et 


orante aperiri 


uu 
21 caelum et descendere spm 


sanctum corporali figura quasi columbam 


in eum et uocem de caelo 


factam filius meus es tu ego hodie 


. a e 
23 genui te erat autem ihs quasi annorum xxx. 


incipiens ut uidebatur esse 


filius wondioseph 

qui fuit iacob 

qui fuit matthan 

qui fuit eleazar 

qui fuit eliud 

qui fuit iachin 

qui fuit sadoc 

qui fuit azor 

qui fuit eliac:m 

qui fuit abiud 

qui fuit zorobabel 

qui fuit salathiel 

qui fuit iechoniae 

qui fuit ioacim 

qui fuit eliacim 

qui fuit losia 

qui fuit amos 

qui fuit manasse 

qui fuit ezecia 

qui fuit achas 

qui fuit ioathan 
(Fol. 196 a.) 


Car. III. 19—23. 


174 


TOU 


TOU 


TOU 


TOU 


TOU 


TOU 


KAT AOYKAN 

—— — - 
οζεια quifuit  ezecia 
αμασιον quifuit amasiu 
war quifuit 1088 
oxofiou quifuit ochoziae 
ἰωραμ quifuit ioram 
ιωσαφαδ quifuit iusafad 
agad quifuit asaph 
αβιουδ quifuit abiud 
ροβοαμ quifuit roboam 
σολομων quifuit solomon 
Saved quifuit dauid 
ιεσσαι quifuit jesse 
«33A qui fuit obed 
Booc quifuit boos 
σαλμων quifuit salomon 
ναασσων quifuit naasson 
apewabaB quifuit aminadab 
apap. quifuit aram 
ασρωμ quifuit asron 
paper quifuit fares 
ιουδα quifuit iuda 
ιακωβ quifuit iacob 
ισακ quifuit isac 
αβρααμ quifuit abraham 
θαρα quifuit thara 
vaxwp quifuit nachor 
σερουκ quifuit seruc 
payau quifuit ragau 
φαλεκ quifuit phalec 
eBep quifuit eber 
coda quifuit sala 
appafad qui fuit arphaxad 
e» quifuit sem 

(Fol. 196 5.) 


yo€ 

apex 
μαθουσαλα 
αἰγνωχ 
ιαρεδ 
μαλελεηλ 
Kaivay 


αἰνὼωσ 


σηθ 
adap 
6v 


LUCAN 


Ὡς Sá 


qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 
qui fuit 


37 


38 


TOU 
TOU 
TOU 
TOU 
TOU 
TOU 
TOU 
TOV 
TOU 
TOU 

31 Tov 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


Car. ILL, 31— 38. 


(Fol 197 a.) 


ses 


faf 


r£ 


— Soe ey — 
KAT AOYKAN 
— 


topdavov Kas ἤγετο εν ro πνευματι 
εν τὴ ἐρήμω ἡμερασ rezgapakovra 
πειραζομενοσ ὕπο rov σατανα 

: KG. οὐκ εφαγεν οὐδεν εν raso: ἡμεραισ εκειγαισ 
και συντελεσθεισων αντων εἐπεινασεν 

Ewer de avro o διαβολοσ εἰ ὕιοσ εἰ rov θυ 
eure ἵνα οι λιθοι ουτοι ἀρτοι γενωνται 

και αποκριθεισ o ine εἰιπεν γεγραπται 
ovx er apro μονω ζήσεται οανθρωποσ 
αλλ εν παντι ρηματι θυ 

καὶ ἀναγαγὼν avrov εἰσ οροσ ὕψηλον 
λειαν εδειξεν avro πασασ rac βασιλειασ 
του κοσμου εν στιγμὴ χρονου 
και εἰπεν προσ αὐτὸν o διαβολοσ σοι δωσω 
Tho ἐξουσιαν ταυτὴν ἀπασαν και τὴν δοξαν 
TOUTWY OTL ἐμοι παραδεδοται και w αν θελω 
διδωμι αὐτὴν ov ovv cay προσκυνησὴησ 
ενωπίιον ἐμου ETAL GOV πασα 

και ἀποκριθεισ avro o ino εἰπεν γεγραπται 
κν τὸν ὃν σου προσκυνήσεισ καὶ BUTW μογω 
λατρευσεισ και ἤγαγεν avrov εἰσ 
Ἱερουσαλὴμ και ἐστησεν αντὸν 
ἐπι TO TTEPVYLOV TOV ἵερου και eurev avro 
εἰ Stoo εἰ rovrov by βαλε σεαντον evrevÜev 
KaTw γεγραπται yap ort Tour ἀγγελοισ 
avrov ἐντελειται περι σου του διαφυλαξαισε 
και ἐπι χείρων αρουσιν σε μηποτε 
προσκοψησ προσ Mov rov ποδα σου 
και αποκριθεισ o ine εἰπεν avro 
γέγραπται ovk ἐκπειρασεισ ky rov Óy aov 
Kat συντελεσασ παντα πειρασμον 
o διαβολοσ ἀπεστη am avrov αχρι χρονου 

(Fol. 197 δ.) 


— — 
: ino δε πληρὴσ πνσ αγιου Vreorpej«v aro rov. IV. 1 


1ο 


12 


13 


SEC LUCAN 


ihs autem plenus spu sancto reuersus est ab 
iordanen et ducebatur in spiritu 
in deserto diebus quadraginta 
temptatus a satana 
et nihil manducauit in diebus illis 
et consummatis illis esuriit 

dixit autem illis diabolus si filius es del 
dic ut lapides isti panes fiant 

Et respondens ihs dixit scriptum est 
nonin panesolo uiuet homo 
sed in omni uerbo dei 

Et adsumens eum in montem altum 
ualde ostendit illi omnia regna 
mundi in momento temporis 
et dixit ad eum diabolus tibi dabo 
hanc potestatem omnem et gloriam 
eorum quia mihi tradita est et cui uolo 
doilam tu ergo si adoraueris 
in conspecto meo eruntua omnia 

Et respondens illi ihs dixit scriptum est 
dom dm tuum adorabis et ipsi soli 
deseruies et adduxit eum in 
hierusalem et statuit eum 
super pinnam templi et dixit illi 
si filiusesdel mitte te hinc 
diosum scriptum est enim quia angelis 
guis demandabit de te ut custodiant te 
etin manus tollent te ne forte 
offendas ad lapidem pedem tuum 
et respondens ihs dixit illi 
scriptum est non temptauis dom dm tuum 
et consummata omnem temptationem 
diabolus recessit ab eo usque ad tempus 

(Fol. 198 a.) 


Car. IV. 1—13. 


175 


176 KAT AOYE SEC LUCAN 
— — — 


am, 


και ὕπεστρεψεν o qe ev rn Suvapet TOV Iv.14 | Etconuersus est ihs in uirtute 
ave εἰσ THY γαλιλαιαν και φημή εξηλθεν aps in galilaeam et fama exiuit 
καθ ολησ THE περιχωρου περι avrov per omnem regionem de illo 
και αὐτοσ ἐδασκεν εν ταισ συναγωγαισ' 15 et ipse docebat in synagogis 
SofaLopevoc vro παντων gloriam accipiens ab omnibus 
up : ελθων δε eur valaped omov ἣν 16 ueniens autem in nazared ubi erat 
n κατα To εἰωθοσ ev τὴ ἡμερα των σαββατων nutricatus introibit.secundum consuetudinem 
εἰσ THY συναγωγὴν και ayeo ro in sabbato ‘in synagogam et surrexit 
avayvuvat καὶ ἐεπεδοθη avro 17 legere et porrectus est illi 
οπροφητὴησ ἡσαΐασ Kat απτνξασ profeta esaias et reuoluens 
ευρεν TOV TOTTOV OV jv γεγραμμενον inuenit locum ubi erat scriptum 
πνὰ κυ em ἐμε OV εἰνεκεν εχρεισεν με 18 Spa dmi super me propter quod unxit me 
εναγγελισασθαι πτωχοισ αἀπεσταλμαι | euangelizare pauperibus misit me 
κηρυξαι αἰχμαλωτοισ αφεσιν adnutiare captiuis remissionem 
και τυφλοισ αναβλεψιν αποστειλαι et caecis uisum demittere 
τεθραυματισμενουσ ev αφεσει κηρυξαι eviavro — 19 confractos in remissione adnuntiare annum 
κυ Sexrov καὶ πυξασ το βιβλιον 20 dmi acceptum et uoluens librum 
αποδουσ Tw ὕπηρετὴ εκαθισεν reddens ministro sedit 
καὶ παντων εν τὴ συναγωγὴ et omnium in synagoga 
ot οφθαλμοι noay ατενιζοντεσ avro oculi erant intendentes ei 
npéaro δε λεγειν προσ avrove σημέρον 21 coepit autem dicere ad eos hodie 
πεπλήρωται ἡ γραφὴ avry ev row ὡσιν repleta est scriptura haec in auribus 
PE ὕμων: καὶ παντεσ ἐμαρτυρουν avro 22 uestris et omnes testabantur ei 
n και εθαυμαζον ert Towr Xoyour qo: χαριτοσ et mirabantur in uerbis gratiae 
TOUT ἐκπορενομενοισ EK του στοματοσ qui exiebant de ore 
αὐτου καιελεγον ovx ὕιοσ Ἰωσηφ eius et dicebant nonno filius ioseph 
"K i €0TU ουτοσ: καὶ εἰπεν προσ αὐτουσ 23 est hic et dixit ad eos 
n παντωσ epecre ot THY παραβολὴν utique dicetis mihi parabolam 
ταυτὴν ἵατρε θεραπευσον ceavrov hane medice cura te ipsum 
οσα ἡκονσαμεν γεινομενα εἰσ quaecumque audiuimus facta in 
καφαρναουμ ποιησον και woe ey τῇ cafarnaum fac et hic in 
κα: πατριδι σου Εἰπεν δε αμὴν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμε. 24 patriatua dixit autem amen amen dico uobis 
7 ort ουδεισ προφητησ δεκτοσ ἐστιν quia nemo propheta acceptus est 
(Fol. 198 5.) (Fol. 199 a.) 


CAP. IV. 14—24. 


RJ 


[5j [8] 


--Ψ....ὄὄ ὕὄςς — 
KAT AOYKAN 
t — ςς — 


ἐν Tn πατριδι «avrov : ἔπ αληθειασ λεγω 
ὕμειν πολλαι χῆραι ἡσαν ev Taur 
ἡμεραισ yALov εν τω ἵστραηλ ore 
ἐκλεισθὴ o ουρανοσ' ern τρια και μηνα e£ 
wo eyevero λιμοσ μεγασ᾽ 

ἐπι πασαν τὴν γὴν καὶ προσ ονδεμιαν 


avrov επεμφθηἡλειασ' εἰ μὴ eur 


IV. 25 


x6 


caperra THT σιδονιασ᾿ προσ γυναικα χήραν 


και πολλοελεπροι σαν εν ro ἵσραηλ 
ἐπι ἐλισαιον Tov προφητου και ουδεισ 
avrov εκαθαρισθὴ ει μὴ ναιμασ οσνυροσ᾽ 
ot δεεπλησθησαν παντεσ θυμου 

ἐν Ty συναγωγή ακουσαντεσ ravra 

καὶ avacravrec ἐξεβαλον avrov 

efw THO πολεωσ΄ και ἤγαγον avroy 

«oc THO οῴρνοσ του ορουσ ed ov πολισ' 
οικοδομηται avroy WOTE κατακρήμνιστι 
avrov* avrog δε διελθων δια μεσου 
avrwy exopevero : καὶ κατηλθεν 

eur καφαρναουμ πολιν Tho γαλιλαιασ 
τὴν παραθαλασσιον εν οριοισ 

ζαβουλων και νεφθαλειμ και ην 


διδασκων avrove ev row σαββασιν 


: καὶ ἐξεπλήσσοντο em τὴ διδαχη avrov 


ot ey ἐξουσια ἣν o Xoyog avrov 

ἣν 9« ev τή συναγωγή ανθρωποσ exw 
ava Sa:poviov - axafjaprov και avexpatey 
φωνὴ peyaAn λεγων τιημειν Kas σοι 
- ναζορηναι ἡλθεσμασ woe 
ἀπολέσαι οιδα σε τισ εἰ ο ἀγεοσ του ὃν 
και ἐπετιμῆσεν G.UTO ο ino Χεγων 
φειμωθητι και ἐξελθεαπανυτου Kat 


peujac avrov ro δαιμονιον eur μεσὸν 


(Fol. 199 5.) 


27 


28 


29 


30 
31 


32 


34 


35 


Sa, 


CAN 177 


-- 

in patria sua in ueritate dico 

uobis multae uiduae erant in 

diebus heliae in istrahel quando 

clusum est caelum annis tribus et men 

sicut facta est famis grandis 

in omnem terram et ad neminem 

eorum missus est helias nisi in 

sarepta sidoniae ad mulierem uiduam . 

et multi leprosi erant in istrahel 

sub eliseo profeta et nemo 

eorum mundatus est nisi naemas syrus 

illi autem inpleti sunt omnes furore 

in synagoga audientes haec 

et surgentes eiecerunt eum 

extra ciuitatem et adduxerunt eum 

usque ad supercilium montis ubi ciuitas 

aedificata est eorum ut praecipitarent 

eum ipse autem transiens per medium 

eorum abiit et descendit 

in cafarnaum ciuitatem galilaeae 

ad maritimam in finibus 

zabulon et nepthalrm et erat 

docens eos in sabbatis 

et mirabantur in doctrina eius 

quoniam in potestate erat uerbus eius 

Erat autem in synagoga homo habens 

daemonium inmundum et exclamauit 

uoce magna dicens quid nobis et tibi 

ihu nazarenae uenisti nos hic 

perdere scio te quis es sanctus det 

et increpauit illi ihs dicens 

ommutesce et exi ab eo et 

proiciens eum daemonium in medio 
(Fol. 200 a.) 


Cap. IV. 24—35. 


23 


178 


sas 


J 


Hf 


ayaxpavyagay re εξηλθεν ar avrov 
μηδὲν βλαψασ avrov Kat eyevero 

Gap Boc peyac eri παντασ Kat 
συνελαλουν προσ αλληλουσ Aeyovrea 


tux 0 λογοσ ουτοσ ort εν ἐξουσια και 


δυναμει ἐεπιτασσει row axaÜaprow tt 


πνευμασν καὶ efepxovrat και εξηλθεν 


ἢ AKON) Τερὶ αὐτον εἰσ TAYTA TOTTOV THT 


ἤλθεν ew τὴν οἰκιαν σιμωνοσ Kat ἀνδραιου 


πενθερα δετου σιμωνοσ nV κατεχομενὴ 
spero μεγαλω καὶ ἡρωτησαν avrov 


περι αυτησ και επισταθεισ ἐπανω αὐτὴσ 

επετειμησεν τω Tvpero και adnkev 

αντὴν παραχρημα ὠστεαναστασαν 

αντὴν διακονειν avrour δυσαντοσ δε 
οσ 

του ἥλιον παντεσ οι εἰχαν ασθενουντασ 

νοσοισ ποικιλαισ εφερον avrovg 

προσ avroy οδε evi exag'ro τασ χειρασ 

επιτιθεισ εθεραπενυεν avrove 

εξηρχετο δε και δαιμονια απο πολλων 

κραυγαζοντα καὶ λεγοντα orc av εἰ 

οὕιοσ TOU Ov και επιτειμων ovk ELA 


— 
avra λαλειν ort ἡδεισαν avrov xpy εἰναι 


: γενομενὴσ δεμερασ εξελθων 


eropevOn eur ἐερήημον τοπον Kat ot 
οχλοι επεζητουν avrov καὶ λθον 


εωσ' GUTOV καὶ €IT€LXOV GUTOV του μὴ 
πορευεσθαιαπαυτων οδε eurev 
προσ avrovg ort δει με και εἰσ TAT 
αλλασ πολεισ ευαγγελισασθαι avr 
την βασιλιαν του θυ «w rovro yop 
απεσταλην KatnVv κηρύσσων εἰσ Tae 


(Fol. 200 6.) 


IV. 


36 


37 


: περιχωρου :avactac δε aro THe cwayeync 38 


40 


42 


43 


44 


‘KE 


BEC LUCAN 
— — -ς-. — 
exclamans exibit ab eo 
nihil nocens eum et factus est 


pabor magnus in omnes et 
conloquebantur adinuicem dicentes 
quis est hic sermo quia in potestate et 
uirtute imperat inmundis 
spiritibus et exeunt et exiuit 
fama de eo in omnem locum 
regionis surgens autem a synagoga 
uenit in domum simonis et andreae 
socrus autem simonis erat conprehensa 
febri magna et rogauerunt eum 
de ea et instans super eam 
increpauit febri et dimisit 
eam continuo ut etiam continuo surgentem 
eam ministraret eid occidente autem 
sole omnes quodquod habebant infirmantes 
languoribus bariis adferebant eos 
ad eum ille autem unicuique manus 
inpones sanabat eos 
exiebant autem et daemonia a multis 
clamantia et dicentia quia tu es 
filius dei et increpans non permittebat 
ea loqui quoniam sciebant eum xpm esse 
facta autem die exiens 
abiit in desertum locum et 
et turbae quaerebant eum et benerunt 
usque ad eum et detinebant eum ut non 
abiret abeis δὰ ille dixit 
ad eos quoniam oportet me et in alias 
ciuitates euangelizare 
regnum del in hocenim 
missussum et erat praedicans in 

(Fol. 201 a.) 


Cap. IV. 35—44. 


« 


ESI 


we — ΄- ι.ς͵ 
KAT AOYK 
—— — 


: συναγωγασ THe γαλιλαιασ : ἔγενετο δε 


εν τω TOV οχλον εἐπικεισθαι avro 


am, 
TOV axovewv Tov λογον TOV Óv eorwrog 


avrov παρατὴν λιμνὴν γεννησαρεδ 


και ἴδεν δυο πλοια ἐστωτα παρα τὴν λημνῆ 


ot Se αλιεισ ar avrov αποβαντεσ 
ἔπλυνον τα δικτυα ενβασ δε ewr εν 
πλοῖον οὴν σιμωνοσ᾽ ἡρωτησεν 

αντον ἐπαναγαγεῖν ἀπὸ THT γὴσ 

οσὸν οσον και καθισασ εν tw πλοιω᾿ 
εδιδασκεν rove οχλουσ : ore δὲ ἐπαυσατο 
λαλων εἰπεν προσ τὸν σίμωνα 
ἐπαναγαγε εἰσ το βαθοσ και χαλασατε 
τα δικτυα ὕμων εἰσ aypav οδεσιμὼν 
αποκρεισ εἰπεν avra. διδασκαλε 

δι ολησ THO νυκτοσ κοπιασαντεσ οὐδὲν 
ehaBopey επι δετω ρηματι σου ov μὴ 
παρακουσομαι και εὐθυσ χαλασαντεσ 
τα δικτυα συνεκλισαν ἴχθυων πληθοσ 
πολυ wore ta δικτνα ρησσεσθαι και 
κατενενον TOW μετοχοισ ἐν TW ἐτέβω 
wow τον ελθοντασ βοηθειν αντοισ 
ελθοντεσ ovy ἐτλησαν apdorepa 

τα πλοια ὠτεπαρατι βυθιζεσθαι 


: οδεσιμων προσέπεσεν avrov τοισ ποσὶν 


Aeyov παρακαλω εξελθε απ ἐμου 

ort aynp αμαρτωλοσ εἰμι κε 

θαμβοσ yap περιεσχεν avrov 

ἐπι τή aypa των ἴχθυων ov συνελαβὸον 


: σαν δεκοινωνοι avrov ἴακωβοσ 


και twayno trot ζεβεδαιου o δε eurev 

avrou δευτε και μὴ γεινεσθε αλιεισ 

ixÜvov ποιήσω yap ὕμασ αλιεισ' avOpune 
(Fol. 201 5.) 


10 


SEC LUCAN 179 


synagogis galilaeae factum est autem 
in eo dum populus super eum esset 

ut audiret uerbum dei stante 

illo ad stagnum gennesared 

et uidit duas naues stantes ad stagnum 
piscatores autem ab eis exientes 
lababant retiam ascendens autem in unam 
nauem quae erat simonis rogauit 

eum inducere a terra 

quantum quantum et sedens in naue 
turbas docebat cum autem cessasset 
loquens dixit ad simonem 

adduc in altum et mittite 

retias uestras in capturam simon autem 
respondens dixit illi magister 

per totam noctem laborantes nihil 
accepimus in tuo autem uerbo non 
praeteribo et confestim mittentes 

retias concluserunt piscium multitudine 
multam ut etiam retiae rumperentur et 
innuebant sociis qui erant in alia 

naue ut uenientes adiubarent eos 
uenientes ergo inpleberunt utrasque 
naues utetiam penae mergerent 

simon autem procidit ad pedes eius 
dicensrogo exia me 

quoniam air peccator sum dme 

timor enim adpraehendit eum 

in captura piscium quos ceperant 

erant autem sociieius  iacobus 
et iohanes fili zebedaei 


ilis uenite et nolite fieri piscatores 


ille autem dixit 


piscium faciam enim uos piscatores homina 
(Fol. 202 a.) 


Cape. IV. 44—V. το. 


180 


rd 
"ἐ 


Loam, 


JES 


- κοῦ SS ---- 
KAT AOYKAN 


ot Se ἀκουσαντεσ παντα κατελειψαν 
ETL TNO yno Kat ἠκολουθησαν avro 

! καὶ €yevero εν Tw εἰναι avrov εν jeux των 
πόλεων και ou ayyp Aempog καὶ eov 
TOV uy ἐπεσεν ἐπὶ προσωπὸον λέγων 
Ke «ay θελησ δυνασαι με καθαρισαι 
exrewag δετὴν χειρα mparo avrov 
λεγων θελω καθαρισθητι και ευθεωσ 
εἐκαθαρισθὴ και avroc παρήγγειλεν 
avro μηδενι εἰπειν απελθε δε 
και δειξον σεαυτὸν Twieper και 
προσένεγκε wept Tov καθαρισμον σου 
καθωσ προσεταξεν μωῦσησ ἵνα εἰσ 
μαρτυριον nv ὕμειντουτο οἶδε 
εξελθων ἡρξατο κηρυσσειν και 


διαφημειζειν Toy λογον wore μήκετι 
δυνασθαι avrov φανερωσ εἰσ πολιν 


εἰσελθειν αλλα e£ ἣν εν ερημοισ 
τοποισ και συνήρχοντο poc avroy 
και λθεν παλιν εἰσ καφαρναουμ 
διήρχετο δε o Xoyog μαλλον περι avrov 
καὶ συνήρχοντο οχλοι πολλοι axoveur 
και θεραπενεσθαι απὸ των ασθενειων 
: avrov : avrog δε qv ὕποχωρων 
εν ταισ ἐρημοισ και προσενχομενοσ 


και €y€VeTO EV μια των ἡμέρων αὐτου 


: διδασκοντοσ συνελθειν rove * φαρισαιουσ 


και νομοδιδασκαλουσ σαν δε 
συνεληλνθοτεσ ex πασησ κωμὴσ 


Tyo γαλιλαιασ και ϊουδαιασ Tov ἵασθαι avrove 
: Kas ov ανδρεσ' φεροντεσ em κλεινησ 


ανθρωπον oc ἣν παραλελυμενοσ 


και ἐζήτουν εἰσενεγκεν avrov. καὶ 


(Fol. 202 5.) 


y. 


12 


17 


18 


SEC LUCAN 


ad illi audientes omnia dereliquerunt 


super terra et secuti sunt eum 


Et factum est dum esset in una 


ciuitatium et ecce in qua erat uir leproms videns 
ihn cecidit in facie mdicens 

dme si uis potes me mundare 
extendens autem manum tetigit eum 
dicens uolo mundari et confestim 
mundatus est et ipse praecepit 

illi nemini dicere uade autem 

et ostende teipsum sacerdoti et 
offers pro purificatione tua 

Sicut praecepit moyses ut sit 

in testimonium uobishoo illeautem 
exiens coepit praedicare et 
diuulgare uerbum ut non amplius 
posse eum palam in ciuitatem 
introire sed foris erat in desertis 

locis et conueniebant ad eum 

et uenit iterum in cafarnaum 
transiebat autem uerbum magis de eo 
et conueniebant turbae multae audire 
etcurari ab infirmitatibus 

eorum ipse autem erat subtrahens se . 
in desertis et orant 


Et factum est in una dierum ipso 


docente conuenire pharisaeos 

et legis doctores erant autem 

congregati ex omni castello 

galilaeae et iudaeae ut salbaret eos 

et ecce uiri adferentes super lectum 

hominem qui erat paralyticus 

et quaerebant inducere eum et 
(Fol. 203 a.) 


Cap. V. 11—18. 


[31] 


— i ι-ς- — 
KAT AOYKAN 

—— — ὦ, 
θειναι ενωπιον αὐτου καὶ μὴ «vpovrea 
ποιασ εἰσενεγκωσιν avrov δια τον οχλον 
ανεβησαν em τοδωμα και aoe 
τεγασαντεσ τουσ κεραμουσ οπουὴν 
καθηκαν τον κραβαττον συν τω 
παραλντικω εἰσ To μέσον ἐνπροσθεν 

— — 
Tovinu ἴδων δειησ τὴν πιστιν αὐτῶν 
Aeyec To παραλυτικω | ayÜporre 
αφαιωνται σου αἱ αμαρτιαι Kat 
ἤρξαντο διαλογιζεσθαι οι γραμματεισ 
και οἱ φαρισαιοι ev ταισ καρδιαισ avrev 
λεγοντεσ τι ovrog λαλει βλασφημιασ 
—, 

Tw δυναται apapriac αφειναι e p εἰσ Oo 
extyvova Se o - Tove διαλογισμουσ 
avrov λέγει avrour τι διαλογιζεσθαι 
εν ταισ καρδιαισ ὕμων πονηρα 
τι ἐστιν εὐκοπωτερον eurety + αφαιωνται σου 
αι αμαρτιαι 7 εἰπειν εἐγειρε Kat περιπατει 
iva δε egre orc εἐξουσιαν exei 


οὕιοσ τον ayÜperrov. erc ro adivat 


apapriac λεγειτω παραλυτικω 
σοι λεγω eyetpe καὶ apoy τον κραβαττον σου 


και πορευου εἰσ TOV OLKOV σὸν και 
παραχρήμα αναστασ᾽ ενωπιον avray 


apac τὴν κλεινὴν ἀπηλθεν εἰσ TOV οἰκον avrov 


: δοξαζων τον θν: και ἐπλησθησαν 


θαμβου λεγοντεσ «dopey παραδοξα 
σήμερον και ελθων παλιν παρα τὴν 


θαλασσαν τον επακολόυθουντα 
avro οχλον εδιδασκεν καὶ παραγων 
edev λευει τον του αλῴφαιου καθημενον 
ἐπει το τέλωνιον και Aeyev avro 


ακολουθει μοι και καταλιπὼν παντα 


(Fol. 203 δ.) 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


Ὁ LUCAN 
— — —— 


181 


fm 


ponere in conspectu eius et non inuenientes 
qua inducerent eum propter turbam 
ascenderunt super tectum et de 
tegentes inbrices ubi erat 
deposuerunt grabattum cum 
paralytico in medio in conspectu 
ihu uidens autem ihs fidem eorum 
dicit paralytico homo 
dimittentur tibi peccata tua et 
coeperunt cogitare scribae 
et pharisaei in cordibus suis 
dicentes quid hic loquitur blasphemias 
quis potest peccata dimittere nisi solus ds 
cognoscens autem ihs cogitationes 
eorum dicit eis quid cogitatis 
in cordibus uestris iniqua 
quid est facilius dicere dimittentur tibi 
peccata aut dicere surge et ambula 
ut autem sciatis quia potestatem habet 
filius hominissuperterra dimittere 
peccata dicit paralytico 
tibi dico surge et tolle grabattum tuum 
etuade in domum tuam 
et confestim surgens in conspectu eoru. 
tollens grabattum abiit in domum suam 
honorificans dm. etin pleti sunt 
timore omnes dicentes uidemus mirabilia 
hodie et uenit iterum ad 
mare quiautem sequebatur 
eum populus docebat et transiens 
uidit leui alphaei sedentem 
superteloneum et dicit illi 
sequere me etrelinquens omnia 

(Fol, 204 «.) 


Car. V. 18—238. 


182 


a KA 
KAT AOYK 
t-— — 0 0 A 


omy e 
AP : ayacrac qkoXovÜet avro : Kat ἐποιησεν 
ὧν; 


ΓΕ] 


λευει δοχην avro peyadyy εν τῇ 


οἰκεία aurou Kat ἣν οχλοσ πολυσ τελωνων 


καὶ αλλων ανακειμενων καὶ οἱ 


φαρισαιοι και οἱ γραμματεισ eyovyufov 
προσ rovc palyrag avrov λεγοντεσ 

δια τι μετα των τελωνων εσθιεται 
καιπεινεται : ἀποκριθεισ δε o me 
€LT€V προσ αὐτουσ OV χρείαν ἐχουσιν 

οι ὕγιαινοντεσ tarpov αλλ οἱ κακωσ 
«xovrec ovx yAÜov καλεσαι δικαιουσ 
αλλα αμαρτωλουσ εἰσ μετανοιαν 

ot δεειπαν προσ avrov. Sta rt οἱ μαθηται 


twavov και ot μαθηται των φαρισαιων 


νηστενουσιν πυκνα και δεησεισ 


“ποίουνται οἱ δε μαθηται σον ovÓey τουτων 


ποιουσιν οδε no εἰπεν προσ avrova 
μὴ δυνανταῖι οι ὕιοι τον νυνφωνοσ 

ed οσον exovaw τον νυμφιον μεθ εαυτων 
νήστευειν ελευσονται δεημεραι 

καὶ οταν ἀπαρθὴ απ avrov o νυμφιοσ 


τότε νηστευσουσὶν ἐν €K€LVaLO ταισ Ὥμεβαισ 


Ελεγεν δε και παραβολὴν προσ avrove 


ort ουδεισ ertBAnpa απο ἵματιον καινου 
σχισασ επιβαλλει ere ἵματιον παλαιον 
εἰ δεμηγε και TO καινον σχεισει καὶ τω 
παλαιω ov συνφωνήησει τὸ aro Tov καινου 
επιβλημα και ουδεισ βαλλει owov veoy 
εἰσ ασκουσ παλαιουσ et de μηγε ρηξει 
0 OU/0G ονεοστουσ ἀσκουσ τουσ παλαιουσ 
καὶ αυτοσ ἐκχυθήσεται και οἱ Gg Kot 
αἀπολουνται αλλα οινον veoy εἰσ ασκουσ 
καινουσ βαλλουσιν καὶ αμφοτεροι 

(Fol. 204 5.) 


30 


31 


32 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


ς.. 


SEC 
— tH 


surgens sequebatur eum et fecit 


leui cenam illi magna in 


domo sua et erat turba multa publicanorum 


et aliorum recumbentium et 
pharisaei et scribae murmurabant 

ad discipuloss eius dicentes 

quare cum publicanis edit 

et bibit respondens autem ihs 
dixitad eos non habent opus 

qui saluisunt medico sed qui male 
habent non ueni uocare iustos 

sed peccatores in paenitentiam 

ad illi dixerunt ad eum quare discipuli 
iohanis et discipuli pharisaeorum 
leiunant frequenter et praecationes 
faciunt tu autem discipuli nihil horum 
faciunt ihsautem dixitad eos 

num quid possunt fili sponsi 

cum habeant sponsum secum 

ieiunare uenient autem dies 

et cum sublatus fuerit ab eis sponsus 


tunc ieiunabunt in illis diebus 


dicebant autem et parabolam ad eos 


quoniam nemo inmissuram tunica rude 
scindens inmittit in tunicam ueterem 
siquomi nus etrudemscindet et 
ueterin 


inmissura etnemo mittit uinum nouum 


onconueniet arude 


in utres ueteres si quominus rumpet 
uinum nouum uires ueteres 
etipseeffundetur et utres 
peribunt sed uinum nouum in utres 
nobos mittent et ambo 

(Fol. 205 a.) 


Cap, V. 28—38. 


ss 


: THpovvrat 


.; KGL ἐγένετο avTov 


ev caB Baro δευτεροπρωτω δια 


πορενεσθαι Sta των σποριμων 
ot δεμαθηται avrov ἡρξαντο τιλλειν 
Tove σταχνασ καὶ ψωχοντεσ Taur χερσιν 


ἤσθιον. 


ἔλεγον avro εἰδετι ποιουσιν οἱ 


τινεσ Se rov φαρισαιων 


μαθηται σου row σαββασιν o ovk εξεστιν 


-- 
αποκριθεισ Seow ελεγεν προσ avrove 


ουδεποτετοντο αἀνεγνωται o ἐεποιῆσεν 
Saved ore erewaov αὐτοσ 

και ot συν avro εισελθων εἰσ Tov oLKOV 

του θυ Kat rove aprove Tyo προσθεσεωσ 
εφαγεν και eBokev και Tour μετ avrov 


owe ovk eov nv φαγειν ει μὴ μονοισ 


> τοισΐερευσιν : τὴ avr» ἡμέρα θεασαμενοσ 


τινα ἐργαζομενον ro σαββατω εἰιπεν avre 
ανθρωπε εἰ μεν οιδασ τι ποιεισ 
μακαριοσ εἰ εἰδε μη οἱ Sao επικαταρατοσ 


καὶ Tapa arque εἰ Tov vog.ov 


και εἰσελθοντοσ avrov παλιν εἰσ τὴν 


συναγωγὴν σαββατω ev ἡ qv ανθρωποσ 
ξηραν exuv τὴν χειρα παρετήρουντο 
QUTOY οἱ γραμματεισ και οι φαρισαιοι 
e ro σαββατω θεραπενει ἵνα ευρωσιν 
κατηγορῆσαι αὐτου. αὐτοσ δε γεινωσκω 
Tovg διαλογισμουσ avrwy λεγε To 

τὴν χεῖρα ἐχοντι Enpay εγειρου και στηθι 


ἐν To μέσω καὶ αναστασ εἐσταθη 


— 
€urev δε Ootnc Tpoc avTOUG ἐἸεΕρωΤΉΏσω 


ὕμασ εἰ «£eorw ro caf aro ayabo 
ποιῆσαι ἡ κακοποιῆσαι ψυχὴν cogat 


ἢ ἀπολεσαι οιδεεσιωπὼν 


(Fol. 205 5.) 


YI. 1 


SEC LUCAN 
——— 
seruantur Et factum est eum 

in sabbato secundo primo 

abiré per segetes 

discipuli autem illius coeperunt uellere 
spicas et fricantes manibus 
manducabant quidam autem de farisaeis 
dicebant ei ecce quid faciunt 

discipuli tui sabbatis quod non licet 


respondens autem ihs dixitad eos 


numquam hoc le gistis quod fecit 

dauid quando esuriit ipse 

et qui cum eo erat introibit in domum 
del et panes propositionis 

manducauit et dedit et qui cum erant 
quibus non licebat manducare si non solis 
sacerdotibus eodem die uidens 
quendam operantem sabbato et dixit illi 
homo si quidem scis quod facis 

beatuses si autem nescis maledictus 

et trabaricator legis 


Et cum introisset iterum in 


synagogam sabbato in qua erat homo 
aridam habens manum obserbabant 
eum scribae et pharisaei 
sisabbatocuraret utinuenirent 
accusare eum ipse autem sciens 
cogitationes eorum dicit illi 

qui manum aridam habibat surge et sta 
in medio etsurgens stetit 


dixit autem ihs ad eos interrogabo 


uos silicet sabbato ben 
facere aut malefacere animam saluare 
aut perdere ad illi tacuerunt 

(Fol. 206 a.) ᾿ 


Carp. V. 38—VI. 9. 


183 


184 


ΠῚ 


και περιβλεψαμενοσ αυτουσ παντασ 
ev opyn λεγει To ανθρωπω εκτεινον 
τὴν χειρα σον Kat εξετεινεν 

και απεκατεσταθη ἢ xe. αντου wo και ἡ αλλῃ 
και ἐλεγεν avrou ort Ko ἐστιν οὕιοσ 

του avOpwirov και rov σαββάτου 

avrot δε επλησθησαν ανοιασ και 

διελογιζοντο προσ αλληλουσ Troc 


: ἀπολεσωσιν αὐτὸν : eyevero δε 


ev ταισ ἡμεραισ εκειναισ εξελθειν avrov 
εισ το οροσ και προσευχεσθαι και ἣν 


διανυκτερευων ev Ty προσευχὴ 


: καιοτεεγενετομερα εφωνησεν 


τουσ μαθητασ avrov και εκλε og 

am avray. (B - ovo και αποστολουσ exaAea € 
πρωτον σιμωνα oy καὶ πετρον 

ἐπωνομασεν καὶ ἀνδρεαν roy αδελῴον 
avrov και ακωβον Kat Wwavyy Tov 
αδελῴον avrov ova επωνομασεν 
βοανηργεσ οεστιν voc βροντησ και 
φιλιππον και βαρθολομαιον και μαθθαιον 
και θωμαν roy επικάλουμενον δύδυμον 

καὶ ἵακωβον τον rov αλφαιον και σιμωνα 
τὸν καλουμενον ζηλωτὴν | kac tovdayv 


taxwBov και ΐουδαν σκαριωθ. οσ και 


: eyevero προδοτησ * και καταβασ μετ avrov 


€OTH ewe τόπου πεδεινου" καὶ oxXoo μαθητω 
avrov καὶ πληθοσ πολν τουλαον azo πασὴσ 
τουδαιασ καὶ αλλων πολεων ἐεληλνθοτων 
ακουσαι avrov και ἴαθηναι απο των 
γόσων avTwy καὶ OL οχλουμενοι 
απο πνευμάτων ἀκαθαρτων εθεραπεῦυοντο 
και πασ οοχλοσ εζητει αψασθε 

(Fol. 206 ὁ.) 


VI. 10 


13 


fm 


C LUCAN 
— 


Et circumspiciens eos omnes 


in ira dicit homini extende 

manum tuam et extendit 

et restituta est manus eius sicut et alia 
et dicebat eis quoniam dms est filius 
hominis etiam sabbati 

ipsi autem repleti sunt insipientia et 
cogitabant ad inuicem quo modo 
perderent eum factum est autem 

in diebusillis exire eum 

in montem etorare et erat 


pernoctans in oratione 


Et cum facta est dies uocauit 


discipulossuos eteligens 

abeis .xil- quos et apostolos uocauit 

primum simonem quem et petrum 

cogno minauit etandre am fratrem 

eius etiacobum etiohanen 

fratrem eius. quos cognominauit 

boanerges quod est fili tonitrui et 

philippum et bartholomeum et matthaeu 

et thoman qui cognominatus est didymus 

etiacobum alphei et simonem 

qui uocatur zelotes et iudan 

iacobi etiudaninscarioth qui etiam 

et tradiditeum et descendens cum eis 

stetit in loco campestri et turbae discipulora 

eius et multitudo multa populi ex omni 

iudaea etaliarum ciuitatium uenientium 

audire eum et saluari ab omne 

infirmitate eorum et qui uexabantur 

spiritibus in mundis curabantur 

et omnis populus quaerebet tangere 
(Fol. 207 a.) 


Car. VI. 10— 19. 


Fas ΠΝ  f*j 


[:] 


jr f 


SA των — 
KAT AOYKAN 


avrov οτι δυναμισ παρ avrov ἐξήρχετο 


> καιΐατο παντασ' * καὶ ετι apac TOUG 


οφθαλμουσ avrov ew rove μαθητασ ελεγεν 


μακαριοι οἰπτωχοι οτι ὕμετερα ἐστιν 


— ee 
: ἢ βασιλειατουθν : μακαριοι οι πεινωντεσ 


νυν ort χορτασθησεσθε 


μακαριοι ἐστε οταν μεισησουσιν ὕμασ 
ot ayÜporrot και οταν αφορισωσιν 


και εἐκβαλωσιν και ονιδισωσιν το ονομα ὕμω 


wo πονήρον ενεκεν του ὕιου τον ανθρωπου 


Xepyre evexew Ty ἡμέρα xa 
σκιρτήσατε orcv μισθοσ ὕμων πολυσ 


εν TW OUPAYW κατὰ Τὰ αντὰ ETOLOUV 


τοισ Trpodnyrauc * o, πατερεσ avrov 


: πλην ovat ὕμειν τοισ πλουσιοισ ort 


αἀπεχετετὴν παρακλησιν ὕμων 
Ova ὕμειν οἱ εἐνπεπλήσμενοι ort 


πεινρασετε οναεῦμειν οι 


γελωντεσ νυν ori πενθησεται 


: καὶ κλαύσεται :ὃν αἱ ὕμειν οταν 


καλωσ ὕμειν εἰπωσιν οἱ ανθρωποι 
κατατααῦντα εποιουν τοισ 


ψευδοπροφηταισ οἱ πατερεσ avrov 


: adda ὕμειν λεγω roo ακονουσιν 


ayarare Tove εχθρουσ ὕμων 

καλωσ ποιειτε τοισ μεισουσιν ὕμασ 
ευλογειτε Tove καταρωμενουσ ὕμασ 
προσενχεσθε ὕπερ των επηρηαζοντων ὕμασ 


> TOTWTTOVTL O'€ εἰσ τὴν σιάγονα 


παρεχεαντω καὶ τὴν αλλην 


καὶ απὸ TOV αἰροντοσ Tov το ἵματιον 
και TOV χιτωνα μὴ κωλυσὴσ 


παντι 0e To αἰτουντι σε διδου 


(Fol. 207 5.) 


20 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


C LUCAN 185 


many 


fz 


eius quia uirabeo exiebat 
et sanabat omnes et eleuans 
oculos suos in discipulos dicebat 
beati pauperes quoniam uestrum est 
regnum del beati qui esuriunt 
nunc quiasaturamini 
beati estis quando odierint uos 
homines et cum exprobabunt 
Et eicient et reprobent nomen uestrum 
sicut malum propter filium hominis 
gaudeteinillodie et 
exultate quoniam merces uestra multa 
incaelo sic enim faciebant 
prophetis patres eorum 
uerum uae uobis diuitibus quoniam 
habetis consolationem uestram 
uae uobis qui repleti estis. quoniam 
esurietis uaeuobis qui 
ridetis nunc quoniam plorabitis 
etlugetis uaeuobis quando 
bene uobis dixerint homines 
secundum haec faciebant 
pseudoprophetis patres eorum 
sed uobis dico qui auditis 
diligite inimicos uestros 
benefacite odientibus uos 
bene dicite maledicentes uos 
orate pro calumniantibus uos 
qui te percutit in maxillam 
praebe illi et aliam 
et ab eo qui tollit tunicam tuam 
et palleum ne uetueris 
omni autem petenti te da 
(Fol. 208 a.) 


Car. VI. 19— 30. 


24 


fas Jef 


SEC LUCAN 


A— — 000 00000 oo 


και απὸ TOV ALPOYTOT TG. σὰ μὴ απαιτει ΥἹ. et ab eo qui tollet tua ne repetieris 
: καὶ καθωσ θελετε ἵνα ποιωσιν ὕμειν 31 et sicut uultis ut faciam uobis 
ot ἀανθρωποι και ὕμεισ ποιειτε αυτοισ' homines et uos facite illis 
: και el ayarare rovg ἀγαπωντασ ὕμασ 32 et si diligitis diligentes uos 
ποια ὕμειν χαρισ ἐστιν και γαρ οι ἁμαρτωλοι quae uobis gratia est etenim peccatores 
TOUTO TTOLOUG Ly τουσ ἀγαπωντασ αντουσ hoc faciunt diligentes illos 
ayarwow και εἰ αγαθοποιειτε 33 diligunt etsi benefacitis 
rove ἀγαθοποιουντασ ὕμασ ποια xopur benefacientibus uebis quae gratia 
Upew ἐστιν και yap ot αμαρτωλοι uobis est etenim peccatores 
rovromowvew Kav δανιζετε 34 hoc faciunt etsi feneratis 
wap wy εἐλπιζεται απολαβειν ποια χαρισ' ἃ quibus speratis reeipere quae gratia 
ὕμειν cot καὶ yap αμαρτωλοι uobisest etenim peccatores 
αμαρτωλοισ δανιζουσιν ἵνα peccatoribus faenerant ut 
απολαβωσιν πλὴν ayarare rove 35 recipiant uerumtamen diligite 
€XOpove ὕμων και αγαθοποιειτε inimicos uestros et benefacite 
και δανιζετε μηδεν αφελπιζοντεσ et faenerate nihil desperantes 
καὶ eoras o μισθοσ ὕμων πολυσ et erit merces uestra multa 
και ἐσεσθαι ὕιοι ὕψιστον οτι avrog et eritis fili altissimi quoniam ipse 
χρήστοσ ἐστιν emt TOUT αχαριστουσ: suabis est superingratos 
καὶ πονηρουσ γεινεσθε οικτιρμονεσ 36 |  etiniquos estote beneuolentes 
καθωσ Kato rarypipwv owretpy.uv sicut pater uester beniuolus est 
: ἐστιν :p Kpewere ἵνα μὴ κριθητε 37 noliteiudicare ut non iudicemini 
μὴ xaradixalere iva py καταδικασθητε date et dabitur uobis 
aroAvere και απολυθησεσθαι mensuram uonam conquassatam 
διδοτε και δοθησεται ὕμειν 38 inpletam supereffundentem 
p.erpov καλον a'ecaAevp.evov dabunt in sinus uestros 
πεπιεσμενον ὕπερεκχυννομένομ in qua enim mensura metieritis 
δωσουσιν ew roy κολμων ὕμων B nolite condemnare ut non condemnemini 
€ yap μετρω μετρειτε avr. y dimitte et demittemini 
: μετρηθησεται ὕμειν :ἔλεγεν Se 39 remitietur uobis dicebant autem 
καὶ παραβολὴν avrow pyre δυναται et parabolam illis numquid potest caecus 
τυφλοσ τυφλον οδαγειν ουχι αμφοτεροι caecum ducere nonne ambo in fobeam 
: «uw βοθυνον ἐνπεσουνται :óvk ἐστιν μαθητησ 40 incident non est discipulus 
r 


(Fol. 208 5.) (Fol. 209 a.) 


Car. VI. 30—40. 


Serf 


sey 


[8 


fof 


ὕπερ rov διδασκαλον κατηρτισμενοσ δε 


πασ εσται wo o διδασκαλοσ avrov 


: τιδεβλεπεισ το καρῴοσ ev τω οφθαλμω 


του αδελῴον cov τὴν δε δοκον τὴν 

εν To ow οφθαλμω ov κατανοεισ 

9 two δυνασαι Xeyew ro adeAdw σου 
αφεσ exBadw To καρῴφοσ εκ του 
οφθαλμου σου και idov ἡ δοκοσ «v τω ow 


οφθαλμω ὑποκειται ὕποκρειτα εκβαλε 
m porrov τὴν δοκον ex τον οφθαλμου σον 


xat rore διαβλεψεισ εκβαλειν 
To καρῴοσ «x rov οφθαλμον του αδελῴου σον 


: οὐκ εστιν δενδρον καλον ποιονν 


καρπουσ σαπρουσ ovde δενδρον σαπρον 
ποιουν καρπουσ καλουσ εκαστον 


δενδρον ex του καρπου avrov γεινωσκεται 


: Ov yap εκλεγονται εξ axavOwy συκα 


ovde ex Barov σταφνλὴν τρυγωσιν 


: οαγαθοσανθρωποσ «x rov ayabuv 


Onoavpov avrov Tye καρδιασ προφερει 


ayafoy Καὶ 0 ?TOV')pOO. εκ TOV TOYNpoV 


Wpopepel To Tovnpov ex yap 


VI. 


42 


43 


περισσευματοσ καρδιασ Kader TO στόμα avroo 


- 


- 
: τιδεμελεγεται κε κε καὶ ov ποίειτε 


> ἀλεγω STO ο ἐρχομενοσ᾽ προσ με 


και axovwy μον των λογων και ποιων 

αντουσ ὕποδειξω ὕμειν τινι ἐστιν 

ὁμοιοσ ομοιοσ ἐστιν ανθρωπω 

οἰκοδομουντι οἰκειαν o0 ἐσκαψεν 

και εβαθυνεν και εθηκεν θεμελιον 

ἐπὶ τὴν πετραν πλημυρασ δε γενομενὴσ 

προσερηξεν o ποταμοσ τη οἰκεια κεινὴ 

και ουκισχυσεν σαλευσαι αὐτὴν τεθεμε 
(Fol. 209 5.) 


47 


SEC LUCAN 


super magistrum confectus autem 
omnis erit sicut magister eius 
quid autem uides festucam in oculo 
fratris tui trauem autem 
intuooculo non inspicis 

aut quo modo potes dicere fratri tuo 
sine eiciam festucam de 

oculotuo eteccetrabis in tuo 
oculo est wpocrita eice 

primum trauem de oculo tuo 
ettuncuidebis eicere 

festucam de oculo fratris tui 

non est arbor bona faciens 

fructos males neque arbor mala 
faciens fructos bonos. unaquaeque 
arbor de fructo suo cognoscitur 

non enim legunt de spinis ficus 
neque derubo ubam uindemiant 
bonushomo de bono 

thensauro cordis sui proferet 
bonum et malus de malo 

froferet malum deenim 


abundantia cordis loquitur os eius 


quid autem mihi dicitis dme dme et non facitis 


quae dico omnis qui uenit ad me 
etaudit mea berba et facit 
ea ostendam uobis cui est 
similis similis est homini 
aedificanti domum qui fodit 
et altum fecit et posuit fundamentum 
super petram inundatione autem facta 
adlisit lumen domui illi 
et non potuit mobere illam fun 

(Fol. 2104.) 


Cap. VI. 40— 48. 


187 


188 


— 
ge: 
— 


Auro yap ert τὴν πετραν οδε ακουσασ' VI. 49 
και μὴ ποιησασ ομοιοσ ἐστιν ανθρωπω | 
οικοδομησαντι OLKELAY ἐπι τὴν γὴν 
χωρισ θεμελιου συνερηξεν οποταμοσ 
και συνέπεσεν καὶ €yeyero TO ρηγμα THC 
οικειασ' EXEL μεγα 

καὶ ἐγενετὸ ore ετελεσεν ταυτατα ρηματαλαλω VIL 1 
n\Oev εἰσ καφαρναουμ. εκατονταρχου de 2 
τινοσ TUT κακωσ ἐχων Ἠμελλεν τελευταν 
OC ἣν αντω τιμειοσ' και ακουσασ rept TOV ἣν 3 
ἀπεστειλεν πρεσβνυτερουσ των Ἰουδαίων 
ἐρωτων avroy οπωσ ελθων διασωση 
τον δουλον avrov ot δεπαραγενομενοι 4 
ἤρωτων avroy σπουδαιωσ' λεγοντεσ 


οτι ἀξιοσ ἐστιν c παρεξή Tovro. ἀγαπα 5 


yap To εθνοσ ἡμων καὶ τὴν συναγωγὴν 


avroc οικοδομησεν new επορενετο δε 6 


μετ avrov o - 767 Se ov paxpay 


QT€XOVTOO αντου THO OLKELAT ἐπεμψε 
προσ avrov o εκατονταρχοσ φιλουσ 
Aeyov avro Ke μὴ σκνλλου ov yap «uit 
txavog ἵνα μου ὕπο THY στεγὴν εἰσ 
ελθησ αλλ eure λογω και tabyoerat 7 
οπαισ pov Kat yap eyw ανθρωποσ 8 
ειμι vr ἐξουσιαν τασσομενοσ' €xav 
Ur ἐμαντὸν στρατιωτασ καὶ λεγω rovro 
πορενου καὶ πορενεται και αλλω ἐρχοὺ και ἐρχεται 
καὶ τω δουλω μου ποιήῆσον TOVTO Kat ποίει 

ακουσασ Se ravra o - εθαυμασεν 9 
και στραφεισ ειπεν τω ἀκολουθουντι 
οχλω ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν ovderore 
τοσαντὴν πιστιν €vpov εν τω Ἰσραὴλ 

: καὶ ὕποστρεψαντεσ εἰσ OLKOY οἱ πεμῴθεντεσ 10 


(Fol. 2106.) 


SEC LUCAN 
ae 
data enim erat super petram ‘qui autem audiuit 
et non fecit similis est homini 
aedificanti domum super terram 
sine fundamento adlisit flumen 
et concidit et facta est ruina 


domus illius magna 


Et factum est cum consummasset omnia uerba loquens 


uenit cafarnaum centurionis autem 
cuiusdam puer male habens incipiebat mori 
quieratillihonoratus etaudiens de ihe 
misit seniores iudaeorum 

rogans eum ut ueniens saluet 

seruum eius ad illi aduenientes 

rogabant eum festinanter dicentes 
quoniam dignus eat cui hoc praestes diligit 
enim gentem nostram et synagogam 

ipse aedificabit nobis ibat autem 
cumeisihs iam autem non longe 

cum essed de domo misit 

&d eum centurio amicos 

dicensei dme noli te uexare non enim sum 
dignus utsub tectum meum 

intres sed dic uerbo et salbabitur 
puermeum etenim ego homo 

sub potestate constitutus habens - 

sub me milites et dico huic 

uadeetuadit etalii ueni et uenit 


et seruo meo fac hoc et facit 


audiens autem haec ihs miratus est 


etconuersus dixitsequenti 
populo amen dico uobis numquam 
tantam fidem inueni in istrahel 


etconuersiindomum qui missi erant 


(Fol. 211 a.) 


Capp. VT. 48—VII. 10. 


δουλοι evpov rov aa Ü«yovvra ὕγιαινοντα 


& : και Ty ἐξησ ewopevero εἰσ πολιν καλουμενὴν 
— 


fas JF 


yaiy καὶ συνεπορευοντο avro ot naf gras 
avrov kat οχλοσ πολυσ' eyevero 9e or 
nyylev τη πυλη THE πολεωσ εξεκομιζετο 
τεθνηκωσ ὕιοσ μονογενησ τὴ μητρι 
αντου xnpa oven καὶ πολυσ οχλοσ THT 
πολεωσ συνεληλνθι avry ivy δε 


12 


v 
ono εσπλαγχνισθὴ ex αντὴ Kat eurev αὐτῇ 


μὴ κλαιε και προσελθων ἡψατο τὴσ 
σορου οιδε βασταζοντεσ ἐστησαν 
και εἰπεν νεανισκε νεανίσκε σοι λέγω 


εἐγερθητι και ἀανεκαθισεν o vexpoar 


και ἤρξατο λαλειν και ἐδωκεν avrov 


T9 pytptavrov ελαβεν δε φοβοσ 


παντασ καὶ εδοξαζον τον 6» Aeyovrea 


ort προφητὴσ μεγασ εξηγερθη ev ἡμειν 


—Á 
και ori επεσκεψατο ο θσ τον Àaoy avrov 


: καὶ εξηλθεν ουτοσ o Xoyog: εν on 


Ty ἴουδαια περι avrov καὶ εν πασὴ 


> τὴ περιχωρω: ἕν our Kat μέχρι iwavou 


του βαπτιστου oc Kat προσκαλεσαμενοσ 
Óvo των μαθητων avrov Aeyet 
πορευθεντεσ εἰπατε avro OV eto 
ἐρχομενοσ ἢ aÀXov προσδοκωμεν 

και παραγενομενοι οἱ ανδρεσ προσ 
avrov euray Ἰωανησ᾽ o βαπτιστησ 
απεσταλκεν ἡμασ προσ σελεγων 

CV ει ο ἐρχομενοσ ἢ ετερον προσ 
δοκωμεν εν avr Se ry wpa εθεραπευεν 
TOÀÀovc αἀπονοσων Kat μαστειγων 
καὶ πονήρων πνευματων KatTupAovT 


ero, βλεπειν και αποκρειθεισ εἰπεν 


(Fol. 211 5.) 


17 


19 


20 


41 


22 


serui inuenerunt aegrum sanum 

Et alia die ibat in ciuitatem quae dicitur 
nain et ibant cum eo discipuli 
eius et turba multa factum est autem ut 
adpropiaret porte ciuitatis et ferebatur 
mortuum filius unicus matri 
suae cum esset uidua et multus populus 
ciuitatis cum ea erat, uidensautem 
188 misertus est ei etdixit illi 


noli plorare et accedens tetigit 


sartofagum qui autem portabant steterunt 


etdixit iuuenisiuuenis tibi dico 
surge et resedit mortuus 

et coepitloqui et dedit eum 
matrisuae accepit autem timor 


omnes et honorificabant dm dicentes 


quoniam profeta magnus surrexit in nobis 


et quoniam uisitauit ds plebem suam 

et exiuit hoc uerbum in totam 

iudaeam de illo et in omni 

regione et in quibus usque ad iohanen 

baptistam quiet aduocans 

duos ciscipulorum suorum dixit 

euntes dicite ei tu es qui 

uenturuses an alium expectamus 

et aduenientes uiri ad 

eum dixerunt iohannes baptista 

misit nos ad te dicens 

tu es qui uenturuses an alium ex 

pectamus in ipsa autem hora curabit 

multos ab infirmitatibus et plagis 

et iniquorum spirituum et caecos 

faciebat uidere et respondens dixit 
(Fol. 212 a.) 


Cap. VII. 10—22?. 


189 


190 


feof 


[ἃ 18] 


ff 


— — 
KAT 
o 


f2j 
"S 
js 


avrow πορευθεντεσ eurare iav 

a. edo ὕμων ot οφθικαια 

ἤκουσαν ὕμων Tawra οτιτυῴφλοι 

αναβλεπουσιν χωλοι περιπατουσιν 

λεπροι καθαριζονται και κωφοι 

ακοουσιν νεκροὶ €y€L.DOVTOL 

πτωχοι εναγγελιζονται και 

μακαριοσ ἐστιν og αν py σκανδαλισθη 

εν ἐμοι απελθοντων δετων ἀγγελῶν 
twavou ἡρξατο λεγειν περι ἴωανον TOW 

οχλοισ τι εἐξηλθατε εἰσ τὴν ἐρῆμον 

θεασασθαι καλαμον ὕπο 

ανεμον σαλενομενον αλλατι 


εξηλθατε ειἰδειν ἀανθρωπον εν μαλακουσ 


ἵματιοισ ἡμφιεσμενον ἵἴδου ot 

εν ιματισμω ενδοξω και τρυφὴ 
διαγοντεσ «v row βασιλειοισ εἰσιν 
αλλατι εξηλθατε ειδειν προφητὴν 
vat Neyw ὕμειν και περισσοτερον 
προφήτου :ὅτι ονδεισ μειζων ey 
γεννητοισ γυναικων προφητὴσ 


iwayov του Barrurrov ovrog ἐστιν 


περι ov γέγραπται ἴδον ἀποστελλω Tov 


αγγελον μου προ προσωπου 


οσ κατασκευασει TOY οδον σον 


: λέγω δεύμειν orco μεικροτεροσ 


avrov ev τὴ βασιλεια του ϑυ μειζων 


ως 
ναι- ἐδικαιωσαι τον Oy βαπτισθεντεσ 


vo βαπτισμα ἴωανου οι de φαρισαιοι 


καὶ νομικοι τὴν βουλὴν του θυ ηθετησαν 


: μη βαπτισθεντεσ im avrov : τινι ovy 


ομοιωσὼ rove ανθρωπουσ Tyo γενεασ 


(Fol. 212 6.) 


ς αυτουέεστιν «και Tac O λαοσ ακουσασ «αὶ οἱ Te» 29 


‘BEC LUCAN 


ilis euntes dicite iohani 
quae uiderunt oculi uestri et quae 
audierunt aures uestre quia caeci 
uident clodiambulant 
leprosi mundantur et surdi 
audiunt mortui resurgunt 
pauperes euangelizantur et 
beatus erit qui non fuerit scandalizatus 
in me euntibus autem nuntiis 
iohanni coepit dicere de iohane 
turbis quid existis in desertum 
uidere harundinem a 
uento moueri sed quid 
existis uidere hominem in mollibus 
uestimentis uestitum  ecoe qui 
in uestimentis gloriosis et aepulatione 
agent in regibus sunt 
sed quid existis uidere profetam 
etiam dico uobis et amplius 
profeta quoniam nemo maior in 
natis mulierum profeta 
iohanis baptiste hic est 
de quo scriptum est, ecce mitto 
angelum meum ante faciem tuam 
qui praeparauit uiam tuam 
dico autem uobis quoniam qui minor est 
eius in regno caelorum maior 
illo est et omnis populus audiens et publicani 
justificabit dm baptizati 
baptisma iohanis pharisaeiautem — . 
etlegisdoctores consilium dei abusi sunt 
non baptizatiab eo cui ergo 
similabo homines generationis 

(Fol. 213 a.) 


Car. VII. 33—31. 


KAT AOYK 
—— NS 
TAVTHO καὶ τινι εἰσιν ομοιοι ομοιοι 
εἰσιν τοισ παιδιοισ TOUT εν TH ayopa 
καθημενοισ και προσφωνουσιν 
αλληλοισ λεγοντεσ ηυλησαμεν ὕμειν 
καὶ ovk ὠρχήσασθαι εθρηνησαμεν 
καὶ κεκλαυσατε ἐληλυθεν yap Ἰωανησ' 
o βαπτιστησ μητεεσθων μητεπεινων 
και λεγετε δαιμονιον exe 
ἐληλνθεν οὕιοσ του ανθρωπον 
ἐσθων και πεινων και λεγετε 
ἴδου ayÜpenroc payor και 
owororme φιλοσ τελωνων 
και apapreAoy και εδικαιωθη 
1) σοφια aro των τέκνων AUTNT 
οὗ: "poro v δε avrov τισ Tov φαρισαιων 


iva $ayy per avrov. και εἰσελθων εἰσ Tov 
oov Tov φαρισαιον karexM On 

xat ov γυνὴ ev Ty woke apaprwdoo 
γνουσα ort ev Ty oua rov φαρισαιου 
KaTaxetrat κομίσασα μνροναλαβαστρον 


και στασα οπισω παρα τουσ ποδασ avrov 
κλαιουσα row δακρυσι εβρεξετουσ 
ποδασ αὐτου xou Tau θριξει τησ 
κεφαλησ αὐτησ εἐξεμαξεν και 
κατεφιλει τουσ ποδασ avrov 
και ἡλειῴφεν To μυρω ἵἴδων de 
o φαρισαιοσ παρ ὦ κατέκειτο 
ειπεν EV εαντω οντοσ εἰ ἣν προφητὴσ 
εἐγεινωσκεν ay Tur Kat ποδαπὴ ἡ γυνὴ 
ἢ ἀπτομενὴ avrov. οτι αμαρτωλοσ 
εστιν και αποκρειθεισ o ino eurev 
προσ GUTOV σίιμὼν exw Cot TL eure 
o Seedy διδασκαλεειπον οδεειπεν 
(Fol. 2135.) 


VIL 32 


33 


34 


35 


37 


38 


39 


40 


- 
EC 


— 


fet 


CAN 191 


j 


huius et cui sunt similes similes 
sunt infantibus qui in foro 
sedentibus et adloquentibus 
inuicem dicentibus cantabimus uobis 
et non saltastis lamentauimus 

etnon plorastis uenit enim iohanes 
beptista nequeedens neque bibens 
etdicitis daemonium habet 

uenit filius hominis 

edens etuibens et dicitis 

ecce homo manducator et 
uinipotator &micus publicanorum 
et peccatorum et iustificata est 


sapientia a filis suis 


rogauit autem illum quidam pharisaeorum 


ut manducaret cum eo et intransin 
domum pharisaei recubuit 

et ecce mulier in ciuitate peccatrix 
sciens quoniam in domo pharisaei 


recumbet accipiens unguenti alabastru 


et stans retro ad pedes eius 


plorans lacrimis inpleuit 

pedes eius et capillis 

capitis sui extersit et 

osculabatur pedes eius 

et unguebat unguento uidens autem 

pharisaeus ad quem recumbebat 

dixit intra se hic si esset propheta 

sciebat utique quiset qualis mulier 

quae tangit eum quia peccatrix 

est et respondens ihs dixit 

ad eum simon habeo tibi quod dicere 

ad ille dixit magister dic ad ille dixit 
(Fol. 214 a.) 


Car. VII. 31—40. 


192 


KAT AOYKAN 
SoS — 
Svo χρεοφιλετε noav δανιστη τινι 
o εἰσ ὠφειλεν δηναρια πεντακοσια 
o δεετεροσ δηναρια πεντήκοντα 
pi exovrov avrav ἀποδουναὶ 
aj.oorepowr exapicaro Tw ovv avrov 
πλεον ἀγαπήσει αποκριθεισ οσιμων 
eurev ὕπολαμβανω ort ὦ τὸ πλεον 
exopwraro οδεειπεν avro ορθωσ 


και στραφεισ προσ τὴν γυναικα 


εἰπεν ro σιμωνι βλεπεισ ταυτὴν 


ἐκρεινασ 


τὴν γυναικα εισηλθον σου «ur τὴν οικιαν 
και ὕδωρ ert ποδασ μοι ovk εδωκασ 
αὐτὴ δετοισ δακρισιν εβρεξεν μον 

Tove ποδασ Kat Taio θριξιν avrgo 
ἐξεμαξεν φιλημα μοι ουκ εδωκασ 

αντη δε adh yo εἰσηλθον ov διελιπεν 


VII 41 


42 


43 


καταφιλουσα μου Tove 7ro0a0 - eco τὴν κεφαλὴ 46 
μον 


ovx ἡλευψασ avrn δε 

μύρω ἡλειψεν ov χαριν δε Aeyw σοι 
αφεωνται αὐτὴ πολλα εἰπεν δε αυτῇ 
αφεωνται cov αἱ apapriat και ἤρξαντο 

οἱ συνανακειμεένοι eye εν eavrour 

τισ ἐστιν οντοσ οσ καὶ αμαρτιασ αφιησιν 


eurey δεπροσ τὴν γυναικα γυναι 


3) πιστισ σον σεσωκεν G'€ - πορευον εν tojv 


: και eyevero ἐν To καθεξησ και avroo 


διωδευεν κατα πολιν καὶ κωμὴν 

κηρνυσσων και ευαγγελιζομενοσ 

την βασιλειαν τον ὃυ καιοι. uf» per avrov 

και γυναικεσ τινεσ at σα τεθεραπευμεναι 

απο πνευματων πονήρων και 

ασθενιων μαρια ἡ καλουμενὴ 

μαγδαληνὴ εξησ. Ü- δαιμονια εξεληλυθει 
(Fol. 214 6.) 


VIII. 1 


fm 
i- 


C 
— 


oak 
duo debitoreserant cuidam faeneratori 
unus debebat denarios quingentos 

alius autem denarios quinquaginta 

non habentibus illis unde redderent 
utrisque donauit quis ergo eum 
plusdiligit respondens simon 

dixit suspicor quoniam cui plus 
donauit ad ille dixit illi recte 

iudicasti et conuersus ad mulierem 
dixit simoni uides hanc 

mulierem introibi in' domum tuam 

et aquam in pedes mihi non dedisti 
haec autem lacrimis inrigauit mihi 
pedes et capillis suis 

extersit osculum mihi non dedisti 
haec autem ex quo introibi non cessauit 
oRculans mihi pedes oleo caput meum 
non unxisti haec autem 

unguento unxit propter quod dico tibi 
dimittentur illi multa dixit autem ei 
dimissa sunt tibi peccata et coeperunt 
qui simul recumbebant dicere intra se 
quisest hic qui et peccata dimittit 
dixit autem ad mulierem mulier 


fides tua te salbam fecit uade in pace 


Et factum est in continenti et ipse 


circuibat circa ciuitatem et castellum 

praedicans et euangelizans 

regnum del et xii cum illo 

et mulieres quaedam quae erant curatae 

a spirit ibus inmundis et 

infirmitatibus maria quae uocabatur 

magdalene de qua . uii . daemonia exierant 
(Fol. 215 a.) 


Capp. VII. 41—VIII. 2. 


Saf 


ff 


[3j 


-. ey — 

KAT AOYKA 

--- -ος:.. — 
και twava yuvy χουζα ^ ererporou 
npwoov καὶ σουσαννα καὶ ετεραι πολλαι 


αἰτινεσ Και διηκογουν AUTOS ἐκ TOV 


: ὕπαρχοντων avrov :συνελθοντοσ δε 


οχλου πολλου καὶ των τὴν πολιν 


επιπορενομενων προσ αὐτὸν εἰπεν 


παραβολὴν rotavrqv προσ avrove 


Εξηλθεν οσπειρων σπειραι rov σπορον 


αὐτου καὶ εν TO σπειρειν oO μεν ere 
παρα τὴν οδον Kat κατεπατηθη Kat τα 
πετεινα κατεφαγεν avro καὶ aXXo 
ἐπεσεν ἐπι τὴν πετραν Kat prev εξζηρανθὴ 
δια To μὴ exew ἵκμαδα καὶ αλλο ἐπεσεν 
μέσον των ἀκανθων και συνφνεισαι 

a, ἀκανθαι απεκνιξαν αὐτο και αλλο 


exec ev emt τὴν γὴν τὴν ἀγαθὴν Kat καλὴν 


VIII. 3 


και φνεν Kat ἐποιησεν koqiroy "εκατονταπλασιονα 


ravra λεγων εφωνει o exov ora 
axovewaxoverw επηρωτων δε 
avrov ot μαθηται avrov TO TU en 


ἢ παραβολὴ αὐτὴ ode eurev ὕμειν 
δεδοται τα μυστηρια τησ βασιλειασ Tov ὃν 


: γνωναι: Tour δελοιποισ 


ev παραβολαισ ἵνα βλεποντεσ py edwory 


: καιακουοντεσ py συνΐωσιν “core δε 


αὐτῇ ἡ παραβολη οσποροσ ἐστιν o λογοσ 
o του Ov 
ot ἀακολονθουντεσ ὧν ἐρχεταε o διαβολοσ 
καιαιρει απὸ THE καρδιασ αὐτῶν τον λογον 


tva py πιστευσαντεσ σωθωσιν οιδε 


οἱ δεπαρα τὴν οδον εἰσιν 


ἐπι τὴν πετραν OLOTAV AKOVTWOLY μετα 


χαρασ Sexovras roy λογον και ριζαν 


ονκ ἐχουσὶν οἱ προσ καιρον πιστενουσι 


(Fol. 215 5.) 


SEC LUCAN 


193 


et iohana uxorchuza procuratoris 
herodis etsusanna etaliae multae 
quae et ministrabant illis de 
substantiasua congregato autem 
populo multo et qui ad ciuitatem 
iter faciebant ad eum dixit 
parabolam talem ad eos 


Exiuit seminator seminare semen 


suum et in quo seminat aliut quidem cedit 
ad uiam et conculcatum est et 
uolatilia comederunt illud . et aliud cecidit 
super petram et cum creuisset aridum factu est 
propter quod non haberet umorem - et aliud cecidit 
in medio spinarum et cum germinassent 
spinae suffocauerunt illud et aliud 
cecidit super terram bonam et uberam 
et cum germinasset fecit fructum centupia 
haec dicens clamabat qui habet aures 
audiendi audiat. interrogabant autem 
illum discipuli eius. quae essent 
parabola haec ad ille dixit.uobis 
datum est mysterium regni del 
scire reliquis autem 
in parabolis ut uidentes non uideant 
etaudientes nonaudiant estautem 
haec parabola semen est uerbum 
del qui autem ad uiam sunt 
quiaudiunt quorum uenit diabolus 
et tollit a corde eorum uerbum 
ut non credentessaluifiant quiautem 
super petram quicumaudierunt cum 
gaudio accipiunt uerbum et radicem 
non habent quiad tempus credunt 

(Fol. 216 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 3—13. 


25 


194 


καὶ εν καιρω πειρασμον αφιστανται 

το δεεισ rac ἀκανθασ πεσὸν ovrot eww 
Ot ακουσαντεσ και ὕπο μεριμνων 

vÀovrov και ἡδονων του βιου πορενομενοι 
συνπνειγονται Kat ov τελεσφορουσιν 

το Ó« ew τὴν καλὴν γὴν ovrot εἰσιν 
οἰτινεσ ev καρδια αγαθη ακουσαντεσ' 


— 
tov λογον Tov θν | karexovaw Kat 


καρποφορουσιν ev vmojovy 


-- 
of : Οὐδεισ Se λυχνον aac Kadvrret avrov 


[8 Jaf 


[3 


ΜΗ 


. TWO ακονέετε 


σκενει ἡ ὕποκατω THO Krew ya τιθησιν 
αλλα ert τὴν λυχνιαν τιθι ἵνα 0t ἐσ 
πορενομενοι βλεπωσι τὸ doo 

ov yap «art κρυπτον 0 ov φανερον εσται 
ovdearoxpypov aAa tva. γνωσθη 

και εἰσ φανερον ελθηὴ | BXerere ovy 

: oc yop av exn δοθησεται 
αντω και 0c αν μὴ exn apÜga erac 


: am avrov xavo Ooket exew : Trapeyevero δε 


T poc avrov ἢ μητὴρ avrov Kat ot adeAdos 
avrov καὶ οὐκ ἤδυναντο συντυχεῖν 

avro δια τον οχλον -απηγγελη δε αυΐω 
οτι ἡ μητὴρ σον καιοι αδελφοι σον 

«£o ἐστηκασιν ζηήτουντεσ σε ode 


αποκριθεισ εἰπεν avrouwr «ἡ LTP μον και οι 
αδελῴοι μον οντοι εἰσιν ot Tov λογον Tov by 


. GQKOVOYTED KGL TOLOUYTET 


: Éyevero Se 
«v paa, των ἡμερων aya qvac avroy 

eur πλοιον και ot pabyrat avrov 

και eurev προσ αντουσ διελθωμεν 


εἰσ To T«pay Tyo λιμνησ και ανηχθησαν 


πλεόντων δεαντων αφυπνωσεν 


και κατεβη λελαψ ἀνεμον πολλη 
(Fol. 216 5.) 


VIII. 


14 


15 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


SEC LUCAN 
— — -- — 


et in tempore temptationis recedunt 
quod autem in spinas cecidit hi sunt 
qui audierunt eta sollicitudinibus 
diuitiarum et suabitati abientes 
suffocantur et non adferent fructum 
quod autem in terram bonam hi sunt 
qui in corde bono audientes 

uerbum dei continent et 


fructificant in sufferentia 


Nemo autem lueernam aocendens coperit eam 


uaso aut suptus lectum ponit 

sed super candelabrum ponit ut qui 

intrant uideant lumen 

non est enim absconsum quod non in palam uenit 
nec occultum sed ut sciatur 

etin palam ueniet  uidete ergo 

quo modo auditis quienim habet dabitur 
ei et qui non habet tolletur 

ab eo et quod putat se habere aduenit autem 
ad eum mater eius et fratres 

eius et non poterant contingere 

ei propter turbam nuntiatum est autem 
ei quimaterter tua et fratres tui 

foras stant quaerenteste ad ille 
respondens dixiteis matermea et 
fratres mei hi sunt qui uerbum del 

audiunt et faciunt factum est autem 

in una dierum ascenderunt eum 

in nauem et discipuli eius 

et dixit ad eos pertranseamus 

in contra stagnum et nauigarunt 


nauigantibus autem illis obdormiuit 


et descendit procella uenti multa 
(Fol. 317 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 13—23. 


eur τὴν λιμνὴν Kat cuverAnpovvro VIII. 

καὶ εκινδυνευον προσελθοντεσ δε 24 
--- --. 

διηγειραν avrov λεγοντεσ κε κε 


απολλυμεθα 0 δεεγερθεισ επετειμησεν 

τω aye» καὶ τω κλυδωνι καὶ ἐπαύσαντο 
και ἐγενετὸ γαληνὴ εἰπεν δε avrowr 28 
που ἐστιν ἡ πιστισ ὕμων φοβηθεντεσ δε 
εθαυμασαν λεγοντεσ προσ αλληλουσ 

TUS Apa OVTOT ἐστιν οτι καὶ TOUT ἀνεμοισ' 


ἐεπιτασσέει Καὶ TW ὕδατι καὶ ὕπακονουσιν αντω 


κατεπλευσαν δε εἰσ τὴν xopay Toy 26 
γερασήνων ἡτισ ἐστιν ἀντίπερα THT 

γαλιλαιασ και εξηλθον ext τὴν γὴν και 2037 
ὕπηντησεν avro avgp ἐκ THT πολεωσ 


oc exer δαιμονία απὸ χρονων ewayov 

og ειματιον ovK ἐνεδυδισκετο Kat 

εν οἰκω OUK ἐμενεν αλλ ev τοισ 

μνημειοισ ειδων δε roy uy avexpagey 28 
φωνὴ peyady curev 

τι ἐμοι και σοι Ut€ Tov ὕἵψιστου δαιομαι σον 

pn με βασανισὴσ ελεγεν yap τω 19 
Sa:poviw ro axopro εξελθε απο Tov 

avOpwrov πολλοισ yap xpovour 

συνήρπακει αὐτὸν εδεσμειτο yap 

αλυσεσιν και παιδεσ φυλασσομενοσ 

και διερησσετα δεσμα yAavvero yap 

ὕποτου δαιμονιον εἰσ τὴν ἐερημοὸν 

επηρωτησεν δεαντον o ine λεγων 30 
τι σοιονομα ἐστιν οδεειπεν λεγιων 


ονομα μοι πολλα yap may δαιμονια 


παρεκαλουν δε ἵνα μὴ ἐπιταξη 31 

avrow ao τὴν αβυσσον απελθειν 

nv δε exer aye χοίρων βοσκομενὴ 32 
(Fol. 217 6.) 


in stagnum et conplebantur 

et periclitabantur accedentes autem 
excitauerunt eum dicentes dme dme 
perimus ad ille surgens inperauit 
uento etundae et cessauerunt 


et facta est tranquillitas.dixit autem illis 


τ ubiest fides uestra timentes autes 


mirabantur dicentes ad inuicem 

quisnam hic est quoniam et uentis 

inperatetaquae etobaudiunt ei 

deuenerunt autem in regionem 

gerasenorum quae est contra 

galilaeam etexieruntin terram et 

obuiauitiliuir de ciuitate 

qui habebat daemonia a temporibus multis 

qui tunicam non induebatur et 

domo non manebat sed in 

monimentis uidens autem ihm exclamaait 

uoce magna dixit 

quid mihi et tibi fili altissimi rogo te 

ne me torqueas dicebat enim 

daemonioin mundoexiab 

homine multis enim temporibus 

abripiebat eum ligabatur enim 

catenis etconpedibus et custodiabatur 

et disrumpebat uincula. ducebantur enim 

a daemonio in desertum 

interrogauit autem eum ihs dicens 

quid tibi nomen est ad ille dixit legio 

nomen mihi multa enim erant daemonia 

rogabant autem ut non praeciperet 

illis in abyssum abire 

erat autem ibi grex porcorum pascentium 
(Fol. 218 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 23— 32. 


195 


196 


j 


και ελθων ανὴρ 


ev Tw ορει παρεκαλουν Se avrov 

iva εἰσ Tove χοιρουσ εἰσελθωσιν 

o Se werpayer avrow - εξελθοντα δὲ 
τα δαιμονια aov ανθρωπου 
wppnoay εἰσ Tove χοιρουσ 


wppnoe δε ἡ ayeAy κατα του 
κρήμνου eur τὴν λιμνὴν 


και απεπνιγὴ εἰδοντεσ Se o. βοσκοντεσ 


τὸ γεγονοσ εφνγαν και απηγγειλαν 


εἰσ τὴν πολιν και εἰσ τουσ ἀγρουσ 
παραγενομένων 0e εκ THE πολεωσ 

και θεωρησαντων καθήμενον 

τον δαιμονιζομενον σωφρονουντα 

και ἵματισμενον καθημενον 

παρα τουσ ποδασ του tqu εφοβηθησαν 
ampyyeay yap αντοισ οι idovrer 
voc ἐσωθη o wv ypwrncay δε 

τον τὴν παντεσ και ἢ χωρα TOV 


γερασηνων απελθειν ar avrov 


φοβω yap μεγαλω συνιχοντο 


: ενβασ δεὔπεστρεψεν npwra δε 


avrov o ἀνὴρ ad ον εξεληλυθει 

τα δαιμονια εἰναι συν avro) 
arreAucey δε avroy λεγων πορενον 

εἰσ TOV οικον σου διηγουμενοσ ova σοι 
060 ἐποιησεν και απελθων kara τὴν 


πολιν εκηρυσσεν 00a εποιῆσεν avro 


uu ee 
: oto’ eyevero δε ey Tw ὕποστρεψε 


-- 
τον inv αποδεξασθαι avrov Tov οχλον 


7Gay yap vayreg προσδοκωντεσ avroy 


y"c πεσων 


ovrog apxcev TO συναγωγὴσ TETwy 


oe — 
ὕπο Tove ποδασ TOV ιηυ παρεκαλει avrov 


(Fol. 2186.) 


VIII. 


33 


34 


40 


in montem rogaban tem eum 
ut in porcos introirent 
δα 1116 praecepiteis cum exissent autem 


daemonia ab homine 


abierunt in porcos 


abiit autem grex per 

praecipitium in stagnum 

et suffocata est . uidentes autem qui pascebant 
quod factum est fugerunt et nuntiauerunt 
inciuitatem et in agros 

aduenientes autem de ciuitate 

et uidentes sedentem 

qui habuerat daemonium sobrium 

et uestitum sedentem 

ad pedes ihu timuerunt 

adnuntiauerunt enim illis qui uiderant 
quomodo salbatus est legion rogauerunt aute 
ihm omneset regio 

gerasenorum abire ab eis 

timore enim magnum conpraehensi erant 
ascendens autem reuersus est rogabat aute. 
eumuir a quo exierant 

daemonia utessetcum eo 

dismisiti autem illum dicens uade 

in domum tuam narrans quanta tibi 

ds fecit et uadens in 

ciuitatem nuntiabat quanta illi fecit 

ihs factum est autem cum reuerteretur 
ihs excepit eum populus 


erant enim omnes expectantes eum 


Etueniens uir cuinomen iairus et 


hic princeps synagogae cadens 
sub pedes ihu rogubat eum 
(Fol. 219 a.) 


Car. VIII. 32—47. 


euweAÜew εἰσ τὴν 0 
θυγατὴρ avro μονογενὴσ ετων. ιβ. 
αποθνησκου και ἐγένετο ev τω 

πορευεσθαι avrov. ot οχλοι συνεπνιγαν 
QVTOV Kat γυνὴ ουσα εν ρυσι aua TOO 

axo αιτων᾽ Bt. qv οὐδε εἰσ ἴσχνεν θεραπενσαι 
προσελθουσα ἡψατο του ἵματιου avrov 

και παραχρημα εστὴ ἡ ρυσισ του αἱματοσ 
avrgg οδε ine γνουσ τὴν εξελθουσαν 

ef avrov δυναμιν ἐπηρωτα rwr pov ἡψατο 
ἀρνουμένων δεπαντων εἰπεν 0 πετροσ 

και οἱ συν αυτω επιστατα οἱ ὀοχλοι συνεχοῦσι 
«a, αποθλειβουσιν και λεγεισ tu pov * 7 
ἥψατο οδεειπεν ἡψατομου Tw eyw yap 
eyvov δυναμιν εξελθουσαν ax ἐμου 

ιἰδουσα δε ἡ γυνὴ ort οὐκ eXaD«v* ἐντρομοσ ov 
λθὲεν καὶ προσπεσουσα avro T 

de nv airway ἡψατο avrov. απηγγειλεν 
evwrtov παντοσ Tov Aaov καὶ orc ἴαθη 
wapaxpypa οδεειπεν αὐτὴ Üvyarep 

ἢ πιστισ σου TETWKEV σε πορευου εν vy 
ετιαντου λαλουντοσ  epxovra4 απὸ Tov 
apxiowaywyou λεγοντεσ avro ort 
τεθνηκεν σου ἡ Ovyarnp- μήκετι σκυλλε 

τον διδασκαλον οδε - ακουσασ 

τὸν λογον απεκριθὴ avro λεγων 

pn φοβου μονον πιστευε και σωθήσεται 
εισελθων δε εἰσ τὴν οἰκιαν ovk αφηκεν 
εἰσελθειν συν avro τινα. εἰ μὴ πετρον 

Kat ἴωανὴν και ἴακωβον Kat Tov 

πατερα τον κορασιου και τὴν μήτερα 
exAatov Se παντεσ και ἐκοπτοντο 

αὐτὴν οδεειπεν μὴ καιετε 


(Fol. 219 5.) 


avavrov yvyap VIII. 42 


43 


45 


46 


47 


48 


49 


51 


LUCAN 197 


introire in domum eius erat enim 

filia ilh unica annorum. xii. 

moriens etfactum est cum 

iter faceret turbae suffocabant 

eum etmulier quae erat in profluuio sanguinis 


ab annis. xii. quem nemo poterat curare 


a accedens tetigit tunicam eius 


— LJ MM . . e 
y eius ihs autem sciens quae exiuit 


ab eo uirtus interrogabat quis me tetigit 
negantibus autem omnibus dixit petrus 

et qui cum eo erant magister turbae te conprimunt 
et contribulant et dicis quis me 

tetigit adilledixit tetigit me quis ego enim 
sciui uirtutem exisse a me 

uidens autem mulier quia non latuit tremibunds 


uenit et procidens ad eum 


B et confestim stetit profluuius sanguinis 


propter quam causam tetigit eum adnuntiabit 
in conspectu omnis populi et quia sanata est 
confestim ad ille dixit ei filia 
fides tua te salbam fecit uade in pacem 
adhuceoloquente ueniunt ab 
archisynagogo dicentes illi quoniam 
mortua est filia tua iam noli uexare 
magistrum ihs autem audiens 
uerbum respondit illi dicens 
noli timere tantum crede etsalbabitur 
intrans autem in domum non admisit 
introire secum quemquam nisi petrum 
etiohanen etiacobum et 
patrem puellae et matrem 
plorabant autem omnes et plangebant 
eam ad ille dixit nolite plorare 

(Fol. 2204.) 


Car, VIIT. 41— 52. 


198 


[3] 


J 


jaf 


[5 fas 


> ΤΟ -yeyovor 


: πανταχου 


ov yap απεθανεν adda. καθενδει VIII. 
και κατέλουν avTOv ειδοτεσ OTL 53 
αἀπεθανεν avrog δε κρατησασ Tyo χειροσ 54. 
avro εφωνησεν λεγων ἡ raw ἐγειρε 

και ὕπεστρεψεν ro πνευμα avro 55 
καὶ ἀανεστὴ παραχρημα Kat επεταξεν 

δοθηναι αὐτὴ φαγειν οι δεγονεισ 56 
avrga θεωρουντεσ ef ἐστησαν 
παρήγγειλεν Seavrow μῆηδε εἰπειν 

: συνκαλεσαμενοσ δε IX. 1 
rovc - 8+ ἐδωκεν avrour δυναμιν 

και ἐξουσιαν ems πασαν δαιμονιον 


καὶ νοσουσ θεραπευειν και απεστειλεν 2 


αντουσ κηρυσσειν την βασιλειαν τον θυ 


: καιΐασθαι rove ασθενεισ : καὶ εἰπεν προσ αντουσ 3 


pajóev aapere εἰσ τὴν odov μητεραβδον 
μητεπήραν papreaprov μητεαργυριον 
μήτε ava δνο χιτωνασ exew 
και εἰσ ἣν ay οἰκιαν εἰσελθητε 4 
exe, μενετε κακειθεν εἐξερχεσθε 

: καὶ οσοιαν μὴ δεξωνται ὕμασ 5 
ἐξερχομενοι ex THO πολεωσ εκεινὴσ 
εἐκτειναξατε TOV KOVLODTOV των ποδων ὕμω 


εἰσ μαρτυριον ἐπ᾿ avrovo 


: efepxopevor δε κατα πολεισ καὶ ἤρχοντο 6 


ευαγγελιζομενοι και θεραπευοντεσ' 
: ἀκουσασ δεηρωδησ 7 
0 Terpapyyg τα γεινομενα ἠπὸορειτο 


δια το λεγεσθαι ὕπο τινων ort 


Ἰωαννὴσ εκ νεκρὼων avETTH 

ὕπο τινων δε orc ηλειασ εφανη 8 

αλλοι Se ort προφητὴσ των ἀρχαίων 

ἡνεστὴ εἰπεν δεηρωδησ ori 9 
(Fol. 2200.) 


SEC LUCAN 
— — υ.-. — 


non enim mortua est sed dormit 

et deridebant eum scientes quoniam 

mortua est ipse autem tenens manum 

eius clamauit dicens puella surge 

et conuersus est spiritus eius 

et surrexit confestim et praecepit 

dariei manducare parentes autem 

eius uidentes expauerunt 

praecepit autem illis nemini dicere 

quod factum est  conuocans autem 

xii-  dediteisuirtutem 

et potestatem super omne daemonium 

etinf&rmitates curare et misit 

eo8 praedicare regnum dei 

et sanare infirmos et dix ad eos 

nihil tuleritisin uiam non uirgam 

neque peram neque panem neque pecaniam 

nequae ana duas tunicas habere 

et in quemcumque domum intraueritis 

ibi manete et inde exite 

et quecumque non acceperint uos 

exeuntes de ciuitate illa 

excutite puluerem pedum uestrorum 

in testimonium super illos 

exeuntes autem circa ciuitates transibant 

euangelizantes et curantes 

ubique audiens autem herodes 

tetrarcha quae fiebant confundebatur 

propter quod diceretur a quibusdam quia 

iohannes a mortuis surrexit 

abaliosautem quoniam helias uisus est 

aliautem quia profeta anticus 

surrexit dixit autem herodes quia 
(Fol. 221 a.) 


Capp. VIII. 51—IX. 9. 


ἴωανην eyo ἀπεκεφαλισα τισ δε 


ἐστιν OUVTOG περι OV Eyw ταντα GKOUO 

και ἐζήτει avroy εἰδειν :και ὕποστρεψαντεσ 
: οεαπόστολοι διηγήσαντο avro oca 

ἐποίησαν : καὶ παραλαβων avrove 

ανεχωρησεν κατιδιαν εἰσ κωμὴν 

λεγομενὴν Bydcaida οι δε oxXot 

γνοντεσ ἠκολονυθησαν avro και 

αποδεξαμενοσ αντουσ᾽ eXaX«t 

αντοισ περι τησ βασιλιασ τον bv 


FSF f 


και τουσ χρειαν exovrao θεραπειασ 
αὐτου παντασ LOTO 
qy : ἢ δεήμερα ἡρξατο κλεινειν : προσελθοντεσ δε 
B οι δωδεκα εἰπὸν avro ATOAVTOY TOV οχλο 
ἵνα πορευθεντεσ ew raa κυκλω 
Kwpao καιτουσ ἀγρουσ καταλυσωσιν 
οτι ὧδε EV epu» τόπω ἐσμεν 
eurey δεπροσ avrovg δοτεαντοισντοισ ὕμεισ 
φαγειν οι δε ecray ovk εἰσιν jew 
πλεον ἡ πεντεαρτοι και Svo ἴχθυεσ 
εἰ μη τιημεισ πορευθεντεσ ἀγορασωμεν 
εἰσ παντα τον Aaov τουτον βρωματα 
ἤσαν yap ανδρεσ wo πεντακισχιλιοι 
εἰπεν δεπροσ rove μαθητασ avrov 
κατακλεινατε avrove κλισιασ ὡσει QVO, 
πεντήκοντα καὶ ἐποιῆσαν ovrog 
λαβὼν Se rove πεντεαρτουσ Kat Tov 
6vo ἴχθυασ ἀαναβλεψασ' cw τον ovpavov 
προσηῦξατο και εὐλογησεν em avrowr 
καὶ εἐδιδου Tow μαθηταισ παρατιθεναι 
Tow οχλοισ᾽ καὶ εφαγον και εχορτασθησαν 
παντεσ καὶ ἤρθη ro περισσευμα των 
κλασματων Koduot Sexadvo 
(Fol. 221 6.) 


IX, 


10 


11 


14 


15 
16 


SEC LUCA 


iohanen ego decollaui quis est autem 
hic de quo ego haec audio 
et quaerebat uidere eum et reuersi 
apostoli narrauerunt ei quanta 
fecerunt etadsumens eos 
recessit seorsum in castellum 
quod dicitur bedsaida turbae autem 
cognoscentes secutae sunt eum et 
suscipiens eos loquebatur 
ills deregno dei 
et qui opus habebant sanitatis 
eius omnes curabat 
dies autem coepit declinare accedentes autem 
duodecim dixerunt ad eum dismitte 
turbas ut euntes in proxima 
castella et uillas maneant 
quoniam hic in deserto loco sumus 
dixit autem ad eos date illis uos 
manducare ad illi dixerunt non sunt nobis 
plus quam quinque panes et duo pisces 
nisi forte nos euntes emamus 
in omnem populum hunc escas 
erant enim uiri ut quinque milia 
dixit autem ad discipulos suos 
reclinate eos discubitiones sicut 
quinquagenos et fecerunt sic 
&ccipiens autem quinque panes et 
duos pisces aspiciens in caelum 
orauit et benedixit super eos 
et dabat discipulis adponere 
turbis et manducauerunt et saturati sunt 
omnes et sublatum est quod superauit 
fractamentorum cophini duodecim 
(Fol. 222a.) 


Cap. IX. 9—17. 


200 


qd 
— 


— 


Ij 


[Ξ| 


: καὶ ἐγενετὸ EV TW εἰναι αντουσ καταμογασ 


συνῆσαν avro ot μαθηται καὶ emporqo ey 
avrova Acywy τινα με Xeyovaty 


ot οχλοι εἰναι οι δε αποκριθεντεσ 

ειπαν Ἰωανην τον βαπτιστην 

αλλοι δεηλειαν ἡ ενα των προφητων 
Ειπεν Se αυτοισ ὕμεισ δε τινα με 


λεγετε εἰναι αποκριθεισ δεο πετροσ' 


: εἰπὲν rov χρν ὕιον rov Ov : ὃ δε επιτειμησασ 


αυτοισ παρηγγειλεν μηδενι λεγειν rovro 


εἰπὼν ort Set Tov tov του ανθρωπου 
πολλα παθειν και αποδοκιμασθηναι 
ὕπο των πρεσβυτέρων και ἀρχιερεων 
καὶ γραμματεων καὶ ἀποκταγθηναι 
και μεθ μερασ τρεισ ἀναστηναι 

ἔλεγεν Se rpoo παντασ «tis θελει 
oruro μον ἐρχεσθε ἀαρνησασθω 
εαντον καὶ ακολουθειτω μοι 


oc yap ay Gedy την ψυχην avrov σωσαι 
ἀπολεσει αὐτὴν og Say ἀπολέσῃ 


τὴν ψυχὴν avrov ενεκενε μου 
OvTOC σωσει αὐτὴν τιγαρ ὠφελει 
ἀνθρωπον κερδησαι rov κοσμον ολον 


εαντον δεαπολεσαι ἢ ζημιωθηναι 


: og yap av αιπεσχυνθὴ ej kac τουσ ἐμουσ 


τοῦτον 0 Utoc Tov ayÜporrov επαισχυνϑθησεται 
— 
eray eAU ev τὴ Sogy avrov Kat Tov πρσ avrov 


καὶ TOV ayusv ἀγγελων : Neyw δε 


: ὕμειν ort αληθωσ εἰσιν rier 


Tuv WE ἐεστωτων Ot OV μὴ γευσωνται 
Üavarov εωσ av ειδωσιν Tov ὕιον 
tov ἀνθρωπου epxopevov ev τὴ 908 avrov 
Eyevero δε pera rove λογονσ τουτουσ 
(Fol. 222 5.) 


IX. 18 


2I 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


SEC LUCAN. 


Et factum est cum essent, soli 


erant cum eo discipuli et interrogauit 
eos dicens quem me dicunt 

turbaeesse ad illi respondentes 
dixerunt iohanen baptistam 


alii autem helian aut unum ex profetis 


dixit autem illis uos autem quem me 


dicitisesse — respondens autem petrus 
dixit xpm filium del ad ille increpauit 
eis et praecepit nemini dicere hoo 
dicens. quoniam oportet filium hominis 
multa pati etexproprari 

&presbyteris eta principibus sacerdotum 
etscribis et occidi 


et post tres dies resurgere 


dicebat autem ad omnes si quis uult 


post me uenire abneget 

semetipsum etsequaturme 

qui enim uoluerit animam suam saluare 
perdet eam qui autem perdiderit 
animam suam propter me 

hic salbabit eam quid enim prodeest 
homini lucrari mundum totum 
semetipsum autem perdere aut iactum pati 
qui enim confusus fuerit me et meos 
hunc filius hominis confundetur 

cum uenerit in regno suo et patris sui 
etsanctorum angelorum dico autem 
uobis quoniam ueresunt quidam 

qui hic stant qui non gustabunt 
mortem usque cum uideant filium 


hominis uenientem in gloria sua 


factum est autem post haec uerba 


(Fol. 223 a.) 


Cap. IX. 18— 38. 


Saf 


wore ἡμεραι οκτω καὶ παραλαβων 

πετρον και ακωβον και wayyy 

aveBy εἰσ ro οροσ προσευξασθαι 

καὶ €yevero ἐν τω προσευχεσθαι avrov 

7 (dea. τον πρόσωπον avrov ἠλλοιωθη 

καὶ οἵματισμοσ αὐτον λευκοσ ἐξαστραπτω 
και ἴδου ανδρεσ Svo συνελαλουν avro 

qw Se μωῦσησ και ἡλειασ οφθεντεσ «v δοξη 
eXeyov Se ryv εἐξοδον avrov. ἣν μελλει 
πληρουν εἰσ Ἱερουσαλήμ οδεπετροσ 

και οἱ συν avro ἡσαν βεβαρημενοι ὕπνω 
διαγρηγορησαντεσ δε ἴδον την δοξαν avrov 
και Tove δυο ανδρασ τουσ συνεστωτασ αντω 
και eyevero ev Tw διαχωρισθηναι avrove 
ἀπαντοῦυ εἰπεν o TeTpod Tw ἣν επιστατα 
καλον ἐστιν ἡμασ ὧδε εἰναι θελεισ 

ποιήσω ὧδε τρεισ σκηνασ μίαν σοι 

και μιαν μωῦσει και μιαν ἡλεια 

μὴ edwo a λεγει Tavra δεαντον λεγοντοσ' 
eyevero νεφελῃ και επεσκιασεν avrovo 
εφοβηθησαν δε εν Tw exewova 

εἰσελθειν εἰσ τὴν νεφελην Kat φωνὴ ἡλθε 
«x Tne νεφελησ λεγουσα ουὅτοσ ἐστιν o doe μου 
οαγαπητοσ «y  ηυδοκησα | axovere avrov 
και ev τω γενεσθαι τὴν φωνὴν ευρεθὴ 

- povoc avrot δε εσειγησαν και οὐδενι 
απηήγγειλαν εν εκειναισ ταισ ἡμεραισ 


: ὠνεθεασαν €ycveroÓe δια ro ἡμερασ 


κατελθοντα avrov απο TOV ορουσ' συνελθειν 

avro οχλον πολυν Kat ἴδου ανὴρ 

aro rov oxAov εβοησεν λεγων διδασκαλε 

δεομαι σου επιβλεψῴον ert rov ὕιον μου 

ort μονογενὴσ μοι ἐστιν λαμβανει yap 
(Fol. 223.) 


ΙΧ. 


29 


33 


34 


' a6 


37 


38 


39 


SEC LUCAN 


A — 00 — 00 ΤΩ, 


201 


quasi dies octo et adsumens 

petrum et iacobum et iohanen 

ascendit in montem orare 

et factum est cum oraret 

species uultus eius mutata est 

et uestimenta eius alba scoruscantia 

et ecce duo uiri conloquebantur cum eo 

erat autem moyxses et helias uisi in gloria 

dicebant autem exitum eius quem incipit 

conplerein hierusalem petrus autem 

et qui cum eo erant. erant grauati somno 

euigilantes autem uiderunt gloriam eius 

et duos uiros qui simul stabant cum eo 

et factum est cum separarentur ab eo 

dixit petrusadihm magister 

bonum estnobishicesse uis 

facio hic tria tabernacula unum tibi 

et unum moysi et unum heliae 

nesciens quiddicit. haec autem eo dicente 

facta est nubs et obumbrauit eos 

timuerunt autem in eo cum illi 

introierunt in nubem et uox uenit 

de nube dicens hic est filius meus 

dilectus in quo benesensi audite eum 

et cum facta fuisset uox inuentus est 

ihs solus ipsi autem tacuerunt et nulli 

dixerunt in illis diebus 

quae uiderunt factum est autem per diem 

descendente eo de monte conuenire 

ei turbam multam et ecce uir 

deturba exclamauit dicens magister 

rogote respice super filium meum 

quoniam unicus mihi est accipit enim 
(Fol. 224a.) 


Car. IX. 28— 39. 


26 


[Ὁ] 


avrov εξαιφνησ πνευμα και ρήσσει 
καὶ σπαρασσει μετα αφρον και μογισ 
ἀποχωρεῖ απ avrov και συντριβει avrov 
καὶ εδεηθὴην rov μαθητων cov ἵνα 
απαλλαξωσιν avrov και ovk ηδυνηθησαν 
— 

αποκριθεισ Se o ja. εἰπεν o yevea 
amore και διεστραμμενη εωσ ποτε ἐσομαι 
᾿ προσ ὕμασ' και ανεξομαι ὕμων 
προσένεγκε Toy ὕιον σον’ ercóe 
προσερχομενον avrov eppyfey avrov 
To δαιμονιον Kat συνεταραξεν' 

-- 
επετειμησεν δεοιησ τω ἀακαθαρτω 
πνευματι καὶ αφηκεν avrov. καὶ 
απεδωκεν τον Tada τω πατρι αὐτου 
ἐπάντεσ δε ἐξεπλήσσοντο επι Τὴ 

€ 
μεγαλιοτητι του Üv. : παντων δε 
θαυμαζοντων eri πασιν occ εἐποιει 
ειπεν προσ rove μαθητασ ovrov 


θεσθαι ὕμεισ eve τα wra ὕμων rove Xoyove 


SEC LUCAN 
— — SY — 


illum desubito spiritus et adlidit 
et disrumpit cum spuma et uix 
recedet ab eo et contribulat eum 
et praecatus sum discipulos tuos ut 


dimittant eum et ron potuerunt 


incredula et peruersa usquequo ero 
&d uos et patiar uos 

adduc filium tuum | adhuc autem 
&ccedenteeo adlisit eum 

daemonium et conturbabit 

inperauit autem ihs in mundo 
spiritui etdimisiteum et 

reddidit puerum patri suo 

omnes autem stupuebanl in 
magnitudine dei omnium autem 
mirantium in omnibus quae faciebat 
dixit ad discipulos suos 


poniteuos in aures uestras uerba 


sR j 


> 
xe) 


respondens autem ihs dixit o generatio 
| 


: τουτουσ o yap ὕιοσ Tov ayÜporrov ista filius enim hominis 


μέλλει παραδιδοσθαι εἰσ χειρασ᾽ ; incipiet tradi in manus 
ανθρωπων ot δεγνοουν To ρημα 45 hominum illi autem ignorabant uerbum 
TOVTO Kat ἣν κεκαλυμμενον aT avrov hoe et erat coopertum ab eis 


iva μη αἰσθωνται avro και epoBovvro ut non sentirent illud et timebant 


Erepwrncat rept Tov ρηματοσ rovrov interrogare de uerbo hoc 
a, 
: τοτισ aven μειζων avrov. o deine 46, 47 quisnam esset maior eorum ihs autem 
wv rov διαλογισμον αὐτων uidens cogitationem eorum 
EOTHOEY Tap εαντον Kat ειπεν οσ ay 48 statuit ad se et dixit quicumque 


δεξηται ro παιδιον rovro ext Tw 


| 
| 
| 
T9c καρδιασ επιλαβομενοσ παιδιον β cordis adprehendens infantem 
| 
acceperit infantem hunc in 


ovopart pov ene δεχεται Kat TOV nomine meo me accipit et eum 


ATOTTELAGYTG με o yap μεκροτεροσ qui me misit qui autem minor est 
ἐν πασιν ὕμειν OVTOG ἐστε μεγασ in omnibus uobis hic erit magnus 


| 
(Fol. 224 5.) | (Fol. 225 a.) 


Car. IX. 39—48. 


[9f 


— 


pe : 
— 


mY c — 
KAT AOYKAN 
—— υ. — 
αποκριθεισ Oe iwayne εἰπεν επιστατα 
εἰδομεν τινα επιτω ovopart σὸν 
ἐκβαλλοντα δαιμονια και ἐκωλυσαμεν 
avrov ort οὐκ ἀακολουθει μεθ ἡμχον 
---- 
Ειπεν δεο ιησ μὴ κωλυετε avrov 


og yap ovk ἐστιν καθυμων ὕπερ ὕμων 


: ἐστιν “eyevero Se εν τω πλήρουσθαι 


Tag ἡμερασ τὴσ ἀαναλημψεωσ avrov 


και αὐυτοσ τὸ προσωπον αυτου εστηριξεν 
Tov πορενυεσθαι εἰσ Ἱερουσαλήμ. 
και απεστειλεν a-yyeXove πρὸ προσωπον 
avrov και πορευθεντεσ εἰσηλθον 
ew κυμην σαμαρειτων ὠστεαιτοιμασαι 
αντω καὶ οὐκ εδεξαντο avrov. om 
TO poc enrov αντου Ἣν 7ropevopuvev 
ec Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἵἴδοντεσ 0€ ot μαθηται 
avroviaxwBoo Kat wayvyo εἰπὸν 
A 
κεθελεισ εἰπωμεν vp kara qvac 
ἐκ TOV ουρανου και ἀαναλωσαι avTOv 
wc καὶ ἡλειασ ποιησεν στραφεισ δε 
εἐκετειμῆσεν αντοισ και εἰπεν 
ovk οἰδατε ποιου πνευματοσ ἐστε 
και ετορευθησαν ew erepay κωμὴν 

καὶ ἐγενετὸ πορενομενων αὐτῶν 
ἐν τή obo εἰπεν τισ προσ avrov 
ακ woo OTOV αν ὕπαγεισ 

— 

καὶ εἶπεν avro 0 ijo. at adwrexes φωλεουσ 
ἐχουσιν Kat TO, πετεινα TOV ουρανου 
xarac κηνωσεισ o δεῦιοσ του avOpwrov 
ουκ exe που τὴν κεφαλὴν κλεινὴ 

Curev δε προσ ετερον ακολουθι μοι 
οδεειπεν εἐπιτρεψον pot πρωτον 
ἀπελθοντα θαψαι rov πατερα μου 


(Fol. 225 5.) 


IX. 49 


$4 


SEC 203 
— —- 
respondens autem iohanes dixit magister 
uidimus quendam in nomine tuo 
eicientem daemonia et prohibus 


eum quia non sequitur nobiscum 


dixit autem ihs nolite prohibere eum 


qui enim non es contra uos pro uobis 
est -factum est autem ut conpleretur 
dies adsumptionis eius 
et ipse uultum suum firmauit 
ut abiret in hierusalem 
et misit nuntios ante faciem 
suam et euntes intrauerunt 
in castellum samaritanorum ut praepararent 
eiet non susceperunteum quia 
uultus eius erat iens 
inhierusalem uidentes autem discipuli 
eius iacobus et iohanes dixerunt 
dme uis dicimus ignem descendere 
de caelo et.consumere eos 
sicut et helias fecit conuersus autem 
in crepauit eos et dixit 
nescitis cuius spiritui estis 
et abierunt in alium castellum 

Et factum est euntibus illis 
inuia dixit quidam ad illum 
se quar te quocumque hieris 

et dixit illiihs wul pes cubilia 
habent et uolatilia caeli 
habitacula filius autem hominis 


non habet ubi caput reclinet 


dixit autem ad alium sequere me 


ad ille dixit permitte mihi primum 
ut eam et sepeliam patrem meum 
(Fol. 226 a.) 


Cap. IX. 49—59. 


204 KAT AOYKAN 


O àe «urev avro αφεσ Tove vexpove IX. 60 
θαψαι rove eavrov vexpova ov de 
πορευθεισ διαγγελλε την βασιλειαν τον ϑυ 
pr : Εἰπεν δε καὶ erepor ἀκολουθησω σοι κε 61 
ἐπιτρεψον δε μοι πρωτον αποταξασθαι 
TOUT εἰσ OLKOV pov οδε ino εἰπεν avro 62 
Ουδεισ εἰσ τα οπισω βλεπων καὶ eriBadrAwv 
τὴν χείρα avrov er aporpoy εὐθετοσ ἐστιν 
et : εἰστην βασιλειαν Tov 0v :απεδειξεν Se X.1 
και erepova ‘of και απεστιλεν avrova aya Óvo 
προ προσωπου AVTOV εἰσ TAYTA τόπον καὶ πολιν 
pu : ουεμελλεν ἐρχεσθαι : ἔλεγεν Óc poo αὐτοῦ 2 
o θερισμοσ πολυσ οι δε epyarat ολιγοι 
δεηθητετου KV TOV θερισμον omo 
ἐργατασ ἐκβαλὴ εἰσ Tov θερισμον avrov 
e: Yrayeras ἴδον eyo αποστελλω ὕμασ wo 3 
αρνασ μέσον λνκων μη βασταζετε 4 
pe :BadAarriov μη πηραν μη ὕποδηματα 
και pndeva kara, τὴν οδον ασπασησθε 
pa tew nv ay δε εἰσελθητε. πρωτον owtay 5 
Aeyere εἰρηνὴ Tw owo rovro 
καν 1) εκει "LOC. εἰρηνηὴσ ἐεπαναπαυσετε ό 
er avrov ἡ εἰρηνηὕμων εἰ δε μηγε 
ed υμασ επιστρεψει ἢ eum ὕμων 
eB : ey aury Se Ty οικεια pevere ἐσθοντεσ 7 
και πεινοντεσ TG. παρ GvTOV 
αἀξιοσ yap o εργατὴσ τον μισθον αὐτου 
μὴ μεταβαινετε απο οικιασ εἰσ 
py : οἰκιαν: καὶ εἰσ ἣν αν πολιν 8 
eurepxna e και δεχωνται ὕμασ 
«avere Ta παρατιθεμενα ὕμειν 
και θεραπενετε ουσ «v αυτῇ 9 


ασθενουντασ και Aeyere avrow. 


(Fol. 226 b.) 


SEC LUCAN 
-- — ὕὄὕ.. — 
ad ille dixit illi sine mortuos 


sepelire mortuossuos tuautem 
uade et praedica regnum del 

dixit autem et alius sequar te dme 
permitte autem mihi primum abrenuntiare 
qui sunt in domum meam ihs autem dixit illis 
nemo retro aspiciens et inmittens 
manum suam in aratrum aptus est 
in regnum dei ostendit autem 

Etalios lxxii. etmisiteosbinos ante faciem 
suam in omnem locum et ciuitatem 
ubi habebat uenire dicebat autem ad eos 
messis multa operarii autem pauci 
praecamini ergo dom messis ut 
mittat operarios in messem suam 

ite ecce ego mitto uos sicut 
agnos in medio luporum nolite baiolare 
sacellu non peram non calciamenta 
et neminem in uiam salutaueritis 
in quamcumque autem intraueritis domum 
dicite pax domui huic 
et si fuerit ibi filius pacis requiescet 
in eum pax uestra si quominus 
iu uos reuertetur pax uestra 
in ipsa autem domo manete edentes 
etuibentes quae sunt ab eis 
dignus est enim operarius mercedem suam 
nolite transire de domo in 
domum et in quamcumque ciuitatem 
intraueritis et acceperint uos 
edite quae adponuntur uobis 
et curate qui sunt in ea 
infirmi et dicite illis 

(Fol. 227 a.). 


Capp. IX. 60—X. 9. 


ΓΕ, 


ESI 


: ἡγγικεν eh υμασ 3 βασιλεια του ὃν 


εἰσ ἣν Say πολιν εἰσελθητε και μη 
δεξωνται ὕμασ εξελθοντεσ εἰσ rac 


πλατειασ αὐτὴσ εἰπατε και τὸν KOVLOPTOV 


τον κολληθεντα ne ex THE 
πολεωσ ὕμων εἰσ rovg ποδασ 


απομασσομέεθα ὕμειν πλὴν rovro 
γεινωσκετε οτι ἤγγικεν ἢ 

ἡ βασιλειατου Ov λεγω δεῦμειν 

ort σοδομοισ ἀνεκτοτερον εἐσται 

εν τὴ βασιλεια του bv ἢ τὴ πολει εκεινὴ 


: ovat got xopofaiy και βεδσαῖδα ort 


ει «v τυρω και σιδωνι εγενηθησαν 

a4 δυναμεισ a4 γενομεναι εν ὕμειν 

vaa ay ey σακκω καὶ σποδω καθημεναι 
μετενοησαν πλὴν rvpo και σιδωνι 


ἀνεκτότερον ἐσται ἢ Ley 


καὶ συ καφαρναουμ. μὴ ewo ουρανου 
ὑψωθησὴ η «wo adov καταβησήη 


: οακονων ὕμων ἐμοῦ ακονει 


και οαθετων ὕμασ εμεαθετει 


οδεέμου ακονων ακουειτου 


: ἀποστειλαντοσ με : ὕπεστρεψαν δε 


o. of: μετα χαρασ λεγοντεσ Ke 
καὶ Ta δαιμονια ὕποτασσεταιήμειν 
εν τω ονοματι σὸν εἰπεν δεαντοισ 
εθεωρουν rov σαταναν wo 
αστραπην εκ Tov ουρανου πεσόντα 
ἴδου διδωμι ὕμειν τὴν ἐξουσιαν 
TOV πατειν ETAVW τῶν οφεων 
καὶ των σκορπίων καιεπιπασαν 
τὴν δυναμιν του εχθρου και 
ουδεν ὕμασ αδικησει πλην 

(Fol. 227 δ.) 


10 


It 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


20 


LUC 


— 


S 205 
to, 


say 


Jay 


adpropiauit superuos regnum del 
in quacumque autem ciuitate intraueritis et no 
accipient uos exeunt es in 
plateis eius dicite et puluerem 
qui adhesit nobis de 
ciuitate uestra in pedibus 
extergimus uobis uerum tamen hoc 
scitote quoniam adpropinquauit 
regnum dei dicoautem uobis 
quóniam sodomis tolerabilius erit 
in regno del quam ciuitati illi 
uae tibi chorozain et be dsaida quia 
si tyru et sidoni factae essent 
uirtutes quae factae sunt in uobis 
olim iam in sacco et sidone resedentes 
paenitentiam egissent uerum tyro et sidoni 
tolerabilius erit quam uobis 
et tu cafarnaum num quid usque ad cuelum 
exaltaueris aut usque ad infernum descendet 
quiaudit uos meaudit 
etquispernituos me spernit 
qui autem meaudit audit eum 
qui me misit reuersisuntautem 
Ixxii. cum gaudio dicentes dme 
et daemonia subdita sunt nobis 
innominetuo dixit autem ad eos 
uidebam sanan sicut 
fulgur de caelo cadentem 
ecce do uobis potestatem 
ut calcetis super serpentes 
et scorpiones et super omnem 
uirtutem inimici et 
nihil uos nocebit uerum tamen 
(Fol. 228 a.) 


Cap. X. 9—20. 


206 KAT AOYKAN 
—— — — 
εν TOVTO μὴ χερετε or. ra Satpovea ὕμειν x. 
vroragceras xaipere 0e orc Ta. ονοματα 
ὕμων eypady ev τω ovpayw . 
pn: Ev avr δε τὴ wpa ἡγαλλιασατο 21 


sas 


sR fs 


exe 


pxp : 
C 


εν TW πνευματι TW αγιω και εἰπεν 
εἐξομολογουμε σοι πατερ Ke Tov 
ovpayov καὶ τὴσ 70 ort απεκρυψασ 
TOVTO. ATO συνετῶν καὶ σοῴων 

και απεκαλυψασ avra νηπιοισ 


ναι o πατὴρ ort ουτωσ eyevero εὐδοκια 


: ἐνπροσθεν cov : παντα μοι παρεδοθη 22 


απο TOV πατροσ Kat ovder γεινωσκει 
τισ ἐστιν οὕιοσ εἰ μὴ οπατὴρ καιτισ 


ἐστιν o πατὴρ εἰ μὴ οὕιοσ καὶ o ay 


: βουληται o toc ἀποκαλυψαι : στραφεισ δε 23 


προσ rovg μαθητασ εἰπεν αυτοισ μακαριοι 
ot οφθαλμοι οἱ βλεποντεσ a βλεπετε 


KaLaxovovres a akovere Aeyo yap ὕμειν 24 
ort πολλοι προφηται ηθελησαν ειδειν 
a ὕμεισ βλεπετε και ovx εἰδον Kat akougat 


α ὕμεισ ακονετε καὶ OUK ἤκουσαν 


: ἀνεστή de Tur νομικοσ ἐεκπιραζων . 25 


avrov καὶ λεγων τι ποιήσασ ζωὴν 
auovioy κληρονομήσω o de εἰπεν 26 
προσ GVTOV εν TW νομω γεγραπται 


TWO QVAYCLVWO KELT 
— 


O δεαποκριθεισ are αγαπησεισ Kv 27 


rov Oy cov εν ολη Ty καρδια σον Kat 


ev ody τὴ ζνυχη σον και εν ολη τη ia xvi σον 


Kat TOV πλησιον σοῦ ὡσσεαυτον ᾿ 


Ειπεν 9e avro ορθωσ απεκριθησ 28 
TOVTO Trove. και ζησεισ : ὃ δεθελων 29 
eavroy δικαιωσαι εἰπεν προσ τον ap 

(Fol. 228 5.) 


in hoc nolite gaudere quoniam daemonia uobis 
subdita sunt - gaudete autem quia nomina 
uestra scripta sunt in caelis 
in ipsa autem hora exultauit 
in spiritu sancto et dixit 
confiter tibi pater dme 
caeli et terrae quoniam abscodisti 
haec ab intellegentibus et sapientibus 
et reuelasti ea paruolis 
etiam pater quoniam sic beneplacitum 
in conspectu tuo omnia mihi tradita sunt 
apatre etnemo cognoscit 
quiest filius nisi pater et quis 
est pater nisi filius et cui 
uoluerit filius reuelare conuersus autem 
ad discipulos suos dixit eis beati 
oculi qui uident quae uidetis 
et audientes quae auditis dico enim uobis 
quoniam multi profetae uoluerunt uidere 
quae uos uidetis et non uiderunt et audi 
quae uosauditis et non audierunt 
surrexit autem quidam legis doctor temptans 
eum etdicens quid faciens uitam 
aeternam hereditabo ad ille dixit 
δα eum inlege quid scriptum est 
quo modo legis 
ad ille respondens dixit dililges dom 
dm tuum in toto corde tuo et 
in tota anima tua et in tota uirtute tua 
et proximum tuum sicut te ipsum 
dixit autem illi recte respondisti 
hocfacetuiues adille uolens 
se iustificare dixit ad ihm 
(Fol. 229 a.) 


Cap. X. 20— 29. 


KAT AOYKAN 

—— — — 
και τισ ἐστιν pov πλησιον ὕπολαβων δε 
ο ino eurey avro. ανθρωποσ τισ 
xareBevey απο ἱερουσαλημ εἰσ ἴεριχω 
και λησταισ περιεπεν οἱ και εκδυσαντεσ 
και πληγασ ἐπειθεντεσ ἀπηλθον 
αφεντεσ ἡμιθανη κατα τυχα 
ἵερευσ τισ καταβαινων εν τη οδω εκεινὴ 
και ιἰδων avrov αντιπαρηλθεν ομοιωσ 
δε και λευειτὴσ γενομενοσ kara τὸν 
τόπον καὶ wy avrov αντιπαρηλθεν 
σαμαριτησ δε rw οδενων ηλθεν κατ αὐτὸν 
και Suv avrov εσπλαγχισθη Kat 
προσεέλθων κατεδησεν τα τραυματα avrov 
επιχεων eAeov και owov καὶ επιβιβασασ 
αυτον €rrt TO ἴδιον κτήνοσ ἤγαγεν αὐτὸν 
ew πανδοχειον καὶ επεμεληθη avrov 
και ert THY αυριον ἐκβαλων δηναρια Svo 
ἐδωκεν Tw πανδοκει Kat εἰπεν 
εἐπιμεληθητι avrov. και οτι αν προσ 
δαπανήσεισ ἐν τω ἐπανερχεσθαι με 


eye αποδωσω τινα ovy δοκεισ πλησίον 


γέγονεναι Tov ἐγ ΤΕσΌΡΤΟΟ εἰσ Τουσ ληστασ 


οδεειπεν οποιησαστοελεοσ μετ avrov 


any . 
eur€y δε οτησ᾽ πορενου Kat συ ποιει ομοιωσ 


Eyevero Se εν τω πορευνεσθαι avrov 
εἰσελθειν εἰσ κωμὴν τινα yvyyg δετισ 
ονοματι μαρθα ὕπεδεξατο avrov 
εἰσ TOV οἰκον αὐυτὴσ καὶ τήδεην αδελφη 
καλουμενὴ μαρια ἡ παρακαθισασα 

i, 
apa Tove ποδασ TOV κυ ἤκονετον λογον 
ἡ δεμαρθα περιεσπατο περι πολλὴν 


-ς 
διακονιαᾳν επισταθεισ δε ειπεν κε 


ov μελι σοι οτι ἡ αδελῴφη pov κατελιπεν pe 


(Fol 229 6.) 


31 


32 


33 
34 


35 


36 


37 


39 


‘SEC LUCAN 207 
— 0 — —À 


et quis est mihi proximus. suscipiens autem 
ihs dixitei homo quidam 

descendebat ab hierusalem in iericho 

et incidit in latrones . a.d illi dispoliantes 
et plagas inponentes abierunt 
dimittentes semiuiuum forte autem 
sacerdos quidam descendens per uiam 1118. 
et uidens eum pertransiuit similiter 
autem et leuita factus ad 

locum et uidens eum pertransiuit 
samaritanus autem quidam transiens uenit ad eu 
et uidens eum misertus est et 

accedens conligauit uulnera eius 
infundens oleum et uinum et inponens 
eum super suum pecus adduxit eum 

in diuersorium et curam habuit eius 
etincrastinum eiciens denarios duos 
deditstablario et dixit 

curam habeto eius et quidquid super 
erogaueris cum reuertor 

ego restituam quem ego putas proximum 
fuisse qui incidit in latrones 

ad ille dixit qui fecit misericordiam cum eo 


dixitautem ihs uade et tu fac similiter 


factum est autem cum iter faceret 


introibit in castellum quoddam *multer aute 

nomine martha suscepit eum 

in domum suam cui erat soror 

nomine maria quae adsidens 

ad pe des dmi audiebat uerbum 

martha autem abalienabaturin multum 

ministerium instans autem dixit ad dome 

non tibi cura est quia soror mea dereliquid me 
(Fol. 230 a.) 


Cap. X. 29—40. 


208 KAT AOYK 


μονὴν διακονειν εἰπὸν ovy avr x. 
iva μου αντιλαβητε αποκριθεισ Seo ae 41 


eurey αὐτὴ μαρθα μαρθα GopyBaln-papiary 45 
ἀγαθὴν μεριδα e&eX«Caro - ουκ αφαιρεθησεται 
pky : avrgo* και €y€vero εν τω εἰναι αὑτὸν XI. 1 
εν TOTO τινι προσενχομενον καὶ Wo 
ἐπαύσατο εἰπεν ur των μαθήτων avrov 
προσ αὐτὸν Ke ddafov ἡμασ προσευχεσθαι 
καθωσ και Ἰωανησ εδιδαξεν rove 
μαθητασαντου οδὲε evrev οταν 2 
προσευχησθε μη BarroXoyevre wo οι λοιποι 
δοκουσιν yap weg. ori εν τή πολυλογεια 
, avrov εισακουσθησονται αλλα προσευχομενοι 
Aeyere πατερ ἡμῶν 0 ev τοισ ουρανοισ 
αγιασθήτω ονομα cov ed ἡμασ 
ἐλθέτω aov y βασιλεια γενηθήτω ro 
θελημα σον wo ev ovpayw Kat ert γησ 
TOV APTOY μων TOV επιουσιον 3 
Soo ημειν onpepov ‘Kat αφεσ ἡμειν 4 
τα οφιλεματα ἡμων wo kac ne 
αφειομεν Tour οφειλεταισ pov 
καὶ μὴ εἰσενεγκὴσ ἡμασ εἰσ πειρασμον 
αλλαρυσαι ἡμασ aro TOV πονῆρον 
Lm : και €urey rur εξὕμων 5 
εξει φιλον και πορευσεται προσ avrov 
μεσανυκτιου καὶ €pet avro pire 
χρησον μοιτρεισ aprova επειδὴ 6 
φιλοσ μοιπαρεστιν aar αγρον kat ovk exo 
o παραθήσω avro. εκεινοσ δεεσωθεν 7 
αποκρειθεισ epe, μὴ μοι κοπουσ παρεχε 
157 ἡ θυρα κεκλισται και τα παιδια μον μετ ἐμον 
εν T kotry ἐστιν ov δυναμαι αναστασ 


δουναι σοι λεγω ὕμειν ov δωσει avro 8 
(Fol. 230 5.) 


SEC LUCAN 
——— - 
solam ministrare dic ergo illi 
ut meadiubet respondens autem ihs 
dixit ei martha martha turbas te maria 
bonam partem elegit quae non auferetur 
abea  etfactum est cum esset 
in loco quodam orantem et cum 
cessauit dixit quidam de discipulis eius 
adeum dme doce nos orare 
sicut etiohanes docuit nos 
discipulossuos ad ille dixit cum 
oratis nolite multum loqui sicut et ceteri 
putant enim quidam quia in multiloquentia 
sua exaudientur sed orantes 
dicite pater noster qui in caelis es 
sanctificetur nomen tuum super nos 
ueniat regnum tuum fiat 
uoluntas tua sicut in caelis et in terra 
panem nostrum cottidianum 
da nobis hodie et dimitte nobis 
debita nostra sicut et nos 
dimittimus debitoribus nostris 
et ne inducas nos in temptatione 


sed liberanos a malo 


Et dixit quis ex uobis 


habebit amicum et ibit ad eum 
media nocte et dicit illi amie 
commoda mihi tres panes quia 
amicus mihi superuenit de agro et non habeo 
quod adponam illi ad ille deintus 
respondens dicit noli mihi molestus esse 
jam osteum clusum est et pueri mecum 
in cubili sunt non possum surgens 
daretibi dico uobis non dabit ei 

(Fol. 231 a.) 


Capp. X. 40—XI. 8. 


pKe : 


SRS | SRS 


f&/ 31 


: «xfjaAAe ra δαιμονια 


: exBadew : 
: ef ovpayov εζητουν παρ avrov : avrog δε 


ἀναστασ δια τὸ εἰναι avrov φιλον avrov 

διαγε τὴν αναιδιαν avrov εγερθεισ 

δωσει οσον χρηζει : καγω ὕμειν λεγω 

αετειτέ καὶ δοθησεται ὕμειν ζητειτε 

καὶ ευρήσεται kpovere καὶ ανοιχθησεται ὕμειν 
Tuc yap οαιτων λαμβανει και o (grow 


€UpLO KEL καὶ TW KpOVOVTL ἀνοίγεται 


τισ δε εξ υμων Toy warepa οὗιοσ αἰτήσει 


αρτον - μὴ λιθον αυτω εκιδωσει ἢ και 
ἔχθυν αἰτησει μὴ αντι ἴχθυοσ οφιν avro 
επιδωσει «ay δε και wov αἰτήσει μὴ 
σκορπιον GvTO επειδωσει εἰ ουν ὕμεισ 
πονήροι οντεσ οἰδατεδοματα αγαθα 
διδοναι Tour τεκνοισ ὕμων ποσω μαλλο᾽ 

o πατῊρ o εξ ουρανου δωσει αγαθον Sopa 
Tow αἰτουσιῖν αὐτὸν ταυτα δε εἰποντοσ 
avrov προσῴερετε avro δαιμονιζομενοσ 
κωφοσ καὶ ἐκβαλοντοσ avrov παντεσ 


: εθαυμαζον * και τινεσ εξ αυτων εἰπὸν 


εν βεελζεβουλ ἀρχοντι των δαιμονίων 
: οδεαποκριθεισ 


εἰπεν roo Svvarat σατανασ σαναν 


ετεροι Se πειραζοντεσ σημειον 


εἰδωσ avrov τα διανοηματα 


eurey avrow πασα βασιλεια διαμερισθεισα 


€d εαυτὴν ἐρημονται και οἰκοσ ἐπ᾿ οἰκον πεσιται 


ει δὲκαὶ οσατανασ | € «avrov διεμερισθη 
ov σταθήσεται ἡ βασιλεια avrov ort Aeyere 
εν βεελζεβουλ εκβαλλειν μετα δαιμονια 
εἰ δεεγω εν βεελζεβουλ εκβαλλω 
τα δαιμονια ὕιοι ὕμων ev τι 
ἐκβαλλουσιν δια rovro avrot ὕμων 

(Fol. 231 5.) 


XI. 


10 


14 


16 


17 


SEC LUCAN 


fem, ey 


209 


surgens propter quod amicus eius sit 

propter inprobitatem eius surgens 

dabite quantum opus habet et ego dico uobis 
petite et dabitur uobis quaerite 

et inuenietis pulsate et aperietur uobis 

omnis enim qui petit accipit et qui querit 


inueniet - et pulsanti aperietur 


quis autem ex uobis patrem suum filius petit 


panem num quid lapidem ei dabit aut 
piscem petierit numquid pro pisce serpentem ei 
dabit etsiouum petierit num quid 
scorpionem ei dabit si ergo uos 
cum sitis iniqui scitis data bona 
dare filis uestris quanto magis 
peter de caelo dabit bonum datum 
petentibus eum haec autem dicente 
eo offerturilli daemonios us 
surdus eteiectoeo omnes 
mirabantur etquidam ex eis dixerunt 
in beelzebul principe dae moniorum 
eicit daemonia ad ille respondens 
dixit quodo potest satanas satanan 
eicere. alii autem temptantes signum 
de caelo quaerebantabeo ipseautem 
sciens eorum cogitationes 
dixit illis omne regnum diuisum 
super se deseretur et domus super domum cadet 
si autem et satanas super se diuisus est 
non stabit regnum eius quia dicitis 
in beelzebul eicere me daemonia 
si autem ego in beelzebul eicio 
daemonia fili uestri in quo 
eicient propter hoc ipsi uestri 

(Fol. 232 a.) 


Cap. XI. 8—19. 


21 


210 


: χείρονα TOV Tporrmov 


κριται ἐσονται" et de eyo εν δακτυλω θυ 
ἐκβαλλω τα δαιμονια apa εφθασεν 

ep υμασ ἡ βασιλεια του θυ oravo ἴσχυροσ 
καθωπλισμενοσ φυλασσει τὴν avAnv 

αντου €V (yv ἐστιν τα ὕπαρχοντα avrov 
cay δεϊσχυροτεροσ ἐπελθων την 

πανοπλίαν avrov αἰρει ej ἡ πεποιθεν 

και τα σκυλα avro διαδιδωσιν 

O μὴ ὧν μετ ἐμου κατ ἐμοῦ ἐστιν 


και O0 μὴ συναγων μετ ἐμου σκορπιζει 


: oray Se ro axaDaprov πνευμα εξελθη 


azo rov ayÜperrov διερχεται δια των ὕδρων 
τόπων ζητουν αναπαυσιν καὶ μὴ 
ευρισκον λεγει ὕποστρεψω εἰσ Tov 

otxoy μου οθεν εἐξηλθον και ελθων 
ευρισκι σεσαρωμενον κεκοσμήμενον 
πορενεται και παραλαμβανει αλλα 
ἐπταπνευματα πονήροτερα EavTOV 

και εἰσελθοντα κατοικει και yewverat 

ra ἐσχατα rov avOpunrov εκεινου 

* ἔγενετο δε 

ev τω Àeyew avrov ταντα γυνὴ Tur 
ἐπαρασα φωνὴν εκ Tov oxXov εἰπεν avro 
μακαριαὴ κοιλια ἡ βαστασασασε 

και μασθοι ova εθηλασασ — o Oe eurev 
μενουνγε μακαριοι οι akovoyTeg 


tov λογον του θυ και φυλασσοντεσ 


: τῶν d¢ oyAwy επαθροζομενων 


ἤρξατο Xeyew ἢ yevea avry γενεα 
πονήρα ἐστιν σημεῖον επειζητει 
καὶ σήμειον ov δοθήσεται avry 

€t μὴ To σήμειον ἴωνα καθωσ yap 


€yevero Lovag. σημίον τοισ γινευταισ 


(Fol. 232 ὁ.) 


XI. 


20 


21 


22 


23 


26 


29 


30 


SEG LUCAN 
— — SY — 


iudices erunt siautem ego in digito dei 
eicio daemonia forsitam adpropinquauit 
in uos regnum del quando fortis 
armatus custodit aulam 

suam in paceest substantia eius 

si autem fortior superuenerit 
armaturam eius tollit in qua confidet 
etspolia eius diuidet 

qui non est mecum contra me est 

et qui non congregat mecum dispargit 
cum autem immundus spiritus exierit 
ab homine uadit per arida 

loca quaerens requiem et non 
inueniens dicit reuertar in 

domum meam unde exiui et ueniens 
inuenit mundatum adornatum 

uadit et adsumit alios 

septem spiritus nequiores se 

etintrant et habitant et fiunt 

peiora prioribus factum est autem 

in eo cum diceret haec mulier quaedam 


eleuans uocem de pleue dixit illi 


‘B: nouissima hominis illius 


ueatus-uenter qui te baiolauit 

et mamillae quas suxisti ad ille dixit 

etiam beati qui audiunt 

uerbum dmi et custodiunt 

turbisautem congregatis 

coepit dicere generatio haeo generatio 

iniqua est signum quaerit 

et signum non dabitur ei 

nisi signum ionae sicut enim 

fuit jonas signum in nineuitis | 


(Fol. 233 a.) 


CaP. XI. 19—30. 


ΓΕ 


SEs 


SY —. 
KAT AOYKAN 
Se τ — 


ουτωσ᾽ ἐεσται Kat οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπου ΧΙ. 
τή γενεὰ ταυτὴ 
€ τῇ κοιλια του κητουσ €yevero 


και καθωσ ἴωνασ 


τρισ ἡμερασ καὶ τρεισ VUKTAT 
ουτωσ᾽ Kat 0 ὕιοσ του avOpurrou εν Tn yg 
βασίλισσα vorov ἐγερθησεται μετα των 31 
ανδρων Tho γενεασ ταντησ και 
κατακρίνει avrovg ori ἡλθεν εκ των 
πέρατων THT yo ακουσαι τὴν σοφιὰαν 
σολομωνοσ και dou πλεον σολομωνοσ 


: ὧδε : δυδεισ Avyvov αψασ εἰσ κρυπτὴν 33 


τιθησιν οὐδε iro τον μοδιον αλλα em τὴν 
λυχνιαν iva οἱ εἰσπορενομενοι ro φωσ 

βλεπωσιν : ὃ λυχνοσ του σωματοσ σου 34 
ἐστιν οοφθαλμοσ cov οταν ἢ οοφθαλμοσ σον 
απλουσ ray TO copa. σὸν φωτινον ἐστιν 

oray δε πονηροσ ἡ Kat τὸ σωμα σου ἐστιν 

σκοτινον ἐστιν εἰ OVV TO φωσ Τὸ εν σοι 35 


OKOTOOC' TO CKOTOC FOC OV 


: «bern δε avrov rw φαρισαιοσ 37 
tva apua T1201) per avrov ere Buy δε 
averegev ο δε φαρισαιοσ ypfaro 38 
διακρεινομενοσ εν eavro λεγειν 


δια τι ουπρωτον εβαπτισθη προτον 
— 
GpLOTOV 


νυν vj.€ur ot φαρισαιοι ὕποκριται 


eurev 0€ o KO προσ avrov 39 


To εξωθεν rov ποτηριον Kat Tov 


πινακοσ καθαριζετε τοδεεσωθεν 


ὕμων γεμει ἀρπαγήσ και πονηριασ 

adpover ovx o ποιησασ τὸ ἐσωθεν 40 
και TO εἐξωθεν ἐποιησεν πλην 41 
τα €Vovra Sore ελεημοσυνὴν 


και ἴδον παντα καθαρα εσται ὕμειν 


(Fol. 222 5.) 


Cap. XI 


SEC LUCAN 211 
sic erit et filius hominis 


generationihuic etsicutionas 
1n uentre ceti fuit 
tribus diebus et tribus noctibus 


sic et filius hominibus in terra 


regina austriexsurget cum 


uiris generationis huius et 

condemnabit eam quia uenit de 

finibus terrae audire sapientiam 

solomonis et ecce plus quam solomon 

hic nemo lucernam accendens in occultum 
ponit neque sub modium sed super 
candelabrum ut introeuntes lumen 

uideant lucerna corporis tui 

est oculus tuus cum est oculus tuus 
simplex totum corpus tuum lucidum est 
cum autem malus fuerit et corpus tuum est 
tenebrosum est.si ergo lumen quod in te est 


tenebrae sunt tenebrae quantae 


rogauit autem eum quidam pharisseum 


ut pranderet cum eo intrans autem 

recubuit pharisaeus autem coepit 

cogitare in semetipso dicens 

quare non primum baptizatus est antequam 

pranderet dixit autem dma ad eum | 

nunc uos farisae ypocritae 

quod a foris est calicis et 

catilli mundatis ab intus autem 

uestrum plenum est rapina et iniquitate 

stulti nonne qui fecit quod intus est 

et quod a foris est fecit; uerum tamen 

quae sunt date misericordiam 

et ecce omnia munda et erunt uobis 
(Fol. 234 a.) 


. 30— 41. 


219 KAT AOYK ‘BEC LUCAN 
— -. — 


pis : ἀλλα ovatipew Tow φαρισαιοισ XI. 42 sed uae uobis pharisaeis 
ort azroOekarovre TO NOVOT jov quoniam decimatis menta 
και TO πήγανον καὶ παν Aaxavoy et rutam et omne holus 
και rapepxeaÜat τὴν κρισιν και τὴν et praeteritis iudicium et 
prt > ἀγαπὴν rov θὺ :ὄναι ὕμειν φαρισαιοι ort ἀγαπατε 43 caritatem del uae uobis pharisaei quia 
τὴν πρωτοκαθεδριαν ev raur συναγωγαισ' diligitis primas sessiones in synagogis 
καὶ TOUS ασπασμουσ € TAL ἀγοραισ et salutationes in foro 
και πρωτοκλισιασ ev τοισ δειπνοισ et primos adcubitos in cenis 
phn: ova. ὕμειν γραμματεισ Kat φαρισαιοι 44 | u&euobisscribae et pharisaei 
or. ἐστε μνημεια αδηλα Kat ot quia estis monumenta sine specie et 
ανθρωποι exavw περιπατουντεσ homines supra ambulantes 
pro : οὐυκοιδασιν : αποκριθεισ δετιστων 45 nesciunt respondens autem quidam de 
νομίκων λέγει avro. διδασκαλε legis doctoribus dicit illi magister 
Tavra λεγων και ἡμασ ὕβρειζεισ haecdicens et nobis iniuriam facis 
o δε eurev και ὕμειν ovat row 46 ad illedixit etuobis uae 
νομικοισ ort φορτιζετε Tove legis doctoribus quoniam honeratis 
avOpurrove popria Suc Baxrara. homines honera quae non possunt portari 
kat avrot evt των δακτυλων ὕμων et ipsi uno digitorum uestrorum 
ee : oumpoow vere :ὄναι ὕμειν ort 47 non adtingitis uae uobis quoniam 
οἰκοδομειτε Ta μνημεια των acdificatis monumenta 
προφητῶν ot de rareper ὕμων profetarum patres autem uestri 
απεκτειναν avrovg apa μαρτυρειτε 48 occiderunt eos ergo testificatis 
μὴ συνευδοκειν Tow ἐργοισ των nonconsentire operibus 
TATEPWY ὕμων OTL GUTOL μεν patrum uestrorum quia ipsi quidem 
απεκτειναν avrove ὕμεισ δε occiderunt eos uosautem 
pua : OLKOOOpLELTE : δια rovro αποστελλω 49 sedificatis propter hoc mitto 
εἰσ avrovo προφητασ Kat αποστολουσ in eos profetas et apostolos 
και εξαντων αποκτενουσιν ex eis interficient 
. και ἐεκδιωξουσιν iva εκζητηθὴ £o et persequentur ut exquirat 
TO Ata παντων TOV προφητων sanquis omnium profetarum ; 
TO ἐκχυννομενον απὸ καταβολησ quod effunditur a constitutione 
KOGJLOU εωσ THO γενεασ ταυτὴσ mundi usquae ad generationem hanc 
απο αἱματοσ αβελ «oo αἱματοσ 51 asanguineabel usquae ad sanguine 
(Fol. 234 5.) (Fol. 235 a.) 


Cap. XI. 41— κι. 


ζαχαριονυ ὕιου βαραχειον ov εφονευσαν 


ava, μεσον Tov θυσιαστηριου και Tov vaov 


ναὶ My wey εἐζητηθήσεται ἀπὸ ry 


> γενεασ ταυτὴσ : ὄναι ὕμειν τοισ 


γομίκοισ ort ἐεκρυψατε THY κλειν 
THT γνωσεωσ καὶ avro, ovx ἰσηλθατε 


και τουσ εἰσπορενομενουσ ἐκωλυσατε 


: λεγοντθσ δεταντα προσ avrove 


ἐνώπιον παντοσ tov Aaov ἡρξαντο 
οι αἰοι Kat οἱ νγομίκοι δεινωσ 
exew καὶ συνβαλλειν avro περι 
πλειόνων ζητουντεσ ἀφορμὴν 
τινα λαβειν avrov ἵνα ευρωσιν 
κατηγορήσαι avrov πόολλων δε 
οχλων συνπεριέεχοντων κυκλω 


: wore αλληλουσ συνπνιγειν : nptaro 


Acyey προσ trove μαθητασ πρωτον 
προσέχετε εἐαντοισ απὸ tye ζυμησ 


τῶν φαρισαιων ηἡτισ ἐστιν νυποκρισισ 


: οὐδὲν yap συνκεκαλυμμενον ἐστιν 


o ov φανερωθησεται kac κρυπτον 
o ov γνωσθήσεται av wy oca. 
«v TH σκοτεια eurare ey To ort 
ακουσθήσεται καὶ o προσ ro ovo 
ἐλαλησατε εν τοισ ταμειοισ knpvxÜna eras 
ex τῶν δωματων.. λεγω Se tev Tow φιλοισ μου 
μη φοβηθηται ato rwv αποκτενοντων 
τὸ σωμα τὴν δε ψυχὴν μη δυναμενων 
awoxrewas μήδε exovrov περισσον 
τι ποιῆσαι ὕποδειξω δε üpew τινα 
φοβηθητε τον μετα ro ἀποκτειναι 
exovra εἐξουσιαν «wr γεενναν βαλειν 
vas Neyo ὕμειν rovrov φοβηθητε 

(Fol. 235 5.) 


XI 


XII. 1 


UA 


213 


zachariae fili barachiae quem occiderunt 
inter medium altaris et templi etiam 

dico uobis exquiretur a 

generatione hac uae uobis 

legis doctoribus quia abscondistis clauem 
scientiae et ipsi non introistis 

et introeuntes uetastis 

dicente autem haec ad eos 

in conspectu omnis populi coeperunt 
pharisaei etlegesdoctores male 

habere et committere illi de 

plurimis quaerentes occasionem 

aliquam accipere eius ut inuenirent 
accusareeum multisautem 

turbis adstantium circa 

utalterutros esuffocarent coepit 

dicere ad discipulos primum 

adtendite uobis ἃ fermento 
pharisaeorum quae est hypocriais 

nihil enim coopertum est 

quod non reuelabitur et absconsum 
quod nonscietur uerum quae 

in tenebris dixistis in lumine 

audientur et quod ad aurem 

dixistis in promptalibus praedicabitur 
super tecta dico autem uobis amicis meis 
non timere ab his qui occidunt 

corpus animam autem non possunt 
occidere nequa habentium amplius 

quid facere ostendam autem uobis quem 
timeatis quem post occiderit 

habentem potestatem in gehenam mittere 


etiam dico uobis hunc timete 
(Fol. 236 a.) 


Capp. XI. 51—XITII. 5. 


ey 
214 KAT AOYK 


ουχι revre aTpovÜeu. πωλειται ασσαριων XII. 6 
vo καὶ εν εξ αὐυτων ουκεστιν 
επιλελησμενον ενωπιον Tov ϑυ 
αλλα καιαι τριχεσ ὕμων πασαι τὴσ Kepadno 7 
ἡριθμημεναι εἰσιν μὴ ovy φοβηθητε 
πολλὼων yap στρουθιων διαφερετε ὕμεισ 
λεγω δε ὕμειν ort rac oc ay ομολογήσει 8 
ev ἐμοι ενπροσθεν των ανθρωπων 
Kat o Uto Tov ανθρωπου oporoynoe 
ev avro ἐνπροσθεν των αγγελων 
ers : rovOv : ὃδε αρνησαμενοσ με 9 
ενπροσθεν των ανθρωπων αρνηθήσεται 
εἐνπροσθεν των ἀγγελων rov ὃυ 
ent > καὶ Trag oc ay epetAoyov εἰσ Tov ὕιον 10 
Tov ayÜperrov αφεθήσεται avro 
εἰσ δετοπνὰ ro αγιον ovx αφεθησεται 
αὐυτω- OUTE EV τω αἰωνι τουτω 
PHN: ουτεεν ro μελλοντι ' ὅταν δε II 
φερωσιν ὕμασ εἰσ rac συναγωγασ 
και τασ apxag καὶιτασ εἐξουσιασ 
μὴ προμεριμνατε πωσ απολογήσησθε 
ἡτιειπήτε τοΎαρ αγιον πνὰ διδαξει 12 
ὕμασ εν αυτητηωρα a de ειπειν 
pub : €urey Se ruo avro ex Tov oxAov διδασκαλε 13 
B εἰπὸν Tw ἀαδελφω pov μερισασθαι 
μετ ἐμου τὴν κληρονομιαν 
O δεειπεν avro. avÜporre rwr με 14. 
κατεστησεν κριτὴν εὐ υμασ 
Ειπεν δεπροσ αντουσ ορατε και 15 
φυλασσεσθαε aro racno πλεονεξιασ 
OTL ουκ εν TW TEPLTT EVEL τινι ἐστιν 
ἢ (wn €x των ὕπαρχοντων avro 
Ειπεν Se pog avrova παραβολὴν Aeyov 16 
(Fol. 236 5.) 


"SEG LUC 
--.- o — -. ~, 


nonne quinque passares ueniunt dipundis 
duobus et unum ex eis non est 
oblitum in conspectu dei 
sed et capilli uestri omnes de capite 
numeratae sunt ne ergo timueritis 
multis enim passeribus differitis uos 
dico autem uobis quia omnes qui confessus fuerit 
in mein conspectu hominum 
et filius hominis confitebitur 
ineo inconspectu angelorum 
del qui autem negauerit me 
in conspectu hominum abnegauitur 
in conspectu angelorum del 
et omnis qui dixerit uerbum in filium 
hominis dimittetur illi 
in spm autem sanctum non demittetur 
illi neque in saeculo hoc 
nequeinfuturo cum autem 
adducent uos in synagogas 
et principatus ad potestates 
nolite solliciti esse quomodo respondeatis 
&ut quid dicetis spa enim sanctus docebit 
| uos in ipsa hora quae oportet dicere 
dixit autem quidam ad illum de populo magiste 
dic fratri meo partiri 
mecum hereditatem 
ad ille dixit illi homo quis me 
constituit iudicem super uos 
dixitautem adillos uidete et 
obserbate ab omni cupiditate 
quoniam non in abundantia cuiquam est 
uita desubstantiae ius 
dixit autem ad eos parabolam dices 
(Fol. 237 a.) 


Cap. XII. 6—16. 


ayÜporrov τινοσ πλουσιον ηυφορησεν 
ἢ χωρα και διελογιζετο εν εαυτω λεγὼν 
τι ποιήσω οτι OVK ἐχω που συναξω 
τουσ καρπουσ μον καὶ €UT€V τουτο 
ποιήσω καθελω pov rag αποθηκασ 
και ποίησω αυτασ μειζονασ 

κακει συνάξω παντατα γενήματα μου 


καὶ px τὴ ψυχὴ μου ψυχὴ exeur 
πολλὰ ayaba ευφραινου. εἰπεν δε avro o Oe 


adpov ταντὴ τὴ νυκτι απαιτουσιν THY 
ψυχὴν σοῦ arodgov a ovy ἡτοιμασασ 


: τιίψοσ εσται " ἕιπεν δε προσ τουσ μαθητασ 


avrov δια Tovro Aeyo ὕμειν μὴ 

pepusvare τὴ Vvxn rc φαγητε μηδε 

Tw σωματιτι ἐνδυσησθε ἢ yap ψυχὴ 

πλεον ἐστιν THO τροφηὴσ καιτοσωμα 

του ἐνδυματοσ κατανοησατετα πετεῖνα 

του Ovpayou οτιοντεσπειρουσιν ουὅτε 

θεριζουσιν | owr ovk εστιν ovre ταμεῖον 

ovre αποθηκὴ Kato óc τρεφει avra. 

ουχι ὕμεισ διαφερεται rov Terewoy 

τισ 9« εξ υμων δυναται προσθειναι 

ἐπι τὴν ἡλίικειαν avrov πήηχυν καὶ περι τῶ 

λοίπων τι μεριμνατε κατανοήσατε 

τα κρινα rac ουτενήθει ovre ὕφαινει 

Aeyo δε ὕμειν ort ovde σολομων 

εν zac) τὴ δοξὴ avrov περιεβαλετο 

wo ev τουτων εἰ Se Tov XOpTOY του 

αγρου σήμερον οντα Kat αὔριον 

eo κλειβανον βαλλομενον o óc 

ovroc αμφιεζει ποσω μαλλον ὕμασ 

oAcyortorot και ὕμεισ μὴ ζητειτε 

τι φαγητε ἡ τι πιητε και μὴ μετεωριζεσθαι 
(Fol. 337 δ.) 


BEC LUCAN 215 

SS = 

hominis cuiusdam diuitis uberes fructus attalit 

regio et cogitabat intra se dicens 

quid faciam quoniam non habeo ubi congrege 

fructos meos et dixit hoc 

faciam deponam apothecas . 

et faciam eas maiores 

et ibi congregabo omnes fructos meos 

et dicam anime meae anima habes 

multa bona aepulare dixit autem illi ds 

stulte ac nocte petunt 

animam tuam a te quae ergo parasti 

cuius erunt dixit autem ad discipulos 

suos propter hoc dico uobis nolite 

solliciti esse animae quid edatis neque 

corpori quid induamini anima enim 

plus est quam esca et corpus 

uestimento intuemini uolatilia 

caeli quoniam neque serent neque 

metent quibus non est neque promptarium 

nequeapotheca et ds pascit ea 

nonne uos differitis uolatilibus 

quis autem ex uobis potest adicere 

in aetatem suam gubitum et de 

ceteris quid solliciti estis intuemini 

lilia quo modo neque neunt neque texunt 

dico autem uobis quoniam neque solomon 

inomnigloriasua indutus est 

sic ut unum ex his si autem faenum 

agri hodie qui est et cras 

in clibanum mittitur ds 

sic uestit quanto magis uos 

pusillae fidei et uos nolite quaerere 

quid manducetis. aut quid bibetis et non sbaliene 
(Fol. 238 a.) 


Car. XII. 16—29. 


216 


δὰ 


eve ° 


pvt 
— 


. μακαριοι ELOLY €KELVOL 


c — ὡς — 
KAT AOYKAN 
—- — ὡ-. -- 
Tavra yap παντα ra, εθνὴ TOV Koo POV 


ζητει oder yap o rargp ὕμων 
ort χρήζεται rovrov ζητειτε 0e rqv 
év 


βασιλειαν avrov. καὶ ravra παντα 


: προστεθησεται ὕμειν : μη φοβον 


TO μεικρον ποιμνιον OTL εν αυτὼω 


ηυδοκησεν o πατὴρ ὕμων δουναι ὕμειν 


: τὴν Bacay * πωλήσαταιτα ὕπαρχοντα 


ὕμων και Sore ελεημοσυνὴν 


: ποιησατεεαντοισ βαλλαντια μη 


παλαιουμενα θησαυρον ανεγλιπτον 

εν Tow ουρανοισ οπου κλεπτὴσ ovk εγγιζει 
οὐδε ono διαφθερει οπου yap εστιν 

o θησαυροσ ὕμων εκει erat Kat 

ῃ καρδια ἡμων : ἔστω ὕμων ἡ οσφυσ 
περιεσζωσμενὴ Kat ot λυχλοι 

καιομενοι και ὕμεισ ομοιοι ανθρωποισ 
προσδεχομενοισ Toy KY αὐτῶν ποτε 
avadvoy εκ των γαμων ἵνα ελθοντοσ' 

και κρουσαντοσ ευθεωσ ανυξουσιν 

avro : μακαριοι ot δουλοι εκεινοι ova: ελθων 
oKc ευρή ypyyopowram ἀμὴν Neyw 
υμειν «οτι περιζωσεται Kat ἀνακλινει 
αντουσ και παρελθων διακονήσει 

avrow καὶ εαν ελθὴ rq ἐσπερινὴ 

φυλακὴ Kat ευρησει ουτωσ ποιήσει 

καὶ €ay εν Ty δευτερα και τὴ rper 

: Touro Se 
yewwoxere ort εἰ ἥδει o οἰκοδεσποτὴησ 
ποία woa o κλεπτὴσ ἐρχεται ovx ay 

και ὕμεισ Oe γεινεσθαι ετοιμοι 

ore ἡ wpa 7] ov δοκειτε o vog Tov ανθρωπου 


e —, 
€pxera4 ' KGL εἰπεν o WETPOT κε 


(Fol. 238 6.) 


XII. 30 


37 


41 


BEC L 


CAN 
SS — — 
haec enim omnia gentes mundi 
quaerunt scit enim pater uester 
quoniam opus habetis horum quaerit autem 
regnum del et haec omnia 
adicientur uobis noliteti mere 
pusillum gregem quoniam in eo 
beneplacitum est patri uestro dare uobis 
regnum uendite substantiam 
uestram et date elemosynam 
facite uobissacculos non 
ueterescentes thensaurum non deficiente. 
incaelis ubifur non accedit 
nectinea conrumpit ubienim est 
thensaurus uester ibierit et 
coruestrum sit lumbus 
uester cinctus et lucernae 
ardentes et uos similis hominibus 
expectantibus dom suum quando 
ueniet a nuptias ut uenienti 
et pulsanti confestim aperiant 
illi beati serui illi quos ueniens 
dmi inueniet uigilantes amen dico 
uobis quia succinget se et reclinauit 
eos et transiens ministrauit illis 
et 8i ueniet uespertina 
custodia et inueniet sic faciet 
etsisecunda ueltertia 
beatisuntilh hocautem 
scitote quia si sciret paterfamilias 
qua hora fur uenit utique non 
et uos ergo estote parati 
quia qua hora non putatis filius hominis 
uenit etdixit petrus dme 

(Fol. 239 a.) 


Car. XII. 30—41. 


ces 


SRS 


προσ ἡμασ Neyer τὴν παραβολὴν 
ταντὴν καὶ εἰπεν o κσ Tur apa. ἐστιν 
οπιστοσ OLKOVOLOG oO φρονιμοσ 
οαγαθοσ ον καταστησειοκσ em τὴν 
θεραπειαν avrov διδοναι εν καιρω 
σιτομετριον μακαριοσ o δουλοσ 

ἐκεινοσ' ov ελθων o Ko avrov ευρησει 
αὐτὸν TOLOVVTG. ουτωσ ἀμὴν λεγω 

ὕμειν οτι ἐπι TOO TOLU ἵπαρχουσιν 
aurov . καταστήσει avroy : éay δε «vm 

o δουλοσ' exewoc εν Ty καρδια avrov 
χρονιζει o κσ pov ἐερχεσθαι και ἀρξηται 
τυπεῖν τουσ παιδασ και τασ παιδισκασ 
ἐσθιων τε καιπεινων μεθυσκομενοσ 

ἥξει o KG αὐτου εν ἥμερα ἢ ουὅπροσδοκα 
kat €V wpa. ἡ OV γεινωσκει καὶ διχοτομήσει 
avrov καὶ τὸ μεροσ avrov θήσει 

pera των απιστων * ἕκεινοσ δε 

οδουλοσ ογνουσ τὸ θελήμα του KV αὐτου 
καὶ μὴ ποιησασ προσ To θελημα avrov 
δαρησεται πολλασ οδε μὴ γνουσ 
ποιησασ δεαξια πληγων δαρησεται 
ολιγασ παντι δε ὦ ἐδωκαν πολυ 
ζητήσουσιν απ avrov περισσοτερον 


καὶ ὦ παρεθεντο πολυ πλεον 


: αἀπαιτήσουσιν avrov : πυρἤλθον βαλειν 


εἰσ τὴν qv καὶ τι θελω εἰ ndy ανηφθὴ 
βαπτισμαδεεχω βαπτισθηναι και 

πωσ cvvexopa. ιεωσ οτου τελεσθη 

Soxecre ort εἰρηνὴν παρεγενομὴν 

ποιῆσαι εν τὴ y). ουχι Aeyw ὕμειν 

αλλα διαμερισμον εἐσονται yap απὸ Tov νυν 


εν €VLOLKO πεντε τρεισ διαμεμερισμενοι 


(Fol. 230.) 


ΧΙ]. 


43 


45 


46 


48 


49 


SEC L 


CAN 217 


ad nos dicis parauolam hano 

et dixit dms quinam est 

fidelis uilicus sapiens 

bonus quem constituit dmi super 

curam eius dare in tempore 
frumentajionem beatus seruus 

ille quem ueniens dms eius inueniet 
eum facientem sic amen dico 

uobis quiasuper omnem substantiam 
Buam constituet eum si autem dixerit 
seruus ille in corde suo 

tardatdms meus uenire et coeperit 
percutere pueros et puellas 

manducare autem et bibere et inebriari 
uenit dms eius in die quanon putat 
et in hora qua ignorat et diuidet 

eum et partem eius ponet 

cum infidelibus ille autem 

seruus quisciuit uoluntatem dmi sui 
et non fecit ad uoluntatem eius 
bapulabit multas quiautem ignorauit 
fecit autem digna plagis bapulauit 
paucas omniautem cui dederunt multum 
quaerent ab eo amplius 

et cui conmendauerunt satis plus 
expostulabunt eum ignem ueni mittere 
in terram et quid uolo si iam accensum est 
baptismum autem abeo baptizari et 

quo modo urguor usque dum consummetur 
putatis quoniam pacem ueni 

facere in terra non dico uobis 

sed diuisionem erunt autem amodo 
indomouna quinque tres diuisi 


(Fol. 240 4.) 


Cap. XII. 41— 52. 


28 


218 KAT AOYK 


ev dvew και dvo ev τρισιν StapeptoOyoovra, — XII. | 


πατὴρ eo juo και ὕιοσ emt πατρι avrov 53 
διαμερισθησονται μητὴρ emt Ovyarepa. 

και Ovyarnp επι τὴν μήτερα srevÜepo. 

ἐπι τὴν νυμῴφην αυτησ και νυμφη 

ἐπὶ τὴν πενθεραν : ἔλεγεν δε και row. 54 
oxÀowr orav ειδητε τὴν νεφελην 


ανατελλουσαν απὸ δυσμων ευθεωσ λεγετε 


PRS 


ομβροσ epxera και γεινεται ovre 

καὶ οταν voroy TrAeoyra λεγετε 55 

καυσων EO ETAL και γεινεται ὕποκριται 56 

TO μεν προσωπον TOV ουρανου 

και TO yno οιδατε δοκειμαζειν πλὴν 

TOV καιρον τοντον ov δοκιμαζετε 

και ach εαντων ov κρινεται To δικαιον 57 
eB: wo yap ὕπαγεισ pera rov αντιδικου σου 58 

em apxovra ev To 099. Soc epyactay 

αἀπαλλαγηναι ax avrou μήποτε KaTAKpary σε 

προσ TOV κριτὴν Kat κριτησ παραδωσει σε 

τω πρακτορι Kato πρακτωρ' Bade ce 

eo φυλακὴν λέγω σοι ov μὴ ἐξελθησ᾽ 59 

εκειθεν εωσ ov arodour τὸν eo xaroy 


: xoSpayryy : mopyav Bc rwea XIM. 1 


avro TO kaipw απαγγελλοντεσ aoro 


περι TOV γαλιλαίων wy TO aia 


πειλατοσ ἐμειξεν μετα των θυσιων avrov 
—, 
και αποκριθεισ o tno eurey avrour a 


[3 


δοκειτε ore οντοι οἱ γαλιλαιοι παρα πανταῦ 


τουσ γαλιλαιουσ ἐγενοντο ἀμαρτωλοι 


ort ταυτα πενπονθασιν ovxt Aeyo tue | 3 
αλλα cay μη μετανοησητε παντεσ' 
ομοιωσ ἀπολεισθαι ἡ εκεινοι ot Sexe. 4 


okro- εὦ ovg ἐπεσὲεν o πυργοσ Tov σιλωαμ 


(Fol. 2405.) 


SEC LUCAM 
Soa SS 
in duobus et duo in tribus diuidentur 
pater in filio et filius super patrem suum 
diuidetur mater super filiam 

et filia super matrem socrus 

super norum suam et norus 
supersocrum dicebat autem et 

turbis cum bideritienubem 

orientem ab occidente confestim dicitis 
nimbus uenit et fiet sic 

et quando austrum flantem dicitis 
aestuserit etfiet hypocritae 

uultum quidem caeli 

et terrae scitis probare uerum tamen 
tempus hoc non probatis 


et a uobis non iudicatis iustum 


dum enim uadis cum aduersario tuo 


ad principem cum esin uia. de operam 
discedere ab eo ne forte condemnet te 
ad iudicem et iudex tradet te 

exactori etexactor mittat te 


in carcerem dico tibi non exies 


inde usque quo reddas nouisimum 
quadrantem — uenerunt autem quidam 
eodem tempore adnuntiantes ei 
degalilaeis quorum sanguinem 


pilatus miscuit eum sacrificiis eorum 


Et respondens ihs dixit eis 


putatis quia isti galilaei prae omnes 

galilaeos fuerunt peccatores 

quoniam haec passi sunt non dico uobis 

sed si non paenitentiam egeritis omnes 

similiter peribitis autilli decem 

et octo super quos cecidit turris in siloam 
(Fol. 241 a.) 


Carr, XII. 52—XIII. 4. 


o — ὡς — 
KAT AOYKAN 
— o — ςς i 
και ἀπέκτεινεν avrovg Soxetre ort 
οφειλετ a4 eycvovro παρα παντασ Tove 
ayÜporrovo Tour ενοικουνταο Ἱερουσαλήμ 


XIII. | 


ouxt- Aeyo de ὕμειν orc eay py μετανοησηται δ 


παντεσ ομοιωσ απολεισθαι 


gà : EXeyer Se ravrqv τὴν παραβολην συκὴην 


τισ εἰχεν πεφυτευμενὴν ev τω 

ἀαμπελωνι αὐτου και ἡλθεν ζητων 

καρπὸν απ αυτὴσ καὶ μὴ €evpoy 

εἶπεν προσ Tov ἀαμπελουργον ἴδου 

ery τρια ad ov ἐρχομαι ζητων καρπον 

ἐν TH συκὴ ταυτὴ και ουκ ευρισκω 

φερετηὴν αζξεινὴην ἐκκοψον αὐτὴν 

ἵνα τι καὶ τὴν γὴν καταργει ο δε 

αποκριθεισ λεγει avro κε αφεσ avrgv 

ετι τουτον TOV EVLAUTOY Ewe OTOV 

σκαψω περι αυτὴν και βαλω xodivoy 

κοπριων και εαν μεν ποιησὴ καρπὸν 

et δε paye ew To μελλον ἐκκοψεισ αὐτὴν 
ἣν δε διδασκων εν μια των συναγωγων 

σαββατω xatidov γυνὴ εν ασθενεια ἣν 

-νσ ετη- τῆ. Kat ἣν συνκαπτουσα και 

py δυναμενὴ ανακυψαι εἰσ τὸ 

wavrereo εἰδων δε αὐτὴν o ine eurey 

aury γυναι ἀπολελυσαι omo THe 


ασθενειασ σον και ἐπεθηκεν raa 


Xelpac αὐτὴ καὶ παραχρημα ανορθωθη 


: καὶ ἐδοξασεν τον θν : ἅποκριθεισ δε 
o apxiovvayuyoo ἀγανακτῶν ελεγεν 


Tw ox) ori tw σαββατω εθεραπευσεν 
on, 
uj εξημεραι cow ev aco Set epyaler Oat 


«v τανυταισ ovy ἐρχομενοι θεραπενεσθαι 


και μὴ τηημερατου σαββατον 
(Fol. 241 5.) 


13 


14. 


SEC LUCAN 


-.- ee ey 


et occidit eos putatis quoniam 
debitores fuerunt prae omnes 
homines qui inhabitant hierusalem non 
dico autem uobis quod sin penitueritis 
omnis similiter peribitis 
dicebat autem hanc parabolam ficulneam 
quidam habebat plantatam in 
'uineasua et uenit quaerens 
fructum inea et noninueniens 


dixit ad uineae eultorem ecce 


annitres exquouenio quaerens fructum 


in ficulnea hac et non inuenio 

adfers securem praecid eam 

ut quid et terram occupat ad ille 
respondens dixit illi dme dimitte illam 
adhuc hunc annum usque quo 

fodiam circa illam et mittam qualum 
stercoris et ΑἹ quidem fecerit fructum 
si quominus in futurum euellis eam 


Erat autem decens in una de synagogis 


sabbato et ecce muher in infirmitate erat 


Sps annos‘xuill- eteratincumbens et 


non poteratse erigere in 

totum uidens autem eam ihs dixit 
illimulier dimissaes ab 

infirmitate tua et inposuit 

manusei et confestim erecta est 

et honorificabat dm respondens autem 
archisynagogus indignans dicebat 


populo quia sabbato curauit 


ihs sex dies sunt in quibus oportet curari 


in his ergo uenientes curamini 
et non die sabbat 
(Fol. 242 a.) 


Car. XIIT. 4— 14. 


219 


220 


— oe 
απεκριθὴ Se avro o tno καὶ eurey ὕποκριτα XIII. 15 


«xag Toc ὕμων ro caf are ov λνει 

tov Bovy avrov καὶ Tov ovoy απὸ THT 

ga νὴσ καὶ απαγαγων ποτειζει ταυτὴν 
δεθυγατερα τον αβρααμ. ovaay qv edycev 


o σατανασ tov erg qr ovx €Oet λυθηναι 
απὸ TOv δεσμου TOVTOV TY) j.€pa. TOv 
pis : σαββατου : και κατησχυνθησαν ot 
αντικειμενοι QUTW καὶ πασ o oxÀog 
εχαιρεν εν πασιν our ἐθεωρουν 
εἐνδοξοισ Ux avrov γεινομενοισ 
pet: Ελεγεν 0e rut opows ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια 
του ϑυ και τινι ομοιωσω αὐτὴν 
ὁμοια ἐστιν κοκκω σιναπεωσ OV 
λαβὼν ανθρωποσ εβαλεν eur τον κηπον 
avrov και ἡνξησεν και eyevero δενδρον 
καὶ τα πετεινὰ του ουρανου κατεσκηνωσαν 


: ὕπο τουσ κλαδουσ avrov * ἢ τινι ομοια 


SJ 


ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια Tov θυ καὶ τινι ομοιωσω 
αντὴν ono ἐστιν Cun ἣν λαβουσα 
γυνὴ ἐνεκρυψεν εἰσ ἀλευρου cara τρια 
ee? : ew ov ζυμωθὴ oXov. : και Steropevero 
κατα πολεισ καὶ κωμασ διδασκων 
και πορειαν ποιουμενοσ᾽ εἰσ ἱερουσαλημ 
po : Εἶπεν δετισαυτω ke. εἰ ολιγοι εἰσιν ot σωζομενοι 
o δεαποκριθεισ εἰπεν αγωνιζεσθε 
εἰσελθειν δια rnc στενησ θυρασ 
ort πολλοι λεγω ὕμειν ζητησουσιν 


εἰσελθειν και ovx ευρησουσιν : ad οτου 


ni 


ay o οἰκοδεσποτησ εἰσελθη και 


αποκλεισὴ τὴν θυραν και ἀαρξησθε 
efw ἐσταναι και Kpovew λεγοντεσ 


wey, 
κε κε ανοιξον ew Kat ἀποκριθεισ 


(Fol. 242 ὁ.) 


25 


SEO LUEAM 


—Á 


respondit autem ei dms et dixit hypocrita 


unusquisque uestrum die sabbati non soluet 
bouem suum aut asinum a 
praesepio et ducens adaquat hanc autem 
filiam abrahae cum esset quam ligauit 
Satanas ecce anni .xuiii- non oportebat solui 
a uinculo hoc die 
sabbati et confundebantur 
&duersariieius et omnis populus 
gaudebat in omnibus quibus uidebant 
mirabilibus ab eo fieri | 
dicebat ergo cui simile est regnum | 
dei_et cui similabo illut 
simile est granosinapis quo 
accepto homo misit in hortum 
suum et creuit et facta est arbor 
et uolatilia caeli habitauerunt 
subramoseius aut cui simile 
est regnum dei et cuisimilabo 
illut simile est fermento quod accipiens 
mulier abscondit in farinae mensuras tris 
usque quo fermentatum est totum - et cirenibat 
per ciuitates et castella docens 
et iter faciens in hierusalem 
dixit autem ei quidam dme si pauci sunt qui sainater 

ad ille respondens dixit certamini 
introire perangustam ianuam 
quoniam multi dico uobis quaerent 
introire et non inuenient ex quo 
paterfamilias introierit et 
cluserit osteum et incipientis 
foris stare et pulsare dicentes 
dme dme aperi nobis et respondens 

(Fol. 243 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 15—25. 


ερειὕμειν | ovk oda ὕμασ ποθεν ἐστε 
rore αρξησθελεγειν κε εφαγομεν 
ἐνώπιον σοῦ καιεπιομεν καὶ εν ταισ' 
πλατειαισ ἡμῶν εδιδαξασ 
και ἐρει λεγω ὕμειν ovderore εἰδον 
ὕμασ αποστητεαπεμον παντεσ 
ἐργαται ἀνομιασ εκει ἐσται o κλαυθμοσ 
καὶ 0 βρνγμοσ τῶν οδοντων : ὅταν 

po : οψεσθαι αβρααμ και ἴσακ και ἴακωβ 
και παντασ τουσ προφητασ ev τὴ βασιλεια 
του θυ ὕμασ δε exBaAXopevova efw 
και ἡξουσιν aro ἀγατολων καὶ δνσμων 
και βορρα και vorov και ανακλειθησονται 


: ev τὴ βασιλεια του θυ : καὶ εἰδου εἰσὶν 


ΠΣ! 


ἐσχατοι οἱ €COVTOL πρωτοι και εἰσιν 
πρωτοι ot ἐσονται ἐσχατοι 

pod Ev ravry τῇ wpa προσηλθαν avro twee 
Tuy φαρισαιων λεγοντεσ εξελθε 
και zopevov ἐντευθεν ort npwdyno 
ζητει σεαποκτειναι καὶ εἰπεν avTow 
πορευθεντεσ εἰπατε Ty αλωπεκι rav) 
ἴδον ἐκβαλλω δαιμονια 
και cag ἀποτελουμαι σημερον 
και αὔριον - καὶ τὴ τριτὴ τελειουμαι 
πλὴν δει με σήμερον και τὴ avpuov 
και TH ερχομενὴ πορενεσθαι 
ort ovx ἐνδεχεται ἀπολεσθαι προτην 


εξωϊερουσαλημ : Ἱερουσαλὴμ Ἱερουσαλὴμ 


f3/ 


ἡ αποκτεινουσα Trova προφητασ Kat 
λιθοβολουσα rove απεσταλμένουσ προσ avr] 
voc axur nOeAnoa επισυναξαι τα τεκνα σὸν 

ον τροπὸν ορνιξ τανοσσια αὐτὴσ vro rac 
πτερυγασ και ovk ηθελησατε ἵδου 


(Fol. 243 5.) 


XIIL 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


32 


34 


35 


[o 
J Of 
fr 


CAM 221 
— 

dicet uobis nescio uos unde estis 

tunc incipietis dicere dme manduc auimus 

in conspecto tuo et bibimus et in 

plateis nostris docuisti 

etdicet dico uobis numquam uidi 

uos recedite a me omnes 

operari iniquitatis ibi erit ploratus 

etstridor dentium cum 

uideritis abraam et isac et iacob 

et omnes prophetas in regno 

dei uosautem eici foras 

et uenient ab oriente et occidentem 

etabaquilone et austro et recumbent 

in regno del et ecce aunt 

nouissimi qui erunt primi et sunt 


primi qui erunt nouissimi 


in ipsa hora accesserunt illi quidam 


pharisaeorum dicentes exi 

et uade hinc quia herodes 
quaeret te occidere et dixit illis 
abeuntes dicite uulpi huic 

ecce eicio damonia 

et sanitates perficio hodie 
etcras et tertia perficior 


uerumtamen oportet me hodie et cras 


et uentura abire 

quia non oportet perire prophetam 

extra hierusalem hierusalem hierusalem 
quae occidis prophetas et 

lapidas missos ad te 

quotiens uolui congregare filios tuos 
quem ad modum gallina pullos suos sub 
alas suas et noluistis ecce 


(Fol. 244 a.) 


Car. XIII. 25— 35. 


229 KAT AOYK SEC LUCAN 


αφιεται ὕμειν o owog ὕμων ἐρήμοσ XIII. dimittetur uobis domus ues deserta 
Aeyo Se üpew | ov μή με ιδητε eoo ἥξει dico autem uobis non me uidebitis donec ueniat 
οτεειπητε ευλογημενοσ o ἐερχομενοσ ut dicatis benedictus qui uenit 
por : ἐν ονοματι kV : και eyevero ἐν τω XIV. 1 in nomine dmi et factus est cum 
eureAÜew avrov εἰσ owoy τινοσ introisset in domum cuiusdam 
τῶν apxovyrov των φαρισαιων principum pharisaeorum 
σαββατω φαγειν αρτον καὶ αντοι σαν sabbato manducare manem et ipsi erant 
παρατήρουμενοι avrov και idov ανθρωποσ 2 obseruantes eum et cce homo 
ἣν ὕδρωπικοσ ἐνπροσθεν avrov erat hydropicus in conspectu eius 
pot : Kat αποκριθεισ o - εἰπεν προσ τουσ 3| Etrespondens ihs dixitad 
νομικουσ Kot Qapuravovo: εξεστιν τω legis doctores οὗ pharisaeos licet 
σαββατω θεραπευσαι ἡ ov ot de novxacay 4 sabbato curare aut non ad illi tacuerunt 
και ἐεπιλαβομενοσ avroy και ϊασαμενοσ et adpraehendens eum et sanans 
αἀπελυσεν Kat εἰπεν προσ avrovg 5 dimisit et dixit ad eos 
Twoc e£ vuv προβατον ἡ Bove cuiusex uobis ouis aut bobis 
εἰσ φρεαρ ἐνπεσειται Ty ἡμέερατου caf) Barov in puteum incidet die sabbati 
καὶ ovK εὐυθεωσ ἀανασπασει avroy et non confestim leuabit eum 
ot Se ovx απεκριθησαν προσ ravra. 6 ad illi non responderunt ad haec 
poy : EXeyer δε και προσ rove κεκλημενουσ 7 | dicebatautem ad inuitatos 
B παραβολὴν. ἐπέχων πωσ rac πρωτοκλισιασ parabolam uidens quo modo primos adcubitos 
efeXeyovro λεγων προσ avrove eligebant dicens ad eos 
orav κληθησ eur γαμον μη κατακλιθησ 8 cum inuitaris in nuptias noli recumbere 
«ur THY Tporokuctuy μήποτε in primum adcubitum ne forte 
εἐντειμοτεροσ σου ἡξει Kat ελθων 9 honorificentior te ueniet et ueniens 
og€katL avrov καλεσασ ερεισοι δοσ qui te et illum inuitauit dicet tibi da 
TOVTO TOTOV KQLTOTE ἐσὴ μετα huic locum et tunc incipiens cum 
αισχυνὴσ ἐσχατον TOT'OV κατέχειν confusione nouissimum locum tenere 
αλλ oray κληθησ εἰσ Tov ἐσχατον romoy 10 sed cum inuitaris in nouissimumlocum ‘ 
avareurre iva oray ελθη o κεκληκωσ σε recumbe ut cum uenerit qui te inuitauit 
eury σοι φιλεπροσαναβηθι ἀανωτερον dicat tibi amice ascende superius 
Kat rore εσται σοι Sofa ενωπιον των et tunc erittibigloria in conspectu qui 
pol : συνανακειμενων : ὅτι rac οὕψων II simul recumbunt quoniam omnis qui exaltat 
ἑαυτὸν ταπεινουται καὶ οταπεινων se humiliauitur et qui humiliat 
(Fol. 244 δ.) (Fol. 245 a.) 


Carr. XIII. 35—XIV, a1. 


Saf 


eavroy ὕψονται eXeyey δε καὶ τω XIV. 12 


κεκλήκοτι αὐτὸν οταν Tong ἀριστον 


ἢ δειπνον μη φωνει τουσ φιλουσ 

μηδετουσ αδελῴουσ σοῦ μηδε 

τουσ γειτονασ μήδετουσ rove tovg 

μήποτε και αντοι αντικαλεσωσιν σε 

και γενῆται ἀνταπόδομα σοι 

αλλα οταν rons δοχην καλει 13 
πτωχουσ ἀναπειρουσ χωλουσ 

τυφλουσ και μακαριοσ erp οτι 14 
οὐκ €xovaty ayramodouvat σοι 

ανταποδοθησεται yap σοι ev TH 

avacracet τῶν δικαίων 


axova ag de TLD TAUTA TOV CVVOVOKEULEVOV 15 


Qrey avro μακαριοσ oo dayere aprov 


: cv ry βασιλεια rov Ou : δυ Se exrey 16 


avÜponroc τισ εποιῆσεν δειπον μέγαν 
και exadecev πολλουσ και ἀπεστειλεν 1) 
Toy δουλον avrov Ty wpa του δειπνου 
ecrety Tour κεκλημενοισ ἐρχεσθαι 
oTt 9 παντα ετοιμα ἐστιν καὶ ἡρξαντο 18 
απο μειασ παντεσ παραιτεισθαι 

Ο πρωτοσ εἰπεὲν aypov ἤγορασα καὶι- 
αναγκὴν exo εξελθων ede avrov 
ἐρωτωσε exe με παρητήμενον 

και ἐετεροσ eurey Cevyn βοων ἤγορα 1g 
wevTe Kat πορευομαι δοκιμασαε avra 
διὸ ov δυναμαι ελθειν kat αλλοσ εἰπεν 20 
γυναικα ἐλαβὸν διο ov δυναμαι ελθειν 

και παραγενομενοσ o δουλοσ ἀπηγγειλεν , 21 
TO KU αὐτουπανταταυτα Kat οργεισ 
o οἰκοδεσποτησ Tw δουλω avrov eurey 


«CO c raxews evo Tag πλατειασ᾽ kat ρυμασ 


(Fol. 245 5.) 


SEC LUCAN 223 
--- .- ὦ. — 


seexaltabitur dicebat autem et ad eum 
qui inuitauerateum cum facis prandium 
&ut cenam noli uocare amicos 
neque fratres tuos neque 
uicinos neque diuites 
ne forte et illi reinuitente 
et fiat retributio tibi 
sed cum facis aepulationem uoca 
egenos debiles clodos 
caecos et beatuseris quoniam 
non habent retribuere tibi 
retribuetur enim tibi in 
resurrectione iustorum 
audiens autem quis haec qui simul recumbebant 
dixit ei beatus qui manducauit panem 
inregnodel ad ille dixit 
homo quidam fecit cenam magnam 
et uocauit multos et misit 
seruum suum hora cenae 
dicereinuitatis uenite 
quoniam iam parata sunt omnia et coeperunt 
ab una omnes se excusare 
primus dixit agrum emi et 
necesse habeo exiens uidere eum 
rogo te babeto me excusatum 
Et alius dixit iuga boum emi 
quinque et eo probare illa 
propter quod non possum uenire. et alius dixit 
uxorem duxi propter quod non possum uenire 
Et adueniens seruus adnuntiauit 
dmo suo haecomnia et iratus 
paterfamilias seruo suo dixit 
exi celerius in plateas et uicos 
(Fol. 246 a.) 


Cap. XIV. 11—121. 


224 


TO πολεωσ KALTTWXOVT καὶ αναπειρουσ 
και τυφλουσ καὶ χωλουσ᾽ ἐνεγκε woe 
και o δουλοσ ειπεν γεγον o ἐπεταξασ 
καὶ ετι τοποσ ἐστιν καὶ εἰτεν O KG. προσ TOV 
δουλον avrov. εξελθε εἰσ Tao οδουσ 
και φραγμουσ καὶ ἀαναγκασον εἰσελθειν 
ἵνα γεμισθὴ μου οοικοσ λεγω yap ὕμειν 
ort ουδεισ των ανθρωπων των 
κεκλημένων γευσεται μου του δειπνον 
pre : Cuveropevovro δε avro oxXot 
kat στραφεισ ELEY αὐτοισ EL TLO ἐρχεται 
προσ με καὶ ου πεισει TOV TATEPA AUTOU 
και τὴν μήτερα αντοῦυ και τὴν γυναικα 
και τα τεκνα και τουσ αδελφουσ 
και τασ αδελῴφασ ert δε καὶ τὴν eavrov 
ψυχὴν ov δυναται μον μαθητὴσ ειναι 
και oc ov βασταζει τον σταυρον avrov 
και epxera οπισω μου ov δυναται μου 
: μαθητησ εἰναι : Tur δε ef ὕμων 
θελων πυργον οικοδομησαι 
ovxt πρωτον καθισασ ψηφειζει 
τὴν δαπανὴν εἰ exei εἰσ απαρτισμον 
ἵνα μηποτε θεντοσ avrov θεμελειον 
μὴ ἴσχυσὴ οἰκοδομῆσαι καὶ παντεσ 
ot θεωρουντεσ μελλουσιν λεγειν 
ovroc οανθρωποσ ἡρξατο οικοδομειν 
Kat ουκισχυσεν ἐκτελεσαι ἡ τις βασιλευσ 
πορενομενοσ᾽ erepo βασιλει. συνβαλειν 
εἰσ πολεμὸν ovk ευθεωσ καθισασ 
πρωτον βουλευεται εἰ δυνατοσ ἐστιν 
εν δεκα χειλειασιν Tw μετα εἰκοσι 
χιλιαδων epxop.evo em avrov 
ὕπαντησαι εἰ Oe pry ert avrov πορρω 


(Fol. 246 5.) 


ciuitatis et egenos et debiles 
et caecos et clodos adduc hic 

Et seruus dixit factum est quod praecepisti 
etadhuclocusest et dixit dms ad 
serbum suum exi in uias 
etinsaepes et coge introire 
ut inpleatur domus mea dico enim uobis 
quia nemo illorum hominorum qui 
inuitatisunt gustabit decens mea 
ibant autem cum illo turbae 
et conuersus dixit illis si quis uenit 
adme et non odit patrem suum 
et matrem suam et uxorem 
et filios et fratres 
etsorores adhucetiam et suam 
animam non potest meus discipulus esse 
et qui non baiulat crucem suam 
et uenit retro me non potest meus 
discipulusesse — quisautem ex uobis 
uolens turrem aedificare 
nonneprimum sedens conputat 
erogationem si habet ad perfectum 
ut ne forte cum posuerit fundamentum 
non potuerit aedificare et omnes 
qui uident incipient dicere 
hichomo coepit aedificare 
et non potuit perficere aut quis rex 
abiens alio regi committere 
in pugnam nonne continuo sedens 
primum cogitat si potens est 
in decemilibus illi qui cum uiginti 
milibus uenit super eum 


obuiari si quo minus adhuc eo longe 


(Fol. 247 a.) 


Cap, XIV. 21—33. 


C 
er: 


— 
pr: xaXov ro ada eay δε και ro ada μωρανθὴ | 


[3j 


3! 


ovrog ἀποστειλασ πρεσβειαν ἐρωτα τα 
προσ etpyvyy : ὄυτωσ ovy και e£ ὕμων 


XIV. 


33 


WAG OU OUK ἀποτασσεται TOU ὕπαρχουσιν 


avrov ov Suara: pov pabyrne ειναι 


ev τίνι ἀρτυθησεται ovre εἰσ τὴν γὴν 


ovre «wr κοπριαν evÜeroy ἐστιν 
ἐξω βαλλουσιν avro — 0 exar ὦτα 


axovety axoverw : ἧσαν Se 


| eyytlovreo avro παντεσ᾽ οἱ τελωγας 


καὶ ἀμαρτωλοι GKOVELV αὐτου 

και διεγογγυζον οι τε φαρισαιοι 
καὶ οἱ γραμματεισ λεγοντεσ 

ort ovrog αμαρτωλουσ προσδεται 


: και συνεσθιει αυτοισ : éurey δε 


προσ avrove τὴν παραβολὴν ταυτὴν 
τισ ανθρωποσ εξ ὕμων οσ εξει 

exarov προβατα και απολεση 

εξαυτων εν ουκαφιησιτα 

ἐνενήκοντα evvea. εν τῇ ἐρήμω 

και ἀπελθὼν ro απολωλοσ ζητει 

εωσ ευρή avro Kat ευρων επιτιθησιν 


επὶ TOVT WOVE αντου χαιρων 


: ελθω de eux οιἰκον συνκαλειται 


τουσ φιλουσ καὶ Tove γειτονασ 
λεγων αντοισ σννγχαρητε μοι ort 
ευρον To προβατον μον το ἀπολωλοσ 
λεγω Se Tet ort ovrog. χαρα εσται 
εν TW ovpayo em ey. αμαρτωλω 
μετανοουντι ἢ emt ἐνενήκοντα 


€vvea δικαιοισ οιτινεσ OUX εχουσι 


> χρείαν μετανοιασ᾽ : 9) τισ γυνὴ 


ἐχουσα δραχμασ δεκα και απολεσασα 
(Fol. 247 b.) 


34. 
35 


XV.t 


4 


SEC LUCAM 295 
— — ey -- 


constitudo mittenslegatosrogat quae 
&d pacem sic ergo et ex uobis 
omnis qui non abrenuntiat substantiae 
suae non potest meus discipulus esse 

bonum est sal etsi autem sal infatuatum fuerit 
inquosalietur neque in terram 
neque in stercore utile est 
foras mittent illud qui habet sures 
audiendiaudiat erat autem 
adpropiantei omnes publicani 
et peccatores audire eum 
et murmurabant pharisaei 
et scribae dicentes 
quoniam hic peccatores adsumit 
et manducat cum illis. dixit autem 
&d eos parabolam hanc 

quis ex uobis homo qui habet 
centum oues et perdiderit 
unum ex eis nonne dismittit 
nonaginta nouem in desertum 
et uadit et quaerit quod perierat 
usque dum inueniat illud et inueniens inponit 
super umeros suos gaudens 
ueniens autem in domum conuocat 
amicos et uicinos 
dicens eis cum gaudete mihi quoniam 
inueni ouem meam quae perierat 
dico autem uobis quoniam sic gaudium erit 
incaelo super uno peccatore 
paenitentiam agenti quam Super "ΧΟ. 
nouem iustis qui non habent 
opus paenitentiae aut quae mulier 
habens drachmas decem et si perdiderit 

(Fol. 248 a.) 


Carp. XIV. 32—XV. 8. 


29 


296 KAT AOYKAN 
— v. --- 


μίαν ovxt απτει λυχνον καὶ σαροι 

τὴν οἰκιαν καὶ ζητει επιμελωσ 

€wo εὑρῇ καὶ ευρουσα συνκαλειται 

Tac γειτονασ καὶ φιλασ λεγουσα 
συνχαρητε μοι ort evpoy - yy ἀπώλεσα δραχμη 


: ovrog λεγω ὕμειν χαρα εσται ενωπιον 


FT 


—Á 
των a-yyeovy rov θυ ert evi 
αμαρτωλω μετανοουντι 


:€urev Se ανθρωποσ rur ειχεν δυο ὕιουσ 


[3] 


και εἰπεν O VEWTEPOT AUTWY τω πατρι 

πατερ Soo pot To επιβαλλον μοι μεροσ 

TO ουσιασ και διειλεν avrow 

τον βιον και ov μετα πολλασ ἡμερασ 

σνυναγαγων πανταὰα 0 γεωτεροσ ὕιοσ 

απεδημησεν eur xopay μακραν 

κακει διεσκορπισεν € avrov rov βιον 

Cuv ασωτωσ δαπανησ αντοσ δε 

avTov παντα eyevero λειμοσ ἵσχυρα 

κατα τὴν χωραν εκεινὴν και avrog 

ἤρξατο ὕστερισθαι και πορευθεισ 

exoAAnOy evi rov πολειτων 

THO χωρασ εκεινὴσ και ἐπεμψεν 

avrov εἰσ τουσ ἀγρουσ βοσκειν χοιρουσ 

καπεθυμει χορτασθῆναι ex των 

κερατιων wy ἤσθιον ot χοιροι 

και ουδεισ εδιδουτω Εἰσ eavroy δε 

ἐλθων εἰπεν ποσοι μισθιοι 

TOV πατροσ μου περισσενουσιν ἀρτων 

eyo δε δε λειμω ἀπολλυμαι 

αγναστασ᾽ πορευσομαι προσ TOV πατερα μον 

καὶ ἐρὼ avro πατερ ἡμαρτον εἰσ TOV 

OVpQVOV και ενωπιον σον  OUKETL 

ειμι advo. κληθῆναι σου Seog TOU) OV 
(Fol. 248 5.) 


XV. 


13 


14 


17 


19 


unam nonne accendit lucernam et mundat 
domum et quaerit diligenter 

usque quo inueniat et cum inuenerit conuocst 
uicinas et amicas dicens 


congaudete mihi quia inueni quam perdidera Ὁ 


: . 2. drachma 
sic dico uobis gaudium erit in conspectu: 


— 
angelorum dei super uno 


peccatori paenitentia agenti 


dixit autem homo quidam habebat duos filios 


et dixit adulescentior eorum patri 
pater da mihi quod me tanget partem 
substantiae et diuisit eis 
substantiam et non post multos dies 
congregans omnia adulescentior filius 
peregrinatus est in regionem longinquam 
et ibi disparsit substant iam suam 
uiuens luxuriose cum erogasset autem 
omnia facta est famis magna 
per regionem illam et ipse 
coepit egeri et abiit 
et adhesit ibi uni ciuium 
regioniillus et misit 
euminagros pascere porcos 
et cupiebat saturari de 
siliquis quase debant porci 
et nemo dabat illi in semetipsum 
autem ueniens dixit quanti mercennarii 
patris mei abundant panibus 
ego autem hic fame pereo 
surgens ibo ad patrem meum 
et dicam illi pater pecaui in 
caelum et in conspecto tuo iam non 
sum dignus uocari filius tuus fac 

(Fol. 249 a.) 


Car, XV. 8—19. 


prea eva των μισθιὼων σου 

καὶ αναστασ ἡλθεπροσ Toy πατερα avrov 

ert Óe avrov μακραν απεχοντοῦ 

eSey avrov o πατὴρ avrov καὶ εσπλαγχνισθὴ 

και δραμὼν ενεπεσεν ἐπὶ TOV 

τραχήλον avrov κατεφιλησεν αὐτὸν 

o b¢ io εἰπεν avro πατερ ἥμαρτον 

εἰσ TOV ουρανον και ενωπῖον σου 

ovxert εἰμι αξιοσ κληθηναι σου ὕιοσ 

ποιῆσον με wo eva. Tuy μισθιων σου 

εἰπεν δε o πατὴρ προσ τουσ δουλουσ 

avrov ταχεὼσ efeveyxare στολὴν 

τὴν πρωτὴν και ἐνδυσατε avrov 

και Gore Gaxrv)uov εἰσ τὴν χειρα avrov 

και ὕποδηματα εἰσ Tove ποδασ avTOv 

καὶ ἐνέγκατε TOV σείτευτον μοσχον 

xat θυσατε και φαγωμεν 

και εὐῴφρανθωμεν οτιουτοσ οὕιοσ μον 

γεκροσ ἣν καὶ ανεζησεν απολωλωσ 

και αρτι ευρεθη καὶ ἡρξαντο 

ευφραινεσθαι nv δεοῦ ιοσ avrov 

οπρεσβυτεροσ evaypw ελθων δε 

καὶ ἐγγισασ T1] OLKELA ἡκουσεν 

συνφωνιασ καὶ χορων και 

προσκαλεσαμενοσ eya των παιδων 

exvvOavero τι θελει Tovro ειναι 

o δεειπεν ort o αδελῴοσ σου ket καὶ 

εθυσεν o πατὴρ σον Toy σειτευτον μοσχον 

aurw ort ὕγιενοντα avrov ἀπελαβεν 
Ὠργισθὴη δε και οὐκηθελεν εἰσελθειν 

o δε πατὴρ avrov εξελθων ἡρξατο avrov 

o δε αποκρειθεισ ειπεν τω πατρει avrov 


ἴδον τοσαυτα ery δουλενω σοι και ovderore 
(Fol. 249 5.) 


XV. 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


27 


28 


29 


mi Se — 
EC LUCAN 227 

— — ι.-. — 

me sicut unum mercennariorum tuorum 

et surgens uenit ad patrem suum 

adhuc autem eo longe iter habentes 

uidit eum pater eius et misertus est 

et currens incubuit super 


collum eius et osculatus est eum 


dixit autem filius eius pater peccaui 


in caelum et in conspecto tuo 

iam non sum dignus uocari filius tuus 

fac me sicut unum mercennariorum tuorum 

dixit autem pater ad seruos 

suos cito adferte stolam 

primam et induite eum 

et date anulum in manum eius 

et calciamenta in pedes eius 

et adducite saginatum uitulum 

et occidite et manducemus 

et aepulemur quoniam hic filius meus 

mortuus erat et reuixit perierat 

et modo inuentus est et coeperunt 

aepulari erat autem filius eius 

seniorin uilla ueniens autem 

et proximans domui audiuit 

synfoniae et chori et 

aduocans unum de pueris 

interrogabat quid uellet hoc esse 

ad ille dixit quoniam frater tuus uenit et 

occidit pater tuus saginatum uitulum 

illi quia salbum eum recepit 

iratus est autem et nolebat introire 

pater autem eius exiens rogabat eum 

ad ille respondens dixit patri suo 

ecce tot annos seruio tibi et numquam 
(Fol. 250a.) 


Cap. XV. 19—29. 


228 


παρεβην σου εντολην και ovderore ΧΥ͂. 
eSwxac μοι ἐριφον εξ αἰγων ἵνα μετα των 
φιλων μου αριστησω τω δεῦιω σον 30 
τω καφαγοντι παντὰ μετὰ των πορνων 
και ελθοντι εθυσασ rov σειτευτον μοσχον 

O δεειπεν avro av Tavrore μετ ἐμοῦ εἰ 31 
καίπαντα Ta eua σα ἐστιν ευφρανθηναι 32 
δε «Dev και χαρηναι ort o αδελῴοσ σον οντοσ 
vexpoo ἣν καὶ ανεζησεν απολωλωσ 
και ευρεθὴ ελεγεν δε και προσ Tove XVL 1 
μαθητασ ἀανθρωποσ ric y πλουσιοσ 
OG €LX€V οἰκονομον και OUTOG 
διεβληθη avro. wo διασκορπιζων τα 
ὕπαρχοντααντοὸν καὶ φωνησασ 2 


€LTEV avro TLTOVTO ἀκονω περισου αποδοσ 
TOV λογον THE οικονομιασ ov yap δυνὴ 
ετι οἰκονομειν εἰιπεν δε εν εαυτω 3 
° — 
0 OLKOVOJ&OG TL ποιησω OTLO KT μου 
αφαιρειται τὴν οἰκονομίαν μὸν σκαπτοιν 
OUK σχνω επαίτειν αἰσχυνομαι εγνοιν 4 
τι ποιήσω ἵνα oray μετασταθὼω εκ THe 
οἰκονομιασ δεξωνται μαι εἰσ τουσ οἰκουσ αὐτῷ 
και προσκαλεσαμενοσ eva. ἐκαστον 5 
των χρεοφιλε rov Tov kvpuov avrov 
ἐλεγεν Tw πρωτω ποσὸν οφειλεισ 
— 
Tw Kw pou οδεειπεν exarov 6 
καδουσ ελαιου eurev δε avro δεξαι σον 
Ta γραμματα καὶ γραψον πεντήκοντα 
ἐπειτα TO ETEPW ELTTEY exaroy κορουσ 7 
σειτου o de Aeyec avro δεξε σον τα 
γραμματα και γρα yoy ογδοηκοντα 
και ἐπήνεσεν o Ko τὸν OLKOVOJLOV 8 
Tyo αδικιασ ort φρονιμωσ εἐποιησεν 
(Fol. 250 5.) 


SEC LUCAN 
—— -. — 
praeteribi mandatum tuum et numquam 
dedisti mihi haedum de capris ut cum 
amicis meis prandeam filio autem tuo 
qui comedit omnia cum meretricibus 


et uenienti occidisti saginatum uitulum 


ad ille dixit illi tu semper mecum es 


et omnia mea tua sunt aepulari autem 
oportebat et gaudere quia frater tuus hic 
mortuus estetreuixit perierat 
etinuentusest  dicebatautem ad 
discipulos homo quidam erat diues 

qui habebat uilicum et hic 

diffamatus est ei quasi dissipans 
substantiam eius et uocans eum 
dixitilli quid hoc audio de te redde 
rationem uilicationis non enim potes 
adhuc uilicare dixit autem intra se 
uilicus quid faciam quia dma meus 
aufert uilicationem meam fodere 
non ualeo mendicare confundor scio 
quid faciam et cum amotus fuero de 
uilicatione accipiant me in domus suas 
et aduocans unumquemque 
debitorum domini sui 

dicebat primo quantum debes 

dmo meo adilledixit centum 

siclos olei dixit autem illi accipe tuas 
litteras et scribe quinquaginta 

deinde alio dixit tu autem quantum 
debes ad ille dixit centum mensuras 
tritici ad ille dixit illi accipe tuas 
litteras et scribe octoginta 


et laudauit dms uilicum 


iniquitatis quoniam sapienter fecit 
(Fol. 351 a.) 


Capp, XV. 29—XV VI. 8. 


διο Xeyo ὕμειν ot ὕιοι του αἰωνοσ XVI. 
τουτου φρονιμωτεροι ὕπερ τουσ 

ϑιουσ του φωτοσ εἰσ τὴν γενεαν THY eavroy — 
καγω A €yo ὕμειν ποιήσατε eavrour 9 
φιλουσ᾽ ex Tov adixov μαμωνα 

ἵνα oray ἐκλιπὴ δεξωνται ὕμασ 

εἰσ τασ αἰωνιουσ σκηνασ 

οπιστοσ ev ἐλαχιστω και ev πολλω πιστοσ 10 
εστιν Kato ἐν ολιγω αδικοσ' Kat 

εν πολλω αδικοσ᾽ γεινεται εἰ ovv 11 
ἐν ro adtxw μαμονα πιστοι ovk eyeverOe 


To αλήηθινον τισ üp.e πιστευσει 


καὶ εἰ εν To αλλοτριω Trio TOL ουκ ἐγενεσθε 12 
To ὕμετερον Tia δωσει ὕμειν 
ΓΌΝΟΝ 
pqa: Ονδεισ' οἰκετησ δυναται δυσὶ κυριοισ 13 
-- 


ΙΣ! 


SBS 


[3f 


GovA«vew ἢ yap Tov «va μεισήησει 
καὶ TOV €repoy ἀγαπήσει ἢ evor ανθεξεται 


Kat του ετερου καταφρονήσει ov δυνασθε 


--- 
: Ow δουλευειν καὶ μαμονα * ἥκονον 14 


δεταντα οι φαρισαιοι φιλαργυροι ὕπαρχοντεσ 
και ἐξεμυκτηριζον αντον και εἰπεν αυτοισ 15 
ὕμεισ ere ot δικαιουντεσ eavrova ἐνωπίον 
Tov avOpurwy 0 Oe ὃσ γεινωσκει 
Tac καρδιασ ὕμων ort To εν ανθρωποισ 
— 
ὕψηλον βδελυγμα ενωπιον rov Ov : ὃ νομοσ τό 
και οἱ προφηται ewe ἴωανου επροφητευσαν 


αποτεὴ βασιλεια του by εναγγελιξεται 


: και πασ εἰσ αὐτὴν βιαζεται ? ξυκοπωτερον δε 17 


ἐστιν TOV ουρανον Kat τὴν ynv παρελθειν 


7 TOV νομον μιαν Kepeay πεσειν 


: Tac οαπολνων τὴν γυναικα αντου 18 


kat yaprov ETEPAY JLOLYEVEL KALO 


απολελυμενὴν γαμὼων μοιχενει 
(Fol. 251 5.) 


L| 
— 


EC LUCAN 229 
SS -- 

propter quod dico uobis fili saeculi 

huius sapientiores super 

filios lucis in generationem suam sunt 

et ego dico uobis facite uobis 

amicos deiniquo mamona 

ut cum defecerit accipiant uos 

in aeterna tabernacula 

qui fidelis est in modico et in multo fidelia 
est et qui in modico inicus et 

in multo inicus fit siergo 

in inico mamona fidelis non fuistis 

quod uerum est quis credet uobis 

et si in alieno fidelis non fuistis 


uestrum quis dabit uobis 


nemo seruus potest duobus dominis 


Beruire aut enim unum odiet 
et unum diliget aut unum adprehendet 
et alium contemnet non potestis 
deo seruire et mamonae audiebant 
autem haec pharisaei cum essent cupidi 
et subsannabant eum et dixit eis 
uos es tis qui iustificat is uos in conspectu 
hominum ds autem nouit 
corda uestra quia quod in hominibus 
altum abominatio in conspectu dei lex 
et prophetae usque ad iohanen prophetarunt 
& quo regnum dei euangelizat 
et omnes in eam conatur facilius autem 
est caelum et terram praeterire 
quam de lege unam apicem cadere 
omnis qui dimittit uxorem suam 
et nubens aliam moechatur οὐ qui 
dimissam nubit moechatur 

(Fol. 252a.) 


Car. XVI. 8— 1:8. 


230 KAT AOYK 


εἰπεν δε καὶ erepay παραβολὴν XVI. 19 
—, 
eas :AvÜporroc rw v rXAovaiog. Kat 

ενεδυδισκετο πορφυραν και βυσσον 


Kat ευὐφραινομενοσ καθημεραν 


λαμπρωσ πτωχοσ de Tw ovopare 20 
λαζαροσ εβεβλητο προσ τον τυλωνα 
avrov ειλκωμενοσ καὶ επιθυμων 21 


χορτασθηναι απὸ των ψιχων των πειπτοντω 
απὸ Tyo τραπεζησ του πλουσιον αλλα και ot KUVET 
ερχομενοι eXecxoy τα ελκὴ avrov 

Evyevero δε αποθανειν τον πτωχον Kat 22 
amevexOnvat avrov ew Tov κολποναβρααμ - 
ὕπο των ἀγγελων απεθανεν δε 
και οπλουσιοσ και εταφὴ καὶ ey TW 23 
aby εἐπαρασ Tove οφθαλμουσ avrov 
ὕπαρχων εν βασανοισ ορα αβρααμ 
απὸ μακροθεν και λαζαρον εν τω κολπω avrov 
αναπανομενον καὶ AUTO εμφωνησασ eurey 24 
πατερ αβρααμ ελεησον με και πεμψον Aalapo 
ἵνα [Jag το axpov του δακτυλου avrov vOaro- 
και καταψυξὴ τὴν γλωσσαν pov 
ort οὗυνωμαι εν τὴ φλογι ταυτὴ 

Ειπεν δεαβρααμ τεκνον μνησθητι 25 
ort αἀπελαβεσ ra. ayaba cov ev τὴ 
ζωη σου και λαζαροσ ομοιωσ τα κακα 
νυν δεωδεπαρακαλειται ov δε 
οδυνασαι καὶ ἐπὶ πασιτουτοισ μεταξυημων 16 
και ὕμων χασμα μεγα ἐστήρικται omg 
ot θελοντεσ διαβηναι προσ ὕμασ - μη δυνωνται 
μήτεεκειθεν woe διαπερασαι εἰπεν δε 27 
«poro σε ovy πατερ αβρααμ ἵνα πεμψησ avro- 
εἰσ TOV OLKOV TOV πατροσ μον ἔχω yap Tr€VT€ 28 
αδελῴουσ᾽ οπωσ διαμαρτυρηται 

(Fol. 252.) 


SEC LUCA 


[2] 


. dixit autem et aliam parabolam 
homo quidam eratdiues et 

induebatur purpuram et byssum 
aepulans cottidie 
splendede pauper autem quidam nomine 
lazarus missus erat ad ianuam 
eius ulceribus plenus et cupiens 
saturari de micis quae cadebant 
de mensa diuitis sed et canes 
uenientes elingebant ulcera eius 

factum est autem ut moreretur pauper et 
ductus est in sinus abrahae 
ab angelis mortuus est autem 
et diues et sepultus est et in 
inferno leuans oculos suos 
cum esset in tormentis uidet abraham 
a longe etlazarum in sinus eius 


requiescentem et ipse exclamans dixit 


pater abraham miserere mihi . et mitte lazaru 


utintingat extremum digiti sui aquam 

et refrigeret linguam meam 

quoniam adfligor inustione ignis huius 
dixit autem abraham fili memento 

quoniam recepisti bona tua in 

uita tua et lazarus similiter mala 

nunc autem hic consolatur tu autem 

adfligeris et in omnibus his. inter nos et uos 

chaus magnum confirmatus est ut 

qui uolunt transire ad uos non possent 

neque inde hic transmeare dixit autem 

rogo te ergo pater abraam ut mittas eum 

in domum patris me i habeo enim quinque 

fratres ut testificetur 

(Fol. 253 a.) 


Cap. XVI. 10--- 28. 


PRBS 


σ 
— 


om, 
oa 
— 


— ᾿ς — 
KAT AOYK 
SN OS 


μαθητασ avrov avevdextov ἐστιν 
του μὴ ελθειν τα σκανδαλα πλὴν ovat 


διου ἔρχεταί σννῴερει de avrw 


αντοισ μὴ καιαντοι ελθωσιν XYI. 
εἰσ TovToy Tov Toroyv THE βασανον 

€urev 9€ avro aBpaap exovat pasüa €o. 29 
KGL τουσ προφητασ ακουσατωσαν αντων 

o δεείπεν ονχι πατὴρ αβρααμ αλλα cay rur 30 
ex νεκρὼν πορευθὴ προσ avrova 
μετανοησουσιν εἰπεν δε avro 31 
εἰ μωύσεωσ και των προφητων 
OUK ακουουσιν οὐδε αν τισ EK νεκρων 
ἀναστὴ Kat αἀπελθη προσ avrove 

: πιστευσουσιν : ἔιπεν δεπροσ Tove XVIL r 


ει λιθοσ μυλικοσ περιεκειτο περι τὸν τραχῆλο 


avTOv και epurTo εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν 


ἢ ἵνα σκανδαλισὴ eva των μεικρων TOUTW 


: προσέεχεται εαντοισ :€ay αμαρτησὴ εἰσ σε 


ο αδελῴφοσ σον επειτιμησον avro 

και «ay μετανοησὴ αφεσ avro 

και €ay ἐπτακεισ THO ἡμερασ αμαρτησὴη 
εισ σε καιετο ἐπτακισ ἐπιστρεψη 


προσ σελεγων peravonow αφεσ avro 


— 
[Kat εἶπαν οἱ ἀπόστολοι Tw Kw προσθεσ 


ἡμεῖν πιστιν 0 δεειπεν αυτοισ εἰ eixere πιστι 
wo κοκκον σιναπεωσ eAeyere ay 
τω ορειτουτω perafa evrevÜey 
εκει καὶ μετεβαινεν και τὴ 
συκαμεινω μεταφ υτευθητι eur τὴν 
θαλασσαν και ὕπηκουσεν ay ἵμειν 
rur δε εχων ὕμων δουλον ἀαροτριωντα 
1) ποιμενοντα og εισελθοντι 


εκ TOV αγρον μὴ ἐρειαντω ευθεωσ 


(Fol. 253 δ.) 


SEG 
— 


— 


LUCAN 
- - 
ilis ne et ipsi ueniant 
in hunc locum tormenti 
dixit autem abraham habent moysen 
et prophetas audiant eos 
ad ille dixit non pater abraham sed si quis 
de mortuis ierit ad eos 
paenitebuntur dixit autem ad eum 
81 moysen et prophetas 
non audiunt nec si quis ex mortuis 
surrexerit et ierit ad eos 
credent dixitautem ad 
discipulos suos inpossibile est 
ut non ueniant scandala uerum uae 


per quem ueniunt expediebat illi 


si lapidem molae circumdatus esset circa collu ὦ 


eius et proiectus esset, in mare 
aut ut scandalizet unum de pusillis istis 
adtendite uobis si peccauerit in te 
frater tuus emenda illum 
et si paenitentiam egerit dimitte illi 
et si septies in die peccauerit 
in te et septies reuersus fuerit 
ad te dicens paeniteor dimitte illi 

Et dixerunt apostoli dmo adde nobis 
fidem ad ille dixit illis si haberetis fidem 
Sicut granum sinapis dicebatis utique 
montihuic transi hinc 
ibide et transibat et 
moro transplantari in 
mare et obaudisset uobis 

quis autem ex uestris habens seruum arante 
aut oues pascentem qui ut intrauit 
de agro num quid dicit illi continuo 

(Fol. 254 a.) 


Carr, XVI. 38—X VII. 7. 


231 


232 


παρελθων avameg« αλλα eper avro 
ετοιμασον τι δειπνήσω Kat 
περιξζωσαμενοσ διακονει μοι 
«o0 φαγω και Tu Kat μετα ravra 
Payer αι av και πιεσαι μὴ exec χαριν 
τω δουλω ort ἐποιῆσεν Ta 
διαταχθεντα avro ov δοκω ovrwe και ὕμεισ 
oray ποιησητε oca. Àeyo λέγεται 
ort δουλοι ἐσμεν αἀχριος οὐὠφιλομεν 
ποίησαι πεποιήκαμεν 

και €yevero εν τω πορευεσθαε avrov 
εἰσ Ἱερουσαλήμ και avrog διήρχετο 
μέσον σαμαρειασ και γαλιλαιασ 
και εἰσερχομενοῦ GUTOV εἰσ τινα 

' κωμὴν οπον cay δεκα avdper 
λεπροι και ἐστῆσαν πορρωθεν 
και ἐκραξαν φωνὴ peyaAn uae 
ἐπιστατα eXenooy ἡμασ Kat ov 
avrove εἰπεν avro τεθεραπευέσθε 
πορευθεντεσ επιδειξατε eavrove 
Touriepevgiy εγενετο δε ey τω 
ὕπαγειν αὐυτουσ εκαθαρισθησαν 
eur δε εξ αυτων ἴδων ort εκαθαρισθη 
ὕπεστρεψεν μετα μεγαλησ φωνησ 
δοξαζων rov ὃν καὶ ἐπεσεν emt προσωπον 
προσ Tove ποδασ avrov ἣν δε σαμαριτησ 

αποκριθεισ δεο - ειἰπεν GvTOUX ουτοι 
δεκα εκαθαρισθησαν — ov evvea που 


εξαντων ουδεισ εὐυρεθηὴ ὕποστρεφων 


XVII ὃ 


1T 


oc δωσει Bofay τω ϑω et μη 0 αλλογενὴσ euros 


και €UT€V QUTW ἀναστασ TTOD€UOV - OTL ἢ WLO Tie σου 19 


σβ : σεσωκενσε: ἕπερωτηθεισ δε ὕπο των 
—À — 
dapurawy Tore epxere ) βασιλεια του θυ 
(Fol. 254 5.) 


20 


fm 
Jos 
fe 


CAN 


transi recumbe sed dicet illi 
para mihi quod cenem et 
cingete et ministra mihi 

usque quo manducem et bibam et post haec 
manducabis tu et bibes. num quid habet gratis 
seruo quia fecit quae 

praecepta sunt ei non puto ita et uos 

cum feceritis quae dico dicitis 

quoniam serui inutiles sumus quod debuimus 


facere fecimus 


Et factum est cum iter faceret 


in hierusalem et ipse praeteribat 
per medium samariae et galilaeae 
et introeunte eo in quendam 
castellum ubi erant decem uiri 
leprosi et steterunt de longe 
et clamauerunt uoce magna ihu 
magister miserere nobis et uidens 
eos dixit illis curati estis 
ite et ostendite uos 
sacerdotibus factum est autem cum 
irent mundatisunt 
unus autem ex e is uidens quia mundatus est 
reuersus est Cum magna uoce 
honorans dm et cecidit in faciem 


ad pedes eius. erat autem samaritanus 


respondens autem ihs dixit ill is hi 


decem mundati sunt nobem ubi 
ex his nemo inuentus est reuertens 


qui dauit gloriam do nisi alienigena hic 


Et dixit illi surgens uade quoniam fides tua 


salbabit te interrogatus autem a 
pharisaeis quando uenit regnum del 


(Fol. 255 a.) 


Cap. XVII. 7—20. 


3j 


[3] 


[4 


απεκριθὴ avrour Kat εἰπεν οὐκ epxerat 
ῃ βασεια Tov Ov μετα παρατηρησεωσ 
ovde epovaty - ov woe ἡ ἴδον εκει 

px) πιστευσητε Sov yap ἡ βασιλεια 


—Á 
TOv θυ evroc ὕμων ἐστιν 


: Εἰπὲν ovy προσ rove μαθητασ ελευσονται 


ἡμέραι rov επιθυμησαι ὕμασ 
μίαν των ἡμέρων rovrov του ὕιου 


του ανθρωπου καὶ ovx οψεσθαι 


: καιερουσὶιν ὕμειν ἴδου ὧδε tdov eet 


μὴ απελθητε μηδε διωξητε 


> ὡσπεέρ γὰρ ἢ αστραπὴ 7 acTparrovca 


εκ THO ὕπο τὸν OVpavoy αστραπτει 


ουτωσ εσται καὶ οὕιοσ Tov ayÜpwrrov 


: πρῶωτον δεδι avrov πολλα παθειν 


και αποδοκιμασθηναι απο THE 


: γεένεασ ταντὴσ " και καθωσ εἐγενετο 


εν ταισ ἡμεραισ νωε ουτωσ εσται 

και ἐν ταισ ἡμεραισ του ὕιον του ανθρωπου 
ἤσθιον erwov ἐγαμουν εγαμιζοντο 

αχρι no ἡμερασ εἰσηλθεν voe εἰσ την κιβωτο 


και €y€vero κατακλυσμοσ καὶ απωλεσε 


: πάντασ + ὑμοιωσ και wo ἐγενετο 


ev ταισ ἡμεραισ λωτ- ἡσθιον επινον 
ηγοραζον ἐπωλουν εφυτευον 
ὠκοδομουν ἢ ἡμέρα εξηλθελωτ 
απο σοδομων εβρεξεθειον και πυρ 
απ Ovpayov καὶ aaro λεσεπαντασ 
κατα τα αντα εσται εν τὴ ἥμερα 


του ὕιου του ανθρωπου ἡ αποκαλυφθη 


: ἐκεινὴ τὴ ἡμέρα OG εσται eri TOv 


δωματοσ και τὰ σκευὴ avrov εν TH ow. 
μὴ καταβατω ἀραιαντα Kato εν τω ἀγρω 


(Fol. 255 δ.) 


Cap, XVII. 20—31. 


XVII. 


21 


23 


24. 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


SEC LUCAN 

SS = 
respondit illis et dixit non uenit 
regnum del cum obserbatione 
neque dicent ecce hic aut cce illi 
nolite credere ecce enim regnum 


—> , 
dei intra uos est 


dixit ergo ad discipulos uenient 


dies ut concupiscatis 

unum dierum horum fili 

hominis et non uideuitis 

et dicent uobis ecce hic aut ecce illic 

ne ieritis neque persequemini 

sicut enim scoruscus qui scoruscat 

de sub caelu scoruscat 

sic erit et filius hominis 

primum enim oportet eum multa pati 

et reprobari a 

generatione hac et sicut fuit 

indiebusnoe sic erit 

et in diebus fili hominis 

edebant bibebant.nubebant.nubebantur 

usque in diem quo introiit noe in arcam 

etfuit dilubium et perdidit 

omnes similiter sicut fuit 

indiebuslot edebant bibebant 

emebant uendebant plantabant 

aedificabant quo die exiuit lot 

a sodomis pluit sulfur et igne 

de caelo et perdidit omnes 

secundum haeo erit in die 

fili hominis qui reuelabitur 

in illo die qui erit super 

tectum et uasa eius in domo 

non descendat tollere illa et qui in agro 
(Fol. 256 a.) 


30 


233 


234 KAT AOYK SEC LUCAN 
—— —— ——— SG 
ομοιωσ μὴ επιστραφητω ew τα οπισω XVII. similiter non conuertatur retro 
σι : pyypovevere Tyo γυναικοσ λωθ 32 et mementote uxoris lot 
gu. : oc ay GeAnon ζωογονησαι τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 33 qui uoluerit biuicare animam suam 
απολεσει αὐτὴν και οσ ay απολεσὴ perdet illam et qui perdiderit 
ei : ζωογονήσει aurny : Aeyw ὕμειν ταυτὴ 34 uiuificauit illam dico uobis hac 
τὴ νυκτι ἐσονται ert kAuyyo: μιασ Ovo nocte erunt in lecto uno duo 
ew παραλαμβανετε και o erepoo aderat unus adsumetur et unus relinquetur 
ἐσονται δυο αληθουσαι ert To avro 35 erunt duo molentes in uno 
ἢ μία παραληφθησεται και ἡ erepa. una adsumetur et alia 
αφεθησεται vo eypo εἰσ παραληφθησεται 36 dimittetur duo in agro unus adsumetur 
Kat o ετεροσ αφεθησεται etalius dimittetur —— 
oly : καὶ αποκριθεντεσ λεγουσιν που κε 3) Etrespondentes dixerunt ubi dme 
σιὸ : οδεειπεν avrota oov To σωμα ad ille dixit illis ubi corpus 
exet συναχθήσονται οι aerot iun ibi congregabuntur et aquilae 


eXeyev δε και παραβολὴν avrowr προσ ro Sew — 1 dicebat autem et parauolam illis quod oportet 


WayTore προσευχεσθαι Kat μὴ ἐνκακειν semper orare et non deficere 


Lom, 
κριτὴσ τισ nV €V TH TONE rov θν n iudex quidam erat in ciuitate dm non 


|l 


φοβουμενοσ και ανθρωπον μη timens et hominem non 
evrperopevog — xnpa. Oe nv ev τὴ 3 reuerens uidua autem erat in 
| πολει ekewr καὶ ἤρχετο προσ avrov λεγουσα ciuitate illa et ueniebat ad eum dicens 
| εἐκδικησον με aaro Tov αντιδικου μου deuindica me ab abuersario meo 
καὶ ovk nOeXev erc xpovov τινα 4 et nolebat in aliqod temporis 
μετα Se ravra ηλθεν ewr cavroy post haec uenit aput se 
και λέγει εἰ TOV ὃν ov φοβουμαι et dicit ai dm non timeo 
καὶ ανθρωπον ovk evTperopat et hominem non reuereor 
Óua.ye ro παρέχειν μοι korroy τὴν χήραν 5 propter quod lauorem mihi praestat uidua 
ravryv ἀπελθων ἐκδικήσω avrqy haec uado et deuindico illam 
iva μὴ εἰσ τελοσ ἐρχομενὴ ὕπωπιαζη με ut non in tempus ueniens suggillet me 
Εἰπεν 8c o κσ' ἀκουσατετι o κριτὴσ τὴσ 6 | dixitautem dmi audite quid iudex 
αδικιασ λεγε 0€ Bo ov μὴ ποιηση ) iniquitatis dicit ds autem non faciet 


τὴν ἐκδικησιν Tuy ἐκλεκτων avrov 


uindictam electorum suorum 


βοώντων avrov νυκτοσ Kat qui clamant ad eum nocte et 
ἡμέρασ και μακροθυμει ev avrov die et patiens est super eos 
(Fol. 256 δ.) ‘AB (Fol. 257 a.) 


Carr. XVII. 31—XVIII. 7. 


σιη: 
— 


KAT AOYK 
wom, ey, — 


λεγω ὕμειν ποιήσει τὴν ἐκδικησιν avrov 
ἐν τάχει πλὴν apa οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπου 
Mwy ευρήσει πιστιν ἐπι τὴσ yoga 

Εἰπεν δὲ καὶ προσ τινασ Tove πεποιθοτασ 
ep ἐαντοισ᾽ ort εἰσιν δικαιοι και 
ἐξουθενουντασ τουσ λοιπουσ ανθρωπουσ 
δυο ανθρωποι aveByoay εἰσ ro iepov 
προσευξασθαι eur φαρισαιοσ και εἰσ 


XYIII. 8 


τελωλωνησ᾽ ο φαρισαιοσ σταθεισ kaD eavroy τι 


— 
Tavra mpooyuyxero οθσ ενχαριστω cot 
OTL OUK εἰμι wo οἱ λοιποι Toy av Üporrov 


ἀρπαγεσ αδικοι μοιχοι ἡ Kat wor OVTOT 


οτελωνὴσ νήστεν w dic rov σαββατου 


αποδεκατω παντα oma κτωμαι 


και οτελωνὴσ μακροθεν ἐστωσ οὐυκθελεν 


ovde rove οφθαλμουσ εἰσ rov ουρανον ἐπαραι 


αλλ ετυπτετο στηθοσ avrov λεγων 
o 6c ειλασθητι μοι τω αμαρτωλω 


λεγω ὕμειν κατεβη οντοσ δεδικαιωμενοσ. 


μαλλον παρ αἰκεινον roy φαρισαιον 
ort TU οὕψων avroy ταπεινωθησεται 

o δεταπεινων eavroy ὕψωθησεται 

: προσεφερον Se avro radia ἵνα avrov 
αἀπτηται ἵἴδοντεσ de oc μαθηται 
ἐπετειμὼν αντοισ οδε ine 
προσεκαλειτο avra. Aeyov acere 
τα παιδια ερχεσθαι προσ με 
και μη κωλυσηται avra. Tov yap 
τοιουτων εστιν ἡ βασιλεια του θυ 

: anny yap λεγω ὕμειν og αν μὴ 
δεξηται την βασιλειαν τον 6v uc 
παιδιον ov ju εἰσελθὴ eur αὐτὴν 


και EXNPWTNT € TLC GvTOV ἀαρχων 
(Fol. 257 5.) 


= 
oc 


SEC LUCAN 
— — ὄς-. — 


dico uobis faciet uindictam eorum 
confestim-uerum put at filius hominis 


ueniens inueniet fidem super terram 


dixit autem et ad quosdam qui confidens 


super se quoniam sunt iusti et 
spernent reliquos hominum 

duo homines ascenderunt in templum 
orare unus pharisaeus et unus 
publicanus pharisaeus stans seorsum 
haec orabat ds gratias ago tibi 
quoniam non sum sicut ceteri hominum 
raptores iniusti adulteri sicut et hic 
publicanus ieiuno bis in sabbato 


decimo omnia quae ad quiro 


Et publicanus a longe stans nolebat 


nec oculos suos in caelum leuare 
sed tundebat pectus suum dicens 
— . . e . 

ds miserere mihi peccatori 

dico uobis descendit hic iustificatus 


magis praeter illum pharisaeum 


quoniam omnis qui se exaltat humiliabitur 


et qui humiliat se exaltabitur 


Offerebant autem 1lli infantes ut eos 


tangeret uidentes autem discipuli 
increpabant eos ihs autem 

ad se uocabat ea dicens dimittite 
infantes uenire ad me 

et nolite uetare eis 

talium enim est regnum dei 

amen enim dico uobis quicumque non 
acceperit regnum del sicut 


infantem non intrauit in illud 


Et interrogauit eum quidam princeps 


(Fol. 258 a.) 


Cap, XVIII. 8— 18, 


235 


236 KAT AOYK 


διδασκαλεαγαθε τι ποιησ ac 
ξωην αἰωνιον κληρονομησω 
O δεειπεν avro τι μελεγεισ αγαθον 
— 
ουδεισ αγαθοσ εἰ μη εἰσ o 0a 
Tac ἐντολασ οιδασ o δε eurev ποιασ 
— 
€urev Se o tno To ov μοιχευσεισ 
ov φονευσεισ ov κλεψεισ' 
ου ψευδομαρτυρησεισ τειμα rov 
πατερα σου και τὴν μηήτερα οδεειπεν 
Tavra παντα εφυλαξαμὴν εκ νεοτητοσ 
στὸ a, 
σιθ : ακουσασ 9e o tno εἰπεν avro ert ey σοι 
λειπει Tavra. oca εχεισ πωλησον 
και δοσ Tor πτωχοισ και εξεισ' θησαυρον 


ἐν Tow ουρανοισ και δευρο ακολουθι μοι 


[3f 


: odeaxovcac ravra περιλυποσ eyevero 
ἣν yap πλουσιοσ σφοδρα ἵἴδων de avrov 
περιλυπον γενομενον εἰπεν o - 

Tu δυσκολωσ ot τα χρήματα exovrea 
eu τὴν βασιλειαν Tov Oy εἰσελευσονται 
εὐκοπώτερον yap ἐστιν καμηλον ᾿ 
δια τρηματοσ βελονησ διελθειν 
ἢ πλουσιον εισελθειν εἰσ την βασιλειαν 
του θὺ εἰπὸν δε οι ἀκουοντεσ και τισ 
δυναται σωθηναι ο δε ειπεν τα αδυνατα 
παρα ανθρωποισ δυνατα παρα ϑω ἐστιν 
Ειπεν δεοπετροσ Sov ἡμεισ τα ἴδια 
αφεντεσ ἠκολουθησαμεν σοι 

σκα: O 8¢ ecrev αυτοισ αμην λεγω ὕμειν 

B ovÓeu ἐστιν og αφηκεν οικιασ 

7 γονισ ἡ αδελφουσ ἡ αδελφασ 

ἢ γυναικα τέκνα εν TO καιρω TOvTO 

evexey THe βασιλειασ τον ὃυ 

ἐαν μη λαβη ἐεπταπλασιονα εν τω 

(Fol. 258 5.) 


XVIII. 


20 


22 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


magister bone quid faciens 
uitam aeternam hereditabo 


ad ille dixit illi quid me dicis bonum 


— 
nemo bonus nisi unusds pater 


praecepta nosti ad ille dixit quae 


dixit autem ihs non moechabis 


non occides non furtum facies 
non falsum testimonium dicis honora 
patrem tuum et matrem ad ille dixit 


haec omnia custodiui ἃ iuuentute 


audiens autem ihs dixit illi adhuc unum tibi 


deest omnia quae habes uende 

et da pauperibus et habebis thensaurum 
in caelis et ueni sequere me 

ille autem audiens haec tristis factus est 
erat enim diues ualde | uidens autem eum 
tristem factum dixit ihs 

quo modo difficile qui pecunias habent 
in regnum del introibunt 

facilius est autem camellum 

per foramen acus trasire 

quam diuitem introire in regnum 

dei dixerunt ergo quiaudierunt et quis 
potest saluari ad ille dixit quae inpossibilia sunt 


inhominibus apud dm possibilia sunt 


dixit autem petrus ecce nos quae nostra sunt 


reliquimus et secuti sumus te 


ad ille dixit illis: amen dico uobis 


nemo est qui dimisit domos 
aut parentes aut fratres aut sorores 


aut uxorem aut filios in tempore hoc 


— 
propter regnum dei 
si non accipiet septi es tantum in 
(Fol. 259 a.) 


Cap. XVIII. 18—30. 


Kn c — 
KAT AOYKAN 
SO — 
KQLpw TOUTW και εν τω GLOVL 
Tw ἐρχομένω ζωὴν αἰωνιον 
Lam, — 
σκβ: παραλαβὼν de rove - B - εἰπεν avrowr 
i, 


ἴδον ἀαναβαινομεν εἰσ ἱἹερουσαλημ. 


και τελεσθησεται παντα τα γεγραμμενα 


XVIII. 


δια των πσροφητων περι rov ὕιου Tov ἀνϑρωπου 


ort παραδοθήσεται τοισ εθνεσιν και 
ενπαιχθησεται και ενπτυσθησεται 
καὶ μαστιγωσαντεσ αποκτεινουσιν 


QUTOY καὶ Τὴ ἡμερα T) TPLTH 


σκγ: αναστήσεται ' ἄντοι Se rovrov οὐδεν 


συνῆκαν add qv ro pop. κεκρυμμενον 


QF αὑτῶν  KQOLOUK €yetvoo0 Kov TO. 


ckÓ: λεγομενα : éyevero δε εν ro evyei;ew 


avrov ewriepeuxo  TvoÀoa τισ 
ezasroy ἐκαθῆτο παρα τὴν οὗον 
ακουσασ 0€ oxXov παραπορενομενου 


ἐπυνθανετο τι αν ev Tovro 


-.-- 
απηγγειλαν Se avro ort ino o νααζαρηνοσ 


mapepxerat οδεεβοησεν Aeyov 
— 
tyu we Saved ἐλεησον pe oc8e 


προαγοντεσ ἐπετειμων avro ἵνα 


σειγησὴ avrog δε uaAXov expa(ev 


ὕιοσ Gave. ἐλεησον pe arabe δε ine 


ἐκελευσεν avroy αχθηναι 


eyywavroo δεαυτον εἐπηρωτησεν 


avrov τισοι θελεισ ποιησω οδεειπε 


—Á 
κε tva αναβλεψω και αποκριθεισ 


ειἰπεν avro αναβλεψον ἡ πιστισ σου 


σέσωκεν σε και παραχρημα 
ανεβλεψεν και ἠκολονθει avro 
— "ES 
: 6o£a£wv rov Oy * και rao o Àaoc 


ἴδων edwxey do 


srs 


--ν 
ξαντωθω και 


(Fol. 259 6.) 


32 


41 


42 


43 


SEC LUCAN 
eS ρὑὭ΄ς- — 


tempore hoc et in saeculum 
uenturum uitam aeternam 
adsumens autem ° xii . dixit illis 


ecce ascendimus in hierusalem 


et consummabuntur omnia quae scripta sunt 


per profetas de filio hominis 

quoniam tradetur gentibus et 

iniuriabitur et espuent in eum 

et flagellis caesum | occident 

eum et tertia die 

resurget ipsi autem horum inihil 

intellexerunt sed erat uerbum absconsu 

ab eis et nesciebant quae 

dicebantur factum est autem in eo 

cum adpropiaretiericho caecus quidem 

mendicus sedebat secus uiam 

audiens autem turbam praetereuntem 

interrogabat quidnam esset hoc 

dixerunt autem illi quia ihs nazoraeus 
iransit ad ille exclamauit dicens 

ihu fili dauid miserere mei ad illi 

qui antecedebant increpabant illum ut 
taceret adille magis clamabat 


filius dauid miserere mihi stans autem ihs 


iussit eum adduci 
cum adpropiasset autem interrogauit 
eum quid uis tibi faciam ad ille dixit 
dme utuideam et respondens 
dixitei respice fides tua 
salbum te fecit et confestim 
respexit et sequebatur eum 
honorans dm etomnis populus 
uidens dedit gloriam deo et 


(Fol. 260a.) 


CAP. XVIII. 30—43. 


237 


238 


IET 


: βασιλειαν και ὕποστρεψε 


και εἰσελθων διήρχετο τὴν ἵερειχω 

και ἴδου ανηρ ovopart ξακχαιοσ 

ovrog ἣν αρχιτελωνηὴσ πλουσιοσ ^ 
και εζητει tery Tov - τισ ἐστιν 

και οὐκ nOUVaTO απὸ του οχλου 

ort τὴ luxu μεικροσ ἣν Kat προλαβων 
ενπροσθεν ανεβὴ emt συκομωρεαν 

ἵνα ἴδῃ avrov ort exeun ἡμελλεν 
διερχεσθαι καὶ eyevero εν τω 
διερχεσθαι avrov. ειδεν καὶ εἰπεν avro) 
{axyate σπευσον καταβηθιοτι σήμερον 
εν τω οἰκω σον Set με μειναι 

και σπευσασ karen και ὕπεδεξατο 
avroy χαιρων καὶ εἰδοντεσ παντεσ 
διεγογγνζον ort παρα αμαρτωλω 
avdpt εἰσηλθεν καταλυσαι σταθεισ δε 
o faxyatoo εἰπεν προσ Tov xv ἴδου 
ταημυσοι των ὕπαρχοντων μοι κε 

Tow πτωχοισ διδωμε και εἰ τινοσ τι 
ἐσυκοφαντησα αποδιδωμι 

TerpaTÀovy eurev Seo ine προσ avrov 
or. ONPLEPOY σωτηρια εν TW οἰκω 


rourw eyevero καθοτι καὶ avroc 


: tio αβρααμ εστιν : ἦλθεν yap o Vioc 


Tov avÜporrov ζητησαι Kat σωσαι 

TO απολωλοσ᾽ : ἄκονοντων δεαυτων 
Tavra προσθεισ ειπεν παραβολὴν 
δια To ειναι avrov εγγνσ ἱερουσαλημ 
και δοκεὶν oTt μελλει παραχρημα 

ῃ βασιλεια rov ὃυ αναφαινεσθαι 


: εἰπεν δε ^ ἄνθρωποσ τισ ευγενὴσ 


ἐπορενετο εἰσ χωραν μακραν λαβειν 
: καλεσασ δε 
(Fol. 26ο 5.) 


XIX. 1 


13 


SEC L 
— 


CAN 

—- 0 — 

et intrans pertransiebat iericho 

et ecce uir nomine zacchaeus 

hic erat princeps publicanorum locuplens 
et quaerebat uidere ihm quisset 

et non potebat a turba 

quia de statu pusillus erat et antecedens 
abante ascendit in morum 

ut uideret eum quia inde habebat 
transire et factum est cum 
illactransiret uidit et dixit ei 

zacchaee festinans descende quia hodie 
indo motua oportet me manere 

et festinans descendit et suscepit 

eum gaudens et uidentes omnes 
murmurabant quia ad peccatorem 


hominem introibit manere stans autem 
C 


zacchaeus dixit ad dm ecce 

dimidium de substantia mea dme 

pauperibus do et si cuius aliquid 

calumniaui restituo 

quadruplum dixit autem ihs 

quoniam hodie salusin domo 

hac facta est quoniam et hic 

filius abraham est uenit enim filius 

hominis quaerere etsalbare 

quod perierat audientium autem eorum 

haeo adiciens dixit parabolam 

propter quod esset iuxta hierusalem 

et putare quia incipiet confestim 

regnum dei reuelari 

dixit autem homo quidam nobilis 

abiit in regionem longinquam accipere 

regnum etreuerti uocans autem 
(Fol. 261 a.) 


CAP. XIX. 1—13. 


KAT AOYKAN 

“τς — - 
Sexa δουλουσ αὐτου εδωκεν avrowr 
δεκα μνασ' καὶ εἰπεν προσ αὐτουσ 
πραγματευεσθαι εν o ἐρχομαι οι δε 
πολειται ἐμεισουν avrov Kat ἐνεπεμψα 
πρεσβιαν οπεισω avrov λεγοντεσ 
ov θελομεν rovrov βασιλευσαι e$ ἡμασ 
και ἐγενετο ἐπανελθειν avrov λαβοντα 
τὴν βασιλειαν και ecrey φωνηθηναι 
avrov τουσ δουλουσ our δεδωκει To 
ἀργυριον ἵνα γνοι τι Oterpa-ypareva ayro 


wapeyevero δε οπρωτοσ λεγων κε 


7) μνα σου δεκα μνασ προσηργασατο 
οδε ecrey avro εὐυγεαγαθε δουλε 
ort ev ἐλαχιστω πιστοσ ἐγενου ἴσθι 


εἐξουσιαν exov eravw δεκα πολεων 


— 
και o ετεροσ ελθων εἰπεν ke ἡ μνα σὸν 


πεντε €mougev μνασ εἰπεν δε 

καὶ τουτω γεινον καὶ OV ἐπανω πεντε 
πολεων Kato ετεροσ ἤλθελεγων 

κε ἴδου ἢ μνα σον NY ειχον αποκειμενὴν 
εν σουδαριω οτι εφοβηθὴην σε 
avyÜporroc yap εἰ αυστηροσ ape 


o ovx εθηκασ και θεριζεισ o ovk εσπιρασ 


o Ó eur€y avro εκ TOv στοματοσ σον 
«peu oe rovgpe SovAe ηδεισ ort 

«yo ανθρωποσ ανστηροσ ειμι aupo 

o ovk εθηκα και θεριζω o ovx ἐσπειρα 
δια τι ovv ovk ἐδωκασ To ἀργυριον μου 
ἐπι τραπεζαν καγω ἐλθὼν συν ToKw ay 
ἐπραξααυτο emer δετοισ παρεστωσι 


αρατε GT αὐτοῦ Και ATEVEVKATE TO TAT 


: δέκα μνασ exovte * λεγω yap ὕμειν 


OTL TTayTL TO €XOVTL προστιθεται 


(Fol. 261 δ.) 


XIX. 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


AI 


22 


23 


24 


26 


SEC LUCAN 


239 


decem seruos suos dedit eis 

decemnas et dixit ad eos 

negotiamini dum uenio 

ciues autem oderant et miserunt 

legatos post illum dicentes 

nolumus huno regnare super nos 

et factum est reuerti eum accipientem 

regnum et dixit uocari 

seruos suos quibus dederat 

pecuniam ut sciat quid negotiati sunt 
aduenit ergo primus dicens dme 

mna tua decemnas ad quisiuis 

ad ille dixit illi euge uone serue 

quoniam in modico fidelis fuisti esto 

potestatem habens super decem ciuitates 
Et alius ueniens dixit dme mna tua . 

quinque adquisiuit mnas dixit autem 

et huic esto et tu super quinque 

ciuitates et alius uenit dicens 

dme ecce mna tua quam habebam repositam 

in sudario quoniam timebam te 

homo esenim austeris tolles 

quod non posuisti . et metis quod non seminasti 

adilledixitili deoretuo 

iudicabo te serue inique sciebas quia 

ego homo sum austerus tolle 

quod non posui et meto quod non seminaui 

quare ergo non dedisti pecuniam meam 

super mensam et ego ueniens cum usura 

exigebam illud. dixit autem his qui astabant 

tolliteab eo et ferte qui 

decemnas habet dico enim uobis 

quoniam omni habenti adicietur 

(Fol. 262 a.) 


Cap. XIX. 13—26. 


240 


[ΣΙ 


: ἀρθησεται απ avrov 


απὸ δετον μὴ ἐχοντοσ καὶ εχει XIX. 
: πλην εκειγουσ 27 
τουσ exÜpova μον rove μὴ θελοντασ με 
βασιλευειν er avrove ayayare ae 

και κατασφαξατε ἐνπροσθεν μον 

και Tov axpetov δονλον εκβαλετε 

εἰσ TO σκοτοσ TO εξωτερον exec EOTAL 


o κλαυθμοσ και ο βρυγμοσ Tov οδοντων 


: και εἰπὼν ravra, ἐπορευετὸ αναβαινων 28 


δε εἰσ Ἱερουσαλὴμ και eyevero wo ἤγγισεν 29 
ew βηθφαγη και βηθανια προσ ro οροσ 

των ἐλαιων καλουμενον 

απεστειλεν δυο roy μαθητων avrov 

λέγων ὕπαγεται εἰσ τὴν κατεναντι 30 
κωμῆν και εἰσπορενομενοι ευρήσεται πῶλον 


e$ ov ουδεισ ανθρωπὼν εκαθισεν. καὶ λυσαντεσαγαγατες _, 
KQL αν τισ ὕμασ EPWTA οντωσ ἐρειτε OTLOKO 31 


ev 
: QUTOU Xpeuay exec καὶ : ameAÜovrea ἀπεκριθησα 52, 34 


— 
OTL O KO GUTOU Xpetav €xet και ayayovTes 35 


TOV πωλον εἐπεριψαν τα ἵματια aurwy 


— 
ex avrov και επεβιβασαν rov inv 


Tropevoj.eyov δε avrov ὕπεστρωνννον 36 
: Ta ἵματια avrov : ἐγγιζοντων δε avrov 37 


προσ τὴν καταβασιν Tov opove τῶν ἐλαιων 
ἤρξατο παν το πληθοσ των μαθητων 
— 
χαιροντεσ atvery Tov Oy περι παντων 
wy edov γεινομενων Aeyoyrea 38 


--- 
εὐυλογημενοσ o ἐρχομενοσ εν ονοματι κυ 


ευλογημενοσ o βασιλευσ εἰρηνὴ 


εν ουρανω καὶ δοξα ev ὕψιστοισ 


: τιψεσ 9e rov φαρισαιων απὸ rov οχλου 39 


ecray προσ avroy διδασκαλε επιτιμησον 
rou μαθηταισ σον αποκριθεισ δε 40 


Aeyet αντοισ λεγω ὕμειν ori eay ovrot 


(Fol. 262 b.) 


SEC LUCAN 
SOS — 
ab eo autem qui non abet et quod habet 
tolletur ab eo uerumtamen illos 
inimicos meos qui nóluerunt me 
regnare supereos adducite hoc 
et occidite in conspecto ineo 
et inutilem serbum eicite 
in tenebras exteriores ibi erit 
ploratus et stridor dentium 
et haec cum dixisset ibat ascendens 
autem in hierusalem et factum est cum adpropiset 
in betphage et bethania ad montem 
oliueti qui uocatur 
misit duos de discipulis suis 
dicensite incontra qui est 
castellus et introeuntes inuenietis pullum 
et si quis uobia dixerit sic dicetis quoniam ἐπὶ 
ejus opus habet et euntes sic dixerunt 
quoniam dms huius opus habet et adducentes 
pullum supermiserunt tunicas suas 
super eum et inposuerunt ihm 
eunte autem illo substernebant 
uestimenta sua adpropiantibus autem illis 
ad discensum montis oliuarum 
coepit omnis multitudo discipulorum 
gaudentes laudare dm de omnibus 
quibus uiderunt quae fiebant dicentes 
benedictus qui uenit in nomine dmi 
benedictus rex pax 
in caelo et gloria in altissimis 
quidam autem de pharisaeis de turba 
dixerunt ad eum magister increpa 
discipulos tuos respondens autem 
dixitillis dico uobis quia si isti 

(Fol. 263 a.) 


Cap. XIX. 26— 40. 


σὰς 


jg 


--- -- Ke, — 
T AOYKAN. 
—S —  ι.- — 


σειγήσονσιν ot λιθοι κραξονται 


: καὶ wo ἤγγισεν ἴδων τὴν πολιν 


ἔκλαυσεν ex αὐτὴν λεγων ort 

εἰ εγνωσ καὶ OV εν τῇ ἡμέρα ταντη 

Ta προσ εἰρηνὴν σοι νυν Se εκρυβη απὸ 
οφθαλμων cov ort nfovow ἡμεραι 

και βαλουσιν ext σε οἱ εχθροι σου xapaxa 
και περικυκλωσιν σε και 

συνεξ ουσιν σεπαντοθεν 


και ἐδαφιουσιν σε και τα τεκνα σου 


> καὶ οὐκ αφησουσιν λιθον er: λιθον 


εν ὁλῃ σοι ανθ wy ovk εγνωσ 


εἰσ Καίρον €mu komo σου 


: ἐλθὼν δε εἰσ To iepov ἤρξατο ἐεκβαλλειν 


Tove πωλουντασ εν avro και ἀγοραζοντασ 
καὶ rac τραπεζασ rov κολλυβιστων 
eCexeev και raa: καθεδρασ των πωλουντω 
Tao περιστερασ λεγὼν avrour γεγραπται 
OTLO OLKOT μου οἰκοσ προσευχὴσ ἐστιν 


ὕμεισ δε ἐποιήσατε avrov σπήλαιον Aere 


: καὶ ἣν διδασκων το καθημεραν 


εν τωΐερω οιδεαρχίερεισ 

καὶ οὐ γραμματισ καὶ Ot πρωτοι 
του λαον εζητουν avrov απολεσαι 
και OVX ἡνρισκον τι ποιήσωσιν αὐτω 


0 yap λαοσ απασ ekpep.aro ἀκονειν 


: avTOv * ἔγενετο δε ey μια των 


ἡμέρων διδασκοντοσ avrov ev τω 
tepw τον λαον και ἐεναγγελιζομενου 
εἐπεστησαν Ot ἀρχιερισ και ot 
γραμματεισ συν τοισ πρεσβυτεροισ 
και εἰπὸν προσ GUTOV ειπεήμειν 


εν wow. εξουσια ravra ποιεισ 


(Fol. 263 5.) 


XIX. 
41 
42 


43 


45 


46 


47 


48 


XX.1 


ὃ 


24] 


tacuerint lapides clamabunt 

et cum adpropi asset uidens ciuitatem 
fleuit super eam dicens quoniam 

81 scisses et tu in diem hoc 

quae ad pacem tibi nunc autem absconsum eat 
ab oculis tuis quoniam uenient dies 

et mittent super te inimici tui sepaem 

et circumcingent te et 

conpraehendent undique 

et ad nihilum deducent te et filios tuos 
et non dimittent lapidem super lapidem 
in tota te propter quod non cognouisti 
in tempus uisitationis tuae 

ueniens autem in templum coepit eicere 
uendentes in e o et ementes 

et mensas numulariorum et fudit et 

et cathe dras uendentium 

columbas dicens eis scriptum est 
quoniam domus mea domus orationis est 
uos autem fecistis illam speluncam latronu 
et erat docens cottidie 

in templo principes autem sacerdotum 


etiribae et primi 


* populi quaerebant cum perdere eum 


populus enim omnia pendebat audire 


eum factum est autem in una 


.β' et non inueniebant quid facerent ei 


dierum docente eo in 
templo populum et euangelizante 
adsisterunt principes sacerdotum et 
Scribae cum praesbyteris 
et dixerunt ad eum dic nobis 
in qua potestate haeo facis 

(Fol. 264 a.) 


Capp. XIX. 40—XX. 2. 


31 


— — Sy — 
242 KAT AOYKAN 
a_i eS — 


καὶ rur ἐστιν 0 Sova cot ταντην THY εξουσιαν 


XX. 


αποκριθεισ Se εἰπεν προσ avrovg. ἐπερβωτησω ὕμασ 3 


καγω eva Xoyov ον εἴπατε μοι 

to βαπτισμα τοΐωανον εξ ουρανου ἣν 
ἢ εξ ανθρωπων οιδε συνελογιζοντο 
προσ εαντουσ λεγοντεσ ort «ay 
εἰπωμεν εξ ovpavov ερι δια τι ovy 

OUK επιστευσατε αντω καὶ εαν εἰπωμεν 
aro roy ανθρωπων λιθασει pac 

o Àaoc απασ πεπεισμενοι yap εἰσεν 
twavny προφητην γεγονεναι 

και ἀπεκριθησαν μὴ edevat avrova 
τοποθεν και o ine εἰπεν avrour 


ovde eyw λεγω ὕμειν ev ποια εἐξουσια 


σμα : Tavra. row : ἔλεγεν δετὴν παραβολὴν ravryv 9 
— . 


απελωνα εφντενσεν ανθρωποσ 
καὶ εξεδοτο avrov γεωργοισ 
avrog δε απεδημησεν χρονουσ ἵκανουσ 
καιρω δεαπεστειλεν προσ τουσ γεωργουσ 
δουλον ἵνα azo τον καρπου rov αμπελωνοσ 
δωσιν αὐτω δειραντεσ Se avrov 
εξαπεστειλαν κενον Kat ἐπεμψεν 
erepov δουλον οι δε κακεινον δειραντεσ 
και ατειμασαντεσ εἐξαπειλαν καινον 
TPLTOV ἐπεμψεν καὶ τουτον τραυματισαντεσ 
εξαπεστειλαν Katvoy οδε KG TOV 
αμπελωνοσ eurey τι T0000 πεμψω 
TOV ULOV μου TOV ἀγαπήῆτον τυχον TOVTOV 
ἐντραπήσονται ἵἴδοντεσ Se avroy 
διελογιζοντο προσ αλληλουσ Xeyovreo 
οντοσ ἐστιν 0 κληρονομοσ Sevre 
αποκτεινωμεν GUTOV ἵνα μων 


γένηται ἡ κληρονομια και ἐεκβαλοντεσ 
(Fol. 264 5.) 


10 


12 


13 


et quis est qui dedit tibi hanc potestatem 


respondens autem dixit ad eos interrogauo uos 


et ego unum uerbum quod dicite mihi 

baptismus iohanis de caelo erat 

aut ab hominibus ad illi cogitabant 

ad semetipsos dicentes quia si 

dixerimus de caelo dic et quare ergo 

non credidistis ei et si dixerimus 

ab hominibus lapidabit nos 

populus omnis scit enim 

iohannen prophetam fuisse 

et responderunt nescire se 

unde etihs dixiteis 

nec ego dico uobis in qua potestate 

haec facio dicebat autem parabolam hanc 
uineam plantauit homo 

et tradidit eam agricolis 

ipse autem peregrinatus est tempora multa 

quod autem tempore misit ad agricolas 

seruum ut de fructo uineae 

darent ei illi autem caesum eum 

dimiserunt uacuum et misit 

alium seruum illi autem et illum caesum 

etiniuriantes dimiserunt uacuum 

tertium misit et hunc uulnerantes 

dimiserunt uacuum dms autem 

uineae dixit quid faciam mittam 

filium meum dilectum forsitam hunc 

reuerebuntur uidentes autem illum 

cogitabant adinuicem dicentes 

hic est haeres uenite 

occidamus illum illum ut nostra 

fiat hereditas et proicientes 

(Fol. 265 a.) 


Car. XX. 2—15. 


SEs 


oy : 
ἐκ 


KAT AOYK 


— 


avrov ἔξω Tov αμπελωνοσ amexreway 


— 
TL OUV ποιήσει O KO TOV αμπελωνοσ' 


eXevorerat kat ἀπολεσει Tove γεωργουσ 


και δωσει Tov αμπελωνα αλλοισ 


ot δε ακουσαντεσ euray μὴ γενοιτο 


οδεενβλεψασ αντοισ eurev τι ουν ἐστιν 


TO γεγραμμενον Tovro λιθον ov 
απεδοκιμασαν οι οἰκοδομουντεσ 
ovroc ἐγενηθη ew καιφαλὴν γωνιασ 


war οπεσὼων er exewoy Tov λιθον 


συνθλασθησεται ε ov ay πεσὴ 


: λικμήσει avrov : καὶ εζητουν 


οι ἀρχίερεισ και οἱ γραμματεισ 
εἐπιβαλιν er αυτον rac χειρασ 

aury τη wpa εφοβηθησαν δε rov Xaov 
ἐγνωσαν yap ort προσ αντουσ' 
εἰρῆκεν τὴν παραβολὴν ταυτην 

καὶ αποχωρήσαντεσ απεστειλαν 
ἐνκαθετουσ ὕποκρεινομενουσ 
εαυτουσ δικαιουσ ἵνα εἐπιλαβωντας 
avrov Των λογων oce παραδουναι 
και επηρωτησαν 
avrov λεγοντεσ διδασκαλε οιδαμεν 


ort λεγεισ ορθωσ Kat διδασκεισ᾽ 


αντον TW ἡγεμόνι 


και ουδενοσ λαμβανεισ προσωπον᾽ 
αλλα er αληθειασ τὴν οδον του 60 
διδασκεισ εξεστιν new hopov 

διδοναι καισαριη οὐ — ercyvova δε 


avTOv τὴν πονήριαν eur€v προσ αντουσ 


τιμεπειραζετε δειξατε μοι το 
γομισμα τινοσ EXEL εἰκονα και τὴν 


excypadyy αποκριθεντεσ εἰπον καισαροσ 


εἰπεν δε αντοισ ἀποδοτετα του καισαροσ τω 


(Fol. 265 2.) 


XX. 


16 


17 


18 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


SEO LUCAN 243 


eum extra uineam occiderunt 

quid ergo faciet dms uineae 

ueniet et perdet agricolas 

et dauit uineam aliis 

ad illi audientes dixerunt absit 

ad ille inspiciens eos dixit quid est ergo 

quod scriptum est hoc lapidem quem 

reprobauerunt aedificantes 

hic factus est in caput anguli 

omnis qui caeciderit super illum lapidem 

confringetur super autem quem ceciderit 

comminuet eum et quaerebant 

principes sacerdotum et scribae 

mittere super eum manus 

ipsa hora timuerunt autem populum 

scierunt enim quoniam ad illos 

dixit parabolam hanc 

etrecedentes miserunt 

obsiduanos in dolo loquentes 

ease ge iustos ut adpraehenderent 

uerborum eius ut traderent 

eum praesidi et interrogauerunt 

eum dicentes magister scimus 

quoniam dices recte et doces 

et nullius accipis personam 

sed in ueritate uiam dei 

doces licet nobis tributum 

dare caesari aut non cognoscens autem 

eorum iniquitatem dixit ad eos 

quid me temptatis ostendite mihi 

figuram cuius habet imaginem et super 

inscriptionem . respondentes dixerunt caesaris 

ille autem dixit eis reddite quae sunt caesaris 
(Fol. 266 a.) 


Car. XX. 15—25. 


244 


— — 
καισαρι kat Ta Tov Üv To Ow 


οὐκ εἰσχυσαν Se avrov ρημα 


ἐπιλαβέσθαι evayriov του Xaov 


και θαυμασαντεσ emt τὴ αποκρισει 


avrov ἐσειγῆσαν προσελθοντεσ δε 
τινεσ των σαδδουκαίων οἱ λεγοντεσ 
αναστασιὶν μὴ εἰναι ετηρωτησαν 

avroy λεγοντεσ διδασκαλε μωῦσησ 
ἐγραψεν new εαν τινοσ αδελῴφοσ 
αποθανὴ ατεκνοσ exav γυναικα 

ἵνα λαβὴ o αδελφοσ avrov τὴν γυναικα 


και εἐξαναστησὴ σπέρμα τω adeAdw avrov 


ἤσαν wap nev erro, αδελῴφοι 


. Kato rporog λαβὼν yuvaixa ἀπεθανεν 


ατεκνοσ και ο δευτεροσ Kato τριτοσ 
ὠσαντωσ οἱ ETTA οὐκ ἀφῆκαν τεκνον 

και ἀπεθανον ὕστερον Kat ἢ γυνὴ 
απεθανεν εν Ty ovy αναστασει τινοσ 
αντων εσται γυνή οἱ yap erra €xov αὐτὴν 
γυναικα και εἰπεν προσ αντουσ 

οἱ ὕιοι TOU αἰωνοσ TOUTOV γεννωνται 

και γεννωσιν γαμουσιν και γαμουνται 

οἱ δε καταξιωθεντεσ του αἰωνοσ εκεινου 
τυχειν καὶ TO αναστασεωσ THT EK 


νεκρων ουτεγαμουσιν OUTE 
γαμιζονται. ovde yap αποθανειν 


ert μελλουσιν εἰσαγγελοι yap εἰσιν τω ϑω 


To ἀαναστασεωσ Ut οντεσ ore δε 
ἐγειρονται ot vexpor μυῦσησ εδηλωσεν 
— — 
erc τὴσ Barov wo λεγει kv rov Oy 
— — 
aBpaap καιθν ἴσακ. και θν Ἰακωβ 
6c γεκρων ovx ἐστιν αλλα ζωντων 


παντεσ yap avro ζωσιν 


(Fol. 266 5.) 


39, 


26 


27 


28 


29 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


SEG LUCAN 


caesari et quae del sunt deo 
non potuerunt autem eius uerbum 
adpraehendere in conspectu populi 

Et mirantes in responsione 
eius tacuerunt accentes autem 
quidam sadducaeorum qui dicunt 
resurrectionem non esse interrogauerunt 
eum dicentes magister moyses 
scripsit nobis sicuius frater 
mortuus fuerit sine filiis habens uxorem 
ut accipiat frater eius uxorem eius 
et resuscitet semen fratri suo 
erant aput nos septem fratres 
et primus accipiens uxorem mortuus est 
sine filiis et secundus et tertius 
similiter et septem non dimiserunt filios 
et mortui sunt nouissime et mulier 
mortua est in resurrectione ergo cuius 
eorum erit uxor septem enim habuerunt eam 
uxorem et dixit ad eos 

filii huius saeculi pariuntur 
et pariunt nubunt et nubuntur 
qui autem digni fuerint saeculi huius 
obtinere et resurrectionis ex 
mortuis neque nubunt neque 
nubuntur nec enim mori 
adhuc possunt equales angelis enim sunt deo 
cum sint resurrectionis fili quia autem 
resurgunt mortui moyses significauit 
in rubo quo modo dicit dom dm 
abraham et dm isacetdm iacob 
ds mortuorum non es sed uiuorum 


omnes enim illi uiuent 
(Fol. 267 a.) 


Cap. X X. 25— 38. 


poses 


ni 


Some, 
ont : 
“-ι 


: TOC VLOG QUTOV ἐστιν 


—— πὶ ως 
KAT AOYK 


αποκριθεντεσ δετινεσ των γραμματεων 
«uray διδασκαλε καλωσ εἰπασ 


: ovxert δε eroApwy erepwray avrov 


ovdey: :Εἰπεν δε προσ avrovo πωσ 
λεγουσιν Tov χρν ὕιον Saved. καὶ αὐτοσ᾽ 
δανυειδ λέγει ev ry βυβλω των ψαλμων 
λεγει Ko TH KO pov kaDov ex δεξιων prov 
eno τίθω rove exXÜpova σου ὕποκατω 
Tov ποδὼν σου δανειδ KY αὐτὸν λεγει 
* ἄκονοντοσ δε 
παντοσ Tov Aaov eurey Tour μαθηταισ προσέχετε 
ἀπὸ τῶν ypapparewy των θελοντων 
περιπατεῖν εν στολαιῖσ καὶ φιλουντων 
ασπασμουσ €y ταισ ἀγοραισ 
και πρωτοκαθεδριασ εν ταισ συναγωγαισ 
και πρωτοκλισίιασ ev TOU δειπνοισ 
ot κατεσθοντεσ τασ οἰκιασ τῶν χήρων 
προφασει μακρα pog €vxop.€vot 
ovrot λήμψονται περισσοτερον κριμα 
avaBrapac δε ειδεν rove βαλλοντασ' 
εἰσ το γαζοφυλακιον τα δωρα ἀντων 
τουσ πλουσιουσ - dey δε καὶ τινα χηραν 
πενιχραν βαλλουσαν vo λεπτα 
οεστιν κοδραντησ καὶ εἰπεν αληθωσ 
λεγω ὕμειν ort ἢ χήρα αὐτὴ ἢ πτωχή 
πλειω avrov εβαλεν παντεσ yap 
οντοι εκ του περισσενοντοσ αντοισ εβαλον 
εἰσ τα δωρα του ϑυ avr de ex Tov 


ὕστερηματοσ αντὴησ παντα Tov tov 


: oveuxev εβαλεν : και τινων λεγοντων 


περι TOv ἵερου ort λιθοισ καλοισ 
κεκοσμηται και ἀαναθεμασιν 
Curey ravra θεωρειτε ελευσονται 


(Fol. 267 δ.) 


XX. 39 


47 


XXI 1 


— 
E 


— 


LUCAN 


— 


246 


f e 


respondens autem quidam de sscribis 


dixerunt magister bene dixisti 

amplius autem non fuerunt ausi interrogare eu 
nihil dixit autem ad eos quo modo 
dicunt xpm filium dauid . et ipse 

dauid dicitinlibro psalmorum 

dicit dms dmo meo sede a dexteram meam 
usque dum ponam inimicos tuos sub 
pedibus tuis dauid dom illum uocat 

quo modo filius illius est. audientes autem 
omni populo dixit ad discipulos adtendite 
&scribis qui uolunt 

ambulareinstolis et amantium 
salutationes in foro 

et primas cathe dras in synagogis 

et primos addubitos in cenis 

qui comedunt domos uiduarum 

occasione longa orantes 


hi accipient amplius iudicium 


aspiciens autem uidit qui mittebant 


in gazophylacium munera sua 

diuites uidit autem et quandam uiduam 
pauperam mittentem duo minus 

quod est codrantes et dixit uere 

dico uobis quia uidua haec paupera 

plus omnibus misit, omnes enim 

isti de abundantias ua miserunt 
inmuneradei haecautem de 

minimo suo omne substantiam suam 
quod habuit misit.et quorundam dicentiu 
detemplo quoniam lapidibus bonis 


ornata est. et depositionibus 


dixit haec uidetis uenient 


(Fol. 268 a.) 


Carr. XX. 39—XXI. 6. 


246 


Ἡμέραι ey αἱσ ovx αφεθησεται 
λιθοσ ἐπι λιθω ev τοιχω «€ 


oc ov καταλυθησεται 


t 
ops: Επηρωτησαν δε avrov ot μαθηται 


3j 


Aeyovrea 09a kaAe rore ravra εσται 
και TLTO σήμειον THO ONT €eXeva eoo 

O Ge eurev βλεπετε μη πλανηθητε 
πολλοι yap eXevoovTat eri Tw ovopatt 
μον Aeyovrec ort eyw εἰμι kat o καιροσ 
ἬἼγγικεν μὴ πορευθητε οπισω avrov 
οταν d¢ axovoyre πολεμουσ 
καὶ ακαταστασιασ μὴ φοβηθητε 
δει yop γενεσθαι ravra, πρωτον 
αλλ ovx ευθεωσ το reXoa - εγερθησεται yap 
εθνοσ er εθνοσ και βασιλεια. ere βασιχειαν 
σεισμοιτε μεγαλοι κατατοπουσ Kat 
λειμοι και λοιμοι ἐσονται φοβηθρα re 


aT ουρανου καὶ σήημεια μεγαλα eure 


: προ δετουτων παντων επιβαλουσιν 


ες υμασ rac. χειρασ αντων και 
διωξουσιν παραδιδοντεσ eur raa 
σνυναγωγασ και φυλακασ᾽ ἀπαγομενουσ 
emt βασιλεισ και ἡγεμονασ 


ενεκα Tov ονοματοσ μὸν αποβησεται 


: ὕμειν-ισ μαρτυριον : Gere ovv ev ταισ 


καρδιαισ ὕμων μη προμελετωντεσ 
αἀπολογηθηναι eyw yap ὕμειν δωσω 
στομα και σοφιαν ἢ ov δυνησονται 
αντιστηναι παντεσ οἱ αντικειμενοι 
ὕμειν παραδοθησεσθε δε 

και ὕπο γονεων καὶ αδελῴων Kat 
σνυνγενων kat φιλων και θανατωσουσιν 
εξυμων και ἐσεσθαι μεισουμενοι 


(Fol. 268 ὃ.) 


XXL 


SEC LUCAN 
— t— Ge, — 


dies in quibus non relinquetur 
lapis super lapidem in pariete hic 


qui non destruatur 


interrogauerunt autem discipuli 


dicentes magister quando haec erunt 
et quod signum aduentus tui 


ad ille dixit uidete ne erretis 


multi enim uenient in nomine 
meo dicentes quia ego sum et tempus 
adpropiauit ne abieritis post illos 
cum autem audieritis pugnas 
et dissensiones ne timueritis 
oportet enim fieri hoc primum 
sed non continuo finis exurget enim 
gens contra gentem et regnum contra regna' 
terrae motus magni per loca et 
fames et morbi erunt timores autem 
decaelo et signa magna erunt 
ante haec autem omnia mittent 
super uos manus suas et 
persequentur tradentes in 
synagogas et carcares ducentur 
ad reges et duces 
propter nomen meum obtinget 
uobis in testimonium ponite ergo in 
cordibus uestris non promeletantes 
respondere ego enim uobis dabo 
os et sapientiam ad quam non poterint 
contradicere omnes aduersantes 
uobis trademini autem 
eta parentibus etfratribus et 
cognatis etamicis et morti tradent 
ex uobis et eritis odibiles 

(Fol. 269 a.) 


Cap, XXI. 6—17. 


[31 


EP 


[313 


fas 


[3f 


-- — — OC 
KAT AQYK 
— — — 

ὕπο vavroy δια T0 ovopa μου Kat θριξ 
«x THE κεφαλησ ὕμων ov μη αποληται 
εν τή ὕπομονη ὕμων κτησασθε 


tomy 
: Tag ψυχασ ὕμων : ὅταν be ἴδητε 
ω- 


κυκλουμενὴν Ἱερουσαλὴμ ὕπο 
στρατοπεδων rore γνωσεσθε 


οτι ἤγγικεν ἢ ἐρημωσισ αὐυτὴσ 


: TOTE οἱ εν τὴ ἴονδαια φευγετωσαν 


εισ TOf!) Kat OL εν μεσω αὐτὴσ 

μὴ εκχωριτωσαν και oc εν Taur xopate 
pen εἰσερχεσθωσαν εἰσ αντὴην or 
ἡμέραι εκδικησεωσ ανται εἰσιν 

του πλησθηναι παντα τα γεγραμμενα 


-OUGL Ταῖσ εν γαστρὶ exovoaato καιταισ 


θηλαζομεναισ εν εκειναισ ταισ ἡμεραισ 


ἐσται yap ἀναγκὴ μεγαλὴ emt THE γὴησ 


: καὶ opyn Tw Aaw TOVTO * και πεσουνται 


XXI. 18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


εν cropatt ρομφαιασ καὶ αἰχμαλωτισθησο 


ται εἰσ παντα τα εθνη και Ἱερουσαλημ 
εσται πατουμενὴ ὕπο εθνων axpur ov 
πληρωθωσιν : και ἐσονται σημεια 

εν ἡλιω καὶ σεληνὴ καὶ αστροισ 

καὶ επι τὴσ γησ συνοχὴ εθνων 

και απορια nxovono θαλασσησ 

καὶ σάλου αποψυχοντων ανθρωπων 
απο φοβου και προσδοκιασ των 
ἐπερχομένων TH οἰκουμενὴ 

αι yap δυναμισ ἡ εν To ουρανω 


: σαλευθήσονται : καὶ Tore ojovraz 


Tov ὕιον Tov ανθρωπου ἐρχομενον 
εν vedeAn και δυναμει πολλη και δοξη 
ἐρχομένων δε rovrov γεινεσθαι 


ayaxwjare καὶ ἐπαρατετασ κεφαλασ 
(Fol. 269 5.) 


25 


26 


27 


28 


"SEG LUCAN 247 
— — — 


ab omnibus propter nomen meum et capillus 
de capite uestro non periet 

in sufferentia uestra adquirite 

animas uestras cum autem uideritis 
circuiri hierusalem ab 

exercitu tunc scietis. 

quoniam adpropinquauit desolatio eius 


tunc qui in iudaea sunt fugiant 


"in montibus et quiin medio eius sunt 


non exeant et quiin regionibus 
non intrent in eam quoniam 

dies uinctictae sunt istae 
utinpleantur omnia quae scripta sunt 
uae praegnantibus et quae 

lactant in illis diebus 

erit enim nessitas magna super terra 
et ira populo huic et cadent 

in ore gladii et captiui ducentur 
in omnes gentes et hierusalem 
erit calcata a gentibus usque quo 
inpleantur et erunt signa 

in sole et luna et in sideribus 
etsuperterram conflictio gentium 
et aporia sonante mare 

etslo deficientium hominum 
&timore et expectatione quae 
uentura sunt orbi terrarum 
uirtutes enim quae sunt in caelo 
mouebuntur ettunc uidebunt 
filium hominis uenientem 

in nube et uirtute multa et gloria 
incipientium autem horum fieri 


erigite uos et subleuate capita 
(Fol. 270a.) 


Cap. XXI. 17—38. 


248 


NES 


KAT AOYK 

—— — su 
διοτι εγγιζει ἡ απολυτρωσισ ὕμων 

και εἰπεν παραβολὴν avrow | eere τὴν 

συκην - καὶ παντα τα δενδρα οταν 
προβαλωσιν rov καρπον avrov 
γεινωσκεται 785 orc eyyvo 99 το θεροσ 
εστιν ουτωσ και ὕμεισ oray ειδητε 
TAVTO γεινωσκεται OTL εγγυσ ἐστιν 
ἢ βασιλεια του ὃν αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 
ort Ov μὴ παρελθὴ 7) γενεα avr 
€WO TAUTA παντα γενηται oovpayoc 


και ἢ yn παρελευσονται ot δε Xoyot μον 


: ov μὴ παρελευσονται᾿ προσέχετε 


εαντοισ μηποτε βαρυνθωσιν ὕμων 
αι καρδιαι εν κραιπαλὴ και μεθη 
και μεριμναισ βιωτικαισ και 
eru eo ὕμασ ενιφνιοσ ἡμερα 
€kety wo παγισ επισελευσεται yap 
emt τουσ καθημενουσ emt προσωπον 
Ways τὴσ γὴσ αγρυπνειτεδε ev 
παντι καιρω δεομενοι ἵνα καταξιω 
θητε εκφνγειν Tavra ravra. τα 
μελλοντα γεινεσθαι και στησεσθε 
evrpoobey Tov tou του ayÜpurrov 

ἣν 9e rac ἡμερασ ev Tw tepo διδασκων 
εἰσ To opo ηυλήσετο TO καλουμενον 
ἐλαιων καὶ rac ολαοσ ὡρθριζεν 
προσ QvTOV AKOVELY αὐτου εν TW ἵερω 

:ἤγγισεν 9e ἡ ἑορτὴ των αζυμων 

ἢ λεγομενὴ πασχα ' δι δεαρχιερισ 
και γραμματεισ εζητουν Tra 


απολεσωσιν avrov. εφοβουτο δε 


: τὸν λαον : ἔισηλθεν δεσατανασ ͵ 


εἰσ Tov tovday τον καλουμενον 


(Fol. 2705.) 


XXI. 


29 


XXIL τ΄ 


-- 


SEC LUCAN 
——— -, 
quoniam adpropinquat liueratio uestra 
et dixit parabolam illis uidete 
ficulneam et omnes arbores cum 
produxerint fructum suum 
scitote iam quia prope iam aestas 
est sic et uos cum uideritis 
haec scitote quoniam prope est 
regnum del amen dico uobis 
quoniam non praeteribit generatio haec 
us quae dum haec omnia fiant caelum 
et terra praeteribunt uerba autem mea 
non praeteribunt adtendite 
uobis ne quando grauentur uestra 
corda in crepula et ebrietate 
etsoniissaecularibus et 
superueniat super nos subitanus dies 
ille sicut laqueus intro ibit autem 
super sedentes super faciem 
omnis terrae uigilate autem in 
omni tempore rogantes ut digni 
habeamini fugere haec omnia 
quae incipie nt fieri et stabitis 
in conspecto fili hominis 
Erat autem per diem in templo docens 
in monte habitabat qui uocatur 
oliueti et omnis populus uigil abat 
ad eum audire eum in templo 
adpropinquauit autem dies azymorum 
qui dicitur pascha principes autem sacerdotu 
et scribae quaerebant quo modo 
perderent eum timebant autem 
populum intrauit autem satanas 
in iudan qui uocatur 


(Fol. 271 a.) 


Capp. XXI. 238—XXTI. 3. 


wurxapwwd οντα ex Tov αριθμου XXIL 
: €x Tuy - ud : καὶ αἀπελθων συνελαλησεν 4 

TOUT ἀρχίερευσιν πωσ παραδοι 

avrov Kat ἐχαρησαν καὶ συνεθεντο avro 5 

apyv ριον δουναι καὶ «juo εν 6 

και εζητει εὐκαιρίαν TOV © at αὐτὸν 

erepoxAov: ηλθεν den ἡμερα rov raa xa. 7 

ἢ ἐδει θνεσθαι ro πασχα και απεστειλεν 8 

τὸν Ἴτετρον και wayyy εἰπὼν 

πορευθεντεσ' ετοιμασατε jew 

τοπασχα ἵνα φαγωμεν οι de 9 


εἶπαν avro πον θελεισ ετοιμασωμεν 

σοι οδεειπεν ἴδου εἰσερχομένων 

ὕμων εἰσ τὴν πολιν ἀπαντήσει 

ὕμειν ανθρωποσ βασταζων κεραμιον ὕδατοσ 
ακ ATE αντὼ εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν OV εἰσ 
WOPEVETE καὶ EPELTE τω οἰκοδεσποτῆ Tye οικιασ 
λεγει o διδασκαλοσ Tov ἐστι το καταλυμα 
οπου TO πασχα μετα των μαθητων μον φαγω 


εκεινοσ ὕμειν δειξει avayarov οἰκον 


ἐστρωμένον EXEL ετοιμασατε 
απελθοντεσ δε evpov καθωσ εἰρήκει αὐτοσ᾽ 
και ἡτοιμασαν τὸ πασχα Kat OTE 


ἐγένετο ἢ opa. QVETETEY KAL Οἱ 


; GTOOTOÀOL σὺν GUTO) * και €UT€V προσ αντουσ 


επιθυμια επεθυμησα Tov To To πασχα 
φαγειν μεθυμων προ rov μεπαθειν 
Aeyo yap ὕμειν οὐκετι μη φαγομαι 
απ avrov εωσ orov καινον βρωθη 
εν τή βασιλεια του θυ και δεξαμενοσ 
TO ποτήριον ευχαριστησασ εἰπεν 
Xaflere rovro διαμερισατε eavrow 
Aeyo yap ὕμειν απο του νυν OU μὴ πιω 
(Fol. 271 6.) 


10 


ΣΙ 


12 


13 
14 


15 


16 


r7 


BEC LUCAN 249 
iscarioth . qui erat de numero 

duodecim et abiit et conlocutus est 
principibus sacerdotum quo modo traderet 
eum et gauisi sunt et constituerunt ei 
pecuniam dare et confessus est 

et quaerebat oportunitatem ut traderet eu 
sineturba: uenit autem dies pas chae 

in qua oportebatimmolaripascha et misit 
petrum et iohanen dicens 

euntes parate nobis 

pascha utmanducemus ad illi 
dixeruntei ubi bis paremus 

tibi ad ille dixit ecce introeuntibus 
uobis in ciuitatem ob uiabit 

uobis homo baiulans bascellum aquae 
semini eum in domum ubi intro 

ierit et dicitis patrifamiliae domus 

dicit magister ubiest diuersorium 

ubi pascha cum discipulos meos edam 

ille uobis ostendet superiorem domum 
stratum ibi parate 

abientes autem inuenerunt sicut dixerat ills 
et parauerunt pascha et cum 

fuithora recubuit et 

apostoli cum illo et dixit ad eos 
eoncupiscentia concupiui hoc pascha 
manducare uobiscum priusquam patiar 
dico enim uobis iam non manducabo 

abeo usquequo nobum edatur 

in regno dei et accipiens 

calicem benedicens dixit 

accipite hoc et partimini uobis 


dieo enim uobis amodo non bibam 
(Fol. 272a.) 


Car. XXII. 3—18. 


32 


250 KAT AOYKAN 
—— — — 
απὸ TOV γενηματοσ THe αμπελου 
€wo οτου tM ἡ βασιλεια του ὃν 
oer : καὶ λαβὼν aprov ευχαριστησασ εκλασεν 
σέζ : Kat ἐδωκεν avrour λέγων rovro ἐστιν 
σξη τὸ σωμα pov πλὴν iov ἡ χεὶρ του 
παραδιδοντοσ με ext THE τραπεζησ’ 
ort μὲν οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπου κατα ro: 
ὡρισμένον πορενεται πλην οναι EKEWW 
c£? : Ot ov παραδιδοται : ἄντοι δε ηρξαντο 
ouv{yrew προσ eavrove Tw apa eu] ομελλω 
oo : TOVTO πρασσειν * éyevero Se καὶ 
φιλονικεια ev avrow To Tw ay ur 
μειζων οδε eurev avrour | 
ot βασιλεισ των εθνων κυριενοῦσιν 
Gvrov Kaz ot εξουσιαζοντεσ avrov 
evepyerat καλουνται 
ὕμεισ δε ουχουτωσ αλλ o μειζων 
ev ὕμειν γεινεσθω wo μέικροτεροσ' 
και ο ἤγουμενοσ wo o διακονοσ' 
— 


coa : μαλλον ; ἢ οανακειμενοσ' eyo yap 
εν μεσω ὕμων ÀÜov ovx wo o αφακειμενοσ᾽ 
αλλ wo o διακονων και ὕμεισ ηυξηθητε 
εν τὴ διακονια μοῦ wo-o διακονων 
ot διαμεμενήκοτεσ μετ ἐμοῦ εν Tour 
πειρασμοισ μου καγω Star ene p ew 
καθωσ διεθετο μοι o πατὴρ βασιλειαν ἵνα 
eoOnre και πεινηται emt THO τραπεζησ μον 
: εν τὴ βασιλεια : και καθεζησθε ex ιβ᾽ 
θρονουσ κρεινοντεσ - iB * φυλασ 


(3. gj 


oe ee — 
: τουϊσραηλ : ἕιπεν co ka. auuby 
σιμὼν ibovocaravac ἐξητησατο ὕμασ' 
Tov σινιασαι wo τὸν σῖτον eyw δε 


εδεηθην περι σου ἵνα μη ἐκλιπὴ ἡ 
(Fol. 272 ὅ.) 


XXII. 


19 


21 


22 


23 


24 


a5 


27 


28 
29 
30 


32 


& creatura uineae 

usque quo ueniat regnum del 

et accipiens panem benedixit fregit 

et dedit eis dicens hoc est 

corpus meum uerumtamen ecce manus qui 
tradet me super mensa 

filius quidem hominis secundum 
praefinitum uadit uerumtamen uae illi 
per quem traditur ipsi autem coeperunt 
conquirere ad semetipsos quis esset qui incipiet 
hoc agere facta est autem et 

contentio in eis quisnam esset 

maior ad ille dixit illis 

reges gentium dominantur 

eorum et qui potestatem habent eorum 
ueniuoli uocantur 

uos autem non sic sed qui maior 

in uobis est fiat sicut minus 

et qui ducatum agit sicut qui ministrat 
magis quam qui recumbit ego autem 
gum in medio uestrum ueni non sicut qui recumbit 
sed sicut ministrans et uos creuistris 

in ministerio meo'sicut ministrat 

qui permansistis mecum in temptatio 
nibus meis et ego dispono uobis 

Sicut disposuit mihi pater regnum ut 
edatis et bibatis super mensam meam 

in regno et sedebitis super xii" 
sedesiudicantes xii-tribus 

israhel dixitautem dms simon 

simon ecce satanas expetiuit uos 

ut cerneret sicut triticum ego autem 


praecatus sum de te ut non deficiat 


(Fol, 273 a.) 


Cap. XXII. 18—32. 


§3sfas 


sas 


[3! 


8. 


fay 3 3: | 


131 


+ TOUTO TO WOTHPLOV αἸΤΈεμου 


: πιστισ σου : συ δεεπιστρεψον και 


: στηριξον rove αδελφουσ σου : ὃ δε εἰπεν 


— 
αὐτῶ KE μετὰ σὸν ETOLLOT εἰμι 


XXII. 


33 


καὶ eo φυλακὴν και εἰσ Üavaroy πορενεσθαι 


o δε earey λεγω σοι πετρε ov μη φωνήσει 
σήμερον ἀαλεκτωρ εωσ οτουτρισ με 
απαρνησὴ μὴ εἰδεναι με 


> καὶ εἰπεν αντοισ OTe απεστειλα ὕμασ 


ατερ BadXayriov και πηρασ Kat 
ὑποδημάτων μὴ τινοσ ὕστερησατε 

ot δεειπαν ουὐδενοσ 0 Se eurev 

αλλα νυν o exov βαλλαντιον apet ομοιωσ 
καὶ πήραν και ο μὴ Cxwv πωλησαι 

TO ἵματιον αντου και ἀγορασει μαχαιραν 


: λέγω yap ort rovro τὸ γεγραμμενον 


δει τελεσθηναι εν ἐμοι ro και μετα των 
ἀνομων ελογισθὴ και To περι ἐμου 


: τελοσ exet οἱ δε ειπαν :ἴδου κε δυο 


μάχαιραι woe o δε eurey avrow 


: ἀρκει > και ἐξελθων ἐπορευετο 


κατα To εθοσ εἰσ ro οροσ των easy 


ἠκολουθησαν δε avro και οἱ μαθηται 


: γενομενοσ δε emt τόπου ειπεν avrowr 


προσευχεσθαι μὴ εἰσελθητε εἰσ πειρασμον 


: avrog δε απεσταθὴ απ avrov woe 


34 


35 


E 


37 


38 


39 


λιθου βολην και θεισ τα yovara προσευχετο 


: λέγων : πατερ μὴ To θελημα μου αλλα 


To σὸν γενεσθω εἰ βουλει παρενεγκε 
:ὠὥφθη δε 
avro ἀγγελοσ απὸ rov ovpavou 
ενισχυων AUTOY καὶ γενομενοσ 

εν αγωνια ἐκτενεστερον προσηνχετο 


eyevero δε οἵδρωσ avrov wo θρομβοι 
(Fol. 273 b.) 


43 


| 


fidestua tu autem conuertere et 
confirma fratres tuos ad ille dixit 

. . — 

illidme tecum paratus sum 

et in carcerem et in mortem ire 

ad ille dixit dico tibi petre non clamauit 
hodie gallus usque quo ter me 


negabis nescire me 


Et dixit illis quando misi uos 


sine sacculo .et pera et 

calciamentis ne cuius defecistis 

ad illi dixerunt nullius ad ille dixit 

sed nunc qui habet sacellum tollet similiter 

et peram et qui non habet uendat 

tunicam suam et emet cladium 

dic o enim quia hoc quod scriptum est 

oportet conpleri inm quod et cum 

iniquis.conputatus est et deme 

finem hauet illi autem dixerunt ecce dine duo 

machaerae adille dixit illis 

sufficit et exiens ibat 

secundum consuetudinem in montem oliueti 

secuti sunt autem eum et discipuli 

cum fuisset autem in loco dixit illis 

orate ne intretis in temptationem 

ipse autem recessit ab eis quasi 

lapides missionem et ponens genua orabat 

dicens pater non uoluntas mea sed 

tua fiat si uis transferre 

hunc calicem ame uisus est autem illi 

angelus de caelo 

confortians eum et factus 

inagonia uehementius orabat 

factus est autem sudor eius sicut buccellae 
(Fol. 2744.) 


Cap. XXII. 32—44. 


253 


(3! 


(3 [3 


αιματοσ' καταβαινοντεσ emt τὴν γὴν 


: και αγαστασ απὸ THO προσευχὴσ 


wv er rove μαθητασ ευρεν 
κοιμωμενουσ αντουσ᾽ απὸ THT 
Aurno και εἰπεν αντοισ᾽ καθευδετε 


ανασταντεσ προσευχεσῦε ἵνα μὴ 


: εἰσ πειρασμον εισελθητε ' ἔτι δὲ 


avrov λαλουντοσο ἴδον οχλοσ' πολυσ' 
Kato καλουμενοσ ἴουδασ᾽ ισκαριωθ 


> εἰσ των - eB - rporyey avrove * και 


--. 

eyywrao εφιλησεν τον την Tovro yap 
σήημειον δεδωκει avrow ον ay φιλησω 
avroc ἐστιν οδε eg eurey ro tovda 


φιληματι roy ὕιον rov ayÜperrov παραδιδωσ 


: ἴδοντεσ Se οἱ πέρι avroy ro γενομενον 


εἰπαν Tw Ko εἰ παταξομεν εν μαχαιρὴη 
«at ἐπαταξεν ew Tur e£ αυτων Toy δουλον 


TOV ἀρχιερεωσ καὶ αφειλατο avrov 


—À 
: TO wrov To δεξιον : ἄποκριθεισ δε o vo 


€UT€y EATE EWO TOVTOU και εἐκτεινασ᾽ 


τὴν x€pa. ἡψατο avrov καὶ απεκατεσταθὴ 


: TO OUC avrov : Étrey δεπροσ Tove 


παραγενομενουσ ἐπ avrov σ- 
Gpxtepeur καὶ στρατηγουσ Tov λαον 

και πρεσβυτερουσ wo ἐπι ληστην εξηλθατε 
μετα μαχαιρων και ξυλων το καθημέραν 
ovrod μου ev τωΐἵερω μεθ υμων 

οὐκ ἐξεστινατετασ χειρασ ET Efe 


αλλα αντὴ ἐστιν ὕμων ἡ wpa και εξονυσια 


: To oKorog * συνλαβοντεσ Se avroy 


ἤγαγον εἰσ Tov otkoy TOV ἀρχιερεωσ 


: οδεπετροσ ηἠκολουθει avro amo 


paxpoÜev αψαντων Se rup 
(Fol. 274 5.) 


45 


46 


47 


48 


49 


om, 


C 


ue 
SEC 
oy 


fr 


— 


sanguinis descendentes super terram 

et surgens ab oratione 

ueniens addis cipulos inuenit 
dormientes eos a 

iristitia et dixit illis dormitis 

surgentes orate ut non 

in temptationem intretis- adhuc autem 
eo lóquente ecce turba multa 

et qui uocatur iudas iscariot 

unus de.xil.antecedebateos et 
accedens osculatus est ihm hoc enim 
signum dederat eis quem osculatus fuero 
ipse-est ihs autem dixit iuda 

osculo filium hominis tra dis 

uidentes autem qui circa eum quod factum est 
dixeruntdmo si percutiemus in gladio 
et percussit unus eis seruum 

principis sacerdotum et abstulit eius 
auriculam dextram respondens autem ihs 
dixitsinite usque hoc et extendens 
manum tetigit eum et restituta est 
auricula eius dixit autem ad eos 

qui aduenerant ad eum 

principes sacerdotum et praepositos populi 
et seniores sicut ad latronem existis 

cum gla diis et fustibus cottidie 

cum essem in templo uobiscum 

non extendistis manus in me 

sed haec est hora uestra et potestas 
tenebrae contenentes autem eum 
adduxerunt in domum principis sacerdotum 
petrus autem sequebutur eum a 


longe incendentibus autem ignem 
(Fol. 275 a.) 


Cap. XXII. 44—55. 


xi gx BT Tou as 
«v μεσω tno avino καὶ περικαθισαντων —— XXII. in medioatrio et circumsedentium 
εκαθητο Kat o rrerpoc μετ avrov sedebat et petrus cum eis | 
θερμαινομενοσ ιδουσ Se avrov 56 calficiensse uidens autem eum 
παιδισκη τισ καθημενον προσ To φωσ puella quaedam sedentem ad lumen 
Kal ατενίσασα AUT €UT€V. καὶ OVTOT et intendens in eum dixit et hio 
συν avro ἣν o δεηρνήησατο avroy λεγων 57 cum eo erat ad ille negauit eum dicens 

2 : oux οἰδα avrov : καὶ pera βραχυ ετεροσ 58 nescio illum et post pusillum alius 
edwy avrov εἰπεν To avro. οδε eurey uidens eum dixit id ipsum ad ille dixit 
ayÜporre ovk εἰμι και διαστησασ woe £9 homo nonsum  etintercesso quasi 
epa μιασ αλλοσ ris Sticxupifero horae unius alius quis certabatur 
er αληθειασ λεγω και ουτοσ μετ avrov ἣν in ueritate dico et hio cum eo erat 
καὶ yap γαλιλαιοσ er εἰπεν Oeo 60 etenim galilaeusest dixit autem 
πετροσ ανθρωπε ovk οιδα τι Neyer | petrus homo nescio quid dicis 
καὶ wapaxpyj.a ert λαλουντοσ avrov et continuo adhuc eo loquente 

σα : εφωνησεν ἀλεκτωρ ! στραφεισ δε o ine 61 gallus cantauit conuersus autem ihs 

B ἐνεβλεψεν ro πετρω καὶ ὕπεμνησθη respexit petrum et rememoratus est 
TOv Àoyov TOVKU ὡσ εἰπεν GVTO uerbum dmi sicut dixit illi 
πριν aXextopa φωγνησαι rpewr quia priusquam gallus cantet ter 
απαρνησὴ με μὴ edevar με καὶ εξελθων 62 abnegauis me et exiens 

σαδ : ef ἐκλαυσαι πικρωσ : δι δε ανδρεσ 63 foras fleuitadmare uiri autem 

B οἱ συνεχοντεσ avrov ever«Lov avro qui contenebant eum inludebant eum 
και περικαλυψαντεσ avrov TO προσωπον 64 et coperientes eius faciem 
ετνπτον αντον καὶ eXeyoy προφήτευσον percutiebant eum et dicebant propheta 
τισ ἐστιν οπαισασ σε καιαλλα πολλα 65 quis est qui te percussit et alia multa 
βλασφημουντεσ eXeyov εἰσ εαυτουσ blasfemantes dicebantin eum 

σῷ € : καὶ wo eyevero ἡμερα συνηχθὴ 66) Etcum factusest dies congregati sunt 
To πρεσβυτεριον του Aaov - Kat apxuepeu seniores populi et principes sacerdotum 
και γραμματεισ καὶ ἀπήγαγον AUTOY ELT To etscribae et adduxeunt eum m 
συνεδριον avrov λεγοντεσ av εἰ o χρσ 67 concilium suum dicentes tu es xps 

σῇ! € : O δεειπεν avrow «ay ὕμειν euro ov μὴ ad ille dixit illis si uobis dixero non 
πιστευσητε €ay EPWTNTW Ov μὴ 68 | ® respondetis mihi aut dimittetis 
αποκριθητε pot ἡ απολυσητει - credetis siinterrogauero non 

oat : amo rou νυν Se extras o itog Tov ανθρωπου 69 amo do autem erit filius hominis 

(Fol. 275 6.) (Fol. 276a.) 


Car. XXII. 5$—69. 


254 KAT AOYK 
Se ες. 
καθημενοσ ex δεξιων τησ δυναμέωσ 
--- — — 
€q7 : Tov Ov : &uroy Se παντεσ σὺ εἰ οὐϊιοσ Tov θυ 
C 
o δε eurev avrow' ὑμεισ Aeyere ori 
omy, 
σηθ : €yo εἰμι" δι δε euray τι ert χρειαν 
ἐχομεν μαρτυρων ἠκουσαμεν yap 
—, es 
= : απὸ TOU στοματοσ aurov ; καιαγασταντεσ XXIII. 1 
ἤγαγον avrov avroy em weiharov 
τα ἑἥρξαντο δε κατήγορειν avrov Aeyovree 


[ὦ Jays 


τουτον evpoy διαστρεφοντα 
TO εθνοσ ἡμων Kat κωλνοντα 
φορουσ διδοναι καισαρι λέγοντα δε 
εαυτον χρν «βασιλεα ειναι 

: O δεπιλατοσ empornaey avroy λέγων 
ov cco βασιλευσ των Ἰουδαίων 

O δεαπεκριθὴ avro λεγων ov λεγεισ 

: O δε πειλατοσ εἰπεν προσ τουσ ἀρχιερεισ 

καὶ τουσ οχλουσ οὐδεν ευρισκω αἰτιον 
: ey To ἀνθρωπω Tovro ! δι δε evicxvov 

λεγοντεσ ανασειῖει Toy λαον διδασκων 
καθ ολησ τησ yno ἀρξαμενοσ απὸ Tne 
γαλιλαιασ εωσ ὧδε ακουσασ deo 
πειλατοσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν επηρωτησεν 
εἰ ao rgo γαλιλαιασ οανθρωποσ 
ἐστιν επιγνουσ δε ort ex τησ εξουσιασ 
npwoou ἐστιν averepivey avrov 
τω ἡρωδὴ ovrt avro εν Ἱεροσολυμοισ 
εν ἐεκειναισ ταισ ἡμεραισ οδεηρωδησ 
εἰδων Tov y exapy Àeay ἣν yap 
θελων ειδειν avrov εξ waywv χρονων 
δια ro akovew περι avrov και ἠλπιζεν 
τι σήμειον ειδειν Ur αὐτου γεινομενον 
exrnpwra δεαντον εν λογοισ εἰκανοισ 


αντοσ δεουκ απεκρινατὸ avro. ovdev 
(Fol. 276 b.) 


SEC LUCAN 
--- ...ὄ.ὄ ἰ-:.-.. --- 


sedens ad dexteram uirtutis 
del . dixerunt autem omnes tu es filius dei 
ad ille dixit illis uos dicitis quoniam 
ego sum ad illi dixerunt quid adhuc opus 
habemus testium audiuimus enim 
de ore eius et exsurgentes 
adduxerunt eum ad pilatum 
coeperunt autem accusare eum dicentes 
hunc inuenimus subuertentem 
gentem nostram et uetantem 
tributa dare caesari dicentem autem 
8e xpm regem esse 
pilatus autem interrogauit eum dicens 
tu es rex iudaeorum 
ille autem respondit illi dicens tu dicis 
pilatus autem dixit ad principes sacerdotum 
et turbas nihilinuenio causae 
in homine hoc ad illi fortius 
dicebant seducit populum docens 
per omnem terram incipiens a 
galilaea usque hic audiens autem 
pilatus galilaeam interrogauit 
si de galilaea homo 
est, cognoscens autem quia de potestate 
herodes est misit eum 
&d heroden cum esset hierosolymis 
in illis diebus herodes autem 
uidens ihm gauisus est ualde erat enim 
uolens uidere eum de multis temporibus 
propter quod audiret de eo et sperabat 
quondam aignum uidere ab eo fieri 
interrogabat autem eum in uerbis multis 
ille autem nihil respondebat illi - 
(Fol. 277 a.) 


Carr. XXII. 69—XXIII. 9. 


fas 


faf 


[3 ff Af 


cy ; 


: εἰστήκεισαν Se ov apxuepeur 


καὶ οἱ γραμματισ ευτονωσ 


: κατηγορουῦτεσ avrov : ξουθενησασ δε 


avrov o ἡἠρωδησ συν τοιστρατευμασιν 
αὐτου και ενπαιξασ περιβαλὼν avroy 
αεσθητα λαμπραν. ἀνεπεμψεν avrov 
To πειλατω οντεσ δε εν αηδια 


οπιλατοσ' Kato ἡρωδησ εγενοντο 


> Φιλοι ev αὐτὴ τηημερα : ὃ δεπειλατοσ 


συνκαλεσασ τουσ ἀρχιερεισ καὶ τουσ 
apxovrag καὶ παντα TOV λαον evrev 
προσ αυτουσ κατηνεγκατε μοι TOP 
ἀγθρωπον rovrov wo αποστρεφοντα 
Toy λαον καγω δὲ avaxpivac ενωπιον 


ὕμων — ovÓcy evpoy atrtoy εν avro 


: add ovde ηρωδησ ἀνεπεμψα yap ὕμασ 


προσ avrov καὶ οὐδεν αξιον θανατου 


: πεπραγμένον ἐστιν εν ? ávro παιδευσασ ov 


avrov ἀπολυσω * ἄνεκραξαν Se παν 


πληθει λεγοντεσ aspe rovrov αἰραι τοντον 


azoAvcoy Se nev rov βαραββαν 
οστισ ny δια στασιν τινα γενομενὴν 
εν τή πολει καὶ φονον βεβλημενοσ' 
εἰσ φυλακὴν - αναγκὴν δε εἰχεν κατα 


€oprv απολνεῖιν avrow eva 


: παλιν δεοπειλατοσ προσεφωνησεν 


αὐτουσ θελων απολυσαι τον ἣν 


oc Se expa fav σταυρου o'ravpov Tov 


: οδετριτον εἰπεν προσ avrove TL yap 


κακον exotnoey ουτοσ οὐδεμίαν 


αἰτιαν θανατου ευρισκω εν avro 


παιδευσασ ovy απτολυσω avrov 


οἱ δε ἐπέκειντο φωναισ μεγαλαισ 
(Fol. 275 δ.) 


XXIII. τὸ 


it 


12 


13 


14 


16 


19 


20 


21 


22 


‘SEC LUC 
— -.ὄ 


— 


stabant autem principes sacerdotum 


et scribae fortiter 

accusantes eum exprobant autem 
eum et herodes cum exercitu 

suo et inludens coperiens eum 
opertorium candidum remisit eum 
pilato cum eesent autem in lite 

pilatus et herodes facti sunt 
amiciinipsodie  pilatus autem 
conuocans principes sacerdotum et 
principes et omnem plebem dixit 
adeos adduxistis mihi 

hominem hunc sicut auertentem 
plebem et ego autem interrogans in conspecta 
uestro nihil mali inueni in eo 

sed nec herodes missi enim uos 

ad eum et nihil dignum mortis 

actum estineo emendans ergo 

eum dimittam exclamauerunt autem 
uniuersi dicentes tolle hunc tolle hunc 
dimitte autem nobis barabbam 


qui erat propter dissensionem quandam facta. 


in ciuitatem et homicidium missus 

in carcerem necesse autem habebat per 
diem festum dimittere illis unum 
iterum autem pilatus aduocauit 

eos uolens dimittere ihm 

ad illi clamauerunt crucifige crucifige eu 
ad ille tertio dixit ad eos quid enim 


| malifecithic ullam 


causam mortis inuenio in eum 

emendans ergo dimittam eum 

ad illi incumbebant uocibus magnis 
(Fol. 2780.) — 


Cap. XXIII. 10—23. 


255 


200 


πε: 


faf 


αἰτουμενοι σταὺν at αὐτὸν 
και KATUTXVOV αὐ φωναι αυτων καὶ των 
των ἀαρχίερεων : ἕπεκρεινεν Se 
o πειλατοσ γενεσθαιτο αἰτημα avrov 
απελυσεν Se Tov ev«xa. φονου 
βεβλημενον eur φυλακὴν 

do, 
ov ἥτουντο Toy 8e ιν παρεδωκεν 


To θεληματι avrov : ὧσ δε 


: ἀπήγαγον avroy επιλαβομενοι 


τινα σιμωνα κυρηναιον 
epxop.evov aroaypov επεθῆκαν avro 
τον σταυρον φερειν οπεισοθεν rov ἣν 


ηκολουθει δετο πληθοσ avro 

TOV λαου και γυναικεσ' 

αι ἐκόπτοντο avroy Kat εθρηνουν 
στραφεισ Seo ine εἰπεν προσ avraa 
θυγατερεσ Ἱερονερουσαλήμ py 
κλαιετεεμε μηδεπενθειτε 

αλλ εαυτασ κλαιετε και TO, τεκνα 
ὕμων ort ἐλευσονται ἡμεραι 

εν aur ἐρουσιν μακαριαι at στειραι 
καὶ κοιλίαι αἱ οὐκ eyevynoay 

kat μασθοι οι ovk εἐξεθρεψαν 

τοτε ἀρξονται λεγειν Tour ορεσι 
πέσεται eo ἡμασ και τοισ βουνοισ 
καλυψατεημασ οτι εἰ εν To ὕγρω ξυλω 


ταυτα ποιουσὶν εν TW ξηρω τι γενησεται 


Td: ἤγοντο δε και ετεροι Svo κακουργοι 


TU) : 
— 


συν avro ἀνερεθηναι : Kat ore nay 


ἐπι TOV τόπον TOV καλουμενον κραγιον 


> «kel ἐστανρωσαν GUTOY : καὶ τουσ κακουργοὺσ 


ομου - OV μεν εκ δεξιων - ov de 
εξ αριστερων * es διεμεριζοντο de 


(Fol. 2788.) 


XXIII. 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 
33 


petentes crucifigi eum 

et conualescebant uoces eorum et 
principum sacerdotum iudicauit autem 
pilatus fieri petitionem eorum * di 
misit autem qui propter homicidium 
missus erat in carcerem 

quem petebant ihm autem tradidit 
uoluntati eorum cum autem 
duxerunt eum adpraehendentes 
quendam simonem cyrenensem 
uenientem deagro inposuerunt ei 
crucem utadferret retro ihm 
Bequebatur autem illum multitudo 
populi et mulieres 

quae plangebant eum et lamentabant 
conuersus autem ihs dixit ad eas 

filie hierusalem nolite 

plangere me neque lugete 

sed uos plorate et filios 

uestros quoniam uenient dies 

in quibus dicent beatae steriles 


et uteri quae non genuerunt 


et ubera quae non enutrierunt 


tunc incipient dicere montibus 


cadite super nos et collibus 
tegite nos quoniam si in umido ligno 
haec faciunt in arido quid fiet 


ducebantur autem et alii duo maligni 


cum eo interfici et cum uenerunt 
inlocum qui uocatur caluariae 
ibi crucifixerunt eum et malignos 
simul unum a dextris. et unum 
& sinistris partiebantur autem 


(Fol. 279 a.) 


Cap. XXIII. 23— 54. 


ra ἵματια avrov. βαλοντεσ 

κληρον : και εἰστήκει ολαοσ opoy 
εἐμυκτηριζον δε avrov καὶ ἐλεγαν avro 
αλλουσ ἐσωσασ σεαυτὸν σωσον 

εἰ ὕιοσ εἰ του θυ εἰ χρσ εἰ 0 ἐκλεκτοσ' 
εἐνεπεῖζον Se avro και ot στρατιωται 
προσερχομέενοι οξοσ τεπροσεφερον 
λεγοντεσ - xaipe o βάσιλευσ των Ἰουδαιων 
περιτεθεντεσ avro και axayÜwoy 
στεφανον : ἣν δε και ἡ επιγραφὴ 
ἐπιγεγραμμενὴ ex avro γραμμασιν 
ελληνικοισ ρωμαΐκοισ εβραΐκοισ 

o βασιλευσ Tov ἴουδαιων ουτοσ ἐστιν 
εἰσ δετων κακουργων € βλασφημει 


avrov :ἅποκριθεισ δεο ετεροσ 


ἐπετειμα avro. λεγων ort ov Hon av 
τὸν Ov οτι «v τω avro κριματι €t 

και ἡμεισ ἐσμεν καιημεισ μεν 
δικαίωσ αξια yap ὧν επραξαμεν 
αἀπολαμβανομεν ovroc δε ουδεν 
πονήρον expagey καὶ στραφεισ 
τροσ TOV KV εἰπεν avro μνησθητι μον 
εν Τὴ NAPA THE ελευσεωσ σου 


ΑἈποκριθεισ δεο - eurev avro To ἐπλήσοντι 


θαρσει σημερον μετ ἐμου ἐσὴ 


: ἐν Tw παραδεισω * καὶ ἣν oc 


wpa. EXT) KAL σκοτοσ €y€vero 
ed ολην THY γὴν eva ὡρασ 
evarne : ἐσκοτισθη δε o quoc 


a 
: καὶ φωνησασ ovs μεγαλη φωνὴ 


«urey πατερ εἰσ χειρασ σον παρατιθημι 
τοπνευμα μουτοῦτο δε εἰπὼν εξεπνευσε 


καὶτὸ Κατα e€ro.0 LG TOU νου 


(Fol. 279 b.) 


4t 


42 


43 


45 
46 


45 


SEC LUCAN ~ 257 
——— -. 
uestimenta eius mittentes 
Sortem et stabat populus uidens 
subsannabant autem eum et dicebant illi 
alios saluos fecisti teipsum salbum fac 
si filius es del si xps es electus 
deludebant autem eum et milites 
accedentes acetum offerebant ei 
dicentes habe rex iudaeorum 
inponentesilli et de spinis 
coronam erat autem et inscriptio 
superscripta super eum litteris 
graecis latinis hebraicis 
rex iudaeorum hic est 
unus autem de malignis blasphemabat 
um respondens autem alius 
increpabat eum dicens quoniam no times ta 
dnm. quoniam in ipso iudicio 
et nos sumus et nos quidem 
iuste digne enim secundum quod egimus 
recipimus hic autem nihil 
inicum egit et conuersus 
ad dom dixit illi memento me 


indie aduentus tui 


respondens autem ihs dixit qui obiurgabat eu 


animequior esto hodie mecum eris 


in paradiso et erat sic ut 
hora sexta et tenebrae factae sunt 


in totam terram usque hora 


nona obscuratus autem est sol 
et clamans ihs uoce magna 
dixit pater in manus tuas commendo 
spm meum et hoc cum dixisset exspirauit 
et uelum templi 
(Fol. 280 a.) 


Car. XXIII. 34—46. 


33 


ἤρχοντο Ewer TO pHa φαιρουσαι 


αητοιμᾶάσαν καιτινεσ συν UTA 
ελογιζοντο δε «v eavrau 
(Fol. 28ο δ.) 


258 KAT AOYKAN 
BoB c 
τὰ : ἐσχίσθη : και o exarovrapxog φωνησασ XXIII. 47 
n εδοξαζεν τον ὃν λεγων ovroc 
Tha : δικαιοσ' ἣν οανθρωποσ ovroc * Kat παντεσ 48 
οἱ συνπαραγενομένοι emi θεωρεια 
οχλοι θεωρησαντεσ τα γενομενα 
τνπτοντεσ τα στηθη xa ra. μετωπα 
ὕπεστρεφαν ειστηκεισαν δεπαντεσ οι 49 
γνωστοι avrov απὸ μακροθεν καὶ γυναικεσ 
at συνακολουθησασαι avro 
απὸ TO γαλιλαιασ ορωσαι ταυτα 
τὰβ : καὶ ἴδον ανὴρ ονοματιϊωσηφ 50 
βονλευτησ ὕπαρχων αγαθοσ και δικαιοσ 
ovroc ovk ἣν συνκατατιθεμενοσ τὴ βουλη 51 
καὶ Ty πραξὴ avrov amo αριμαθιασ 
πολεωσ των iovdaiwy oc προσεδέχετο 
την βασιλειαν του θυ προσελθων τω πειλαάτω 52 
Thy : ἥτηήσατοτοσωμα TOV LU : καὶ καθελων 53 
ενετυλιξεν ro σωμα τον em ev σινδονι 
καὶ εθηκεν avrov ev μνημειω 
λελατομημενω ov ovk jy ουπω 
οὐδεισ κειμενοσ και θεντοσ avrov ereOnae 
τω μνήμειω λειθον ον μογισ εικοσι 
τλὸ : εκυλιον : ἣν Sey ἡμέρα προσαββατον 54 
κατηκολονθησαν δε Svo £5 
γυναικεσ auriver σαν συνεληλυθύυιαι 
απὸ THO αγαλιλαιασ καὶ εθεασαντο 
The: τὸ μνημα avrov : ὑποστρεψασαι δε 56 
B ἡτοίμασαν apeuara, και μυρα 
«a4 To μεν σαββατον ἡσυχασαν : μιαδε — XXIV. 1 
τὰς : τῶν σαββατων ορθρου βαθεωσ 


scissum est . et centurio clamans 
honorificabat dm dicens uere 
iustus erat hic homo et omnes 
qui simul uenerant ad spectaculum popat 
uidentes quae facta sunt 
percutientes pectora et frontes 
reuertebantur stabant autem omnes 
notieius alonge et mulieres 
quae secutae sunt eum 
&galilaea uidentes haec 
etecce uir nomine ioseph 
decurio cum esset bonus etiustus 
hic non erat consentiens consilio 
etactionieorum ab arimathia 
ciuitate iudaeorum qui expectabat 
regnum dei et accedens ad pilatum 
petiuit corpus ihu et deponens 
inuoluit corpus ihu in sindone 
et posuib eum in monumento 
sculpto  ubiadhuc 
nemo positus et posito eo inposuit 
in monumento lapidem quem uix uiginti 
mouebant.erat autem dies antesabbatum 
secutae sunt autem duae 
mulieres quae erant. simul uenientes 
agalilaea etuiderunt 
monimentum eius reuersse autem 
parauerunt aromata et unguenta 
et quidem sabbatum requieuerunt una aute. 
sabbati mane diluculo 
ueniebant ad monimentum adferentes 
quae parauerunt etquidam cum illis 
cogitabant autem intra se 

(Fol. 281 a.) 


Capp. XXIII. 44—XXIV. 1. 


— 
τλζ : 
—, 


ty: 


— 
τλθ 
-— 


i 0 - 
KAT AOYKAN 


Tir apa ἀποκυλισει roy foy XXIV. 
εἐλθουσαι δε ευρον roy λιθον 2 
αποκεκυλισμενον ἀπὸ TOV μνημειου 
εἰσελθουσαι δε ovy evpoy ro σωμα 3 
Kat eyevero εν τω ἀπορεισθαι αυτασ 4 
περι avrov ἴδον dvo avdper επεστῆσαν 
αυταισ ev ἐσθητι αστραπτουσὴ 
evpoBor δε γενομεναι εκλειναν τα 5 
προσωπὰ εἰσ τὴν γὴν οι δε εἰπαν προσ avrag 
τι ζητειτε τὸν ζωντα μετα τῶν νεκρων 
μνησθητε Se oca ἐλαλησεν ὕμειν 6 
ert oy εν Τὴ γαλιλαια ort de τον ὕιον 7 
του ayÜparrov παραδοθηναι εἰσ χειρασ 
ayÜpenrov και σταυρωθηναι και τὴ τριτή 
ἡμέρα αναστῆναι Kat εἐμνησθησαν των 8 
ρήματων avrov * και ὑποστρεψασαι 9 
απηγγειλαν παντα rav τὰ τοισ ἐνδεκα 
και Tract Tow λοιποισ 
:papu 7) μαγδαληνὴ Kat iwava 10 
καὶ μαρια ἡ ἵακωβον και αι Xouraa συν ανταισ 
ἐλεγαν προσ αὐτουσ ἀποστολουσ ταυτα 
και εφαγνησαν ενωπιον αὐτων II 
«€i ληροσ Ta ρήματα ταντα. και ἡπιστουν αὐταισ 
σαν δε dv0 πορευομενοι e£ avrov 13 


εν αυτή τὴ ἡμέρα εἰσ κωμὴν ἀαπεχουσαν 
σταδιουσ efyxovra αποϊερουσαλημημ 


ovopartt ουλαμμαουσ 

ὠμειλουν δεπροσ eavrove 14 
περι avrov συνβεβηκοτων τουτων 

καὶ ἐγενετο εν TW ομειλειν avrova 15 
και συνζητειν και o - eyywaa 

cuveropevero avrag ot Se οφθαλμοι avre 16 


EXPATOVYTO TOV μὴ ἐπιγνωναι GUTOV 


(Fol. 281 5.) 


^ 


Cap. XXIV 


SEO LUCAN 


259 


quis utique reuolueret lapidem 
uenientes autem inuenerunt lapidem 
reuolutum amonumento 


introeuntes autem ‘non inuenerunt corpus 


Et factum est dum aporiarentur 


deeo ecce duo uiri adsisterunt 

eis in amictu scoruscanti 

in timore autem factae inclinauerunt 
uultos suos in terra. ad illi dixerunt ad eas 
quid quaeritis uiuum cum mortuis 
mementote autem quanta locutus est uobis 
cum adhuc esset in galilaea . quoniam oportet fiu 
hominis tradi in manus 

hominum et crucifigi et tertia die 
resurgere. et memoratae sunt 

ueruorum eius et reuersae 

nuntiauerunt omnia haec illis undecim 


et omnibus reliquis 


maria magdalena etioana 


et maria iacobi et ceterae cum eis 
dicebant ad apostolos haec 
et paruerunt in conspectu eorum quasi 


derisus uerba haec et non credebant eis 


Erant autem duo abeunte s ex eis 


inipsadie in castellum iter habent is 

stadios sexaginta . ab hierusalem 

nomine ulammaus 

fabulabantur autem ad semetipsos 

de omnibus quae contigerant horum 

et factus est in eo fabulari eos 

etconquerere et ihs adpropians 

simulibat cum illis oculi autem eorum 

tenebantur ut non cognoscerent eum 
(Fol. 382 a.) 


, I—16. 


260 


XXIV. 
o δε eurey τινεσ οι λογοι ovrot ova ἀντιβαλλεται 17 


προσ eavrova περιπατουντεσ σκυθρωποι 


αποκριθεισ δε εἰσ w ονομα κλεοπασ * 


& 
ειπεν προσ αντὸν συ μονοσ παροικεισ 


ἱερουσαλημ' ovk €yvoo τα y€voj.eva. εν avr 
εν Taw ἡμεραισ τανταισ - O δε ειἰπεν avro Tou, 
τα περι - TOV γαζωραιου oo €yevero ανὴρ 
mpopyrya - δυνατοσ ev λογω καὶ epyw 
ενωπιον rov θυ καὶ παντοσ του λαου 

wo τουτὸν παρεδωκαν οι ἀρχιερεισ 

καὶ οἱ ἀαρχοντεσ' ἡμῶν εἰσ κριμα 

θανατον καὶ εσταυρωσαν avrov 

ἡμεισ δεηλπιζομεν or avroo ἣν 

o μελλων λυτρουσθαι τον io pas 

αλλαγε και συν πασιν τουτοισ 

τριτὴν ἡμεραν σήμεραν αγει ad ov ravra. 
yeyovev - aÀXa. καὶ γυναικεσ Tier 
εἐξεστησαν ἡμασ γενομεναι 

ορθριψαι eet To μνημειον καὶ μὴ 
ευρουσαιτο σωμα αὐτου ἡλθον λεγουσαι 
οπτασιαν ἀγγελων εωρακεναι 

ot λεγουσιν avrov {yy Kat ἀπηλθον 

TIVES EK TOV συν ἡμειν 

€t TO μνήμειον καὶ €UpOV OVTWr 

wo εἰπὸν αἱ γυναικεσ avrov δε 

ovk εἰδομεν 0 δεειπεν προσ avrove 

w avonrot και βραδεισ τὴ καρδια emt πασιν 
ow ἐλαλησαν οἱ προφηται 

ort ravra εδει παθειν τον χρν 

και ere Gey εἰσ την δοξαν avrov 


και ἣν αρξαμενοσ απὸ μωσεωσ καὶ παντων 


των προφήτων ἐρμήνενειν 


27 


αντοισ ενταισγραφαισ τα πέρι avrov - και ἤγγισα 28 


(Fol. 282 6.) 


SEC LUCAN 


ad ille dixit quae sunt ista uerba haec quae conferitis 


ad uos ambulantes tristes 


respondens autem unus ex eis cui nomen cleopas 


dixit ad eum tu solus aduena es 

in hierusalem nescisti quae facta sunt in ea 
in diebus istis ad ille dixit ei quae 

de ihu nazoreo qui fuit uir 

propheta potensin uerbo et opera 

in conspectu del omnis populi 

sicut hunc tradiderunt principes sacerdota 
et potentes nostri in iudicium 

mortis et crucifixerunt eum 

nos autem sperauimus quoniam ipse erat 
qui incipiebat saluare israhel 

sed etiam et in omnibus istis 

tertium diem hodie agit ex quo haec 
facta sunt sed et mulieres quaedam 
seduxerunt nosfactae 

matutinae ad monumentum et cum non 
inuenissent corpus eius uenerunt dicentes 
uisionem angelorum uidisse 

qui dicunt eum uiuere et abierunt 
quidam de his qui erant nobiscum 

in monimentum et inuenerunt sic 

aicut dixerunt mulieres illum autem 

non uidimus ad ille dixit ad eos 

o insensati et tardi corde in omnibus 
quibus locuti sunt profetae 

quoniam haec oportebat pati xpm 

et introire in gloriam eius 

et erat incipiens a mosen. et omnium 
propheetarum interpraetari 

ilis inscripturis de eo.et adpropiauerunt 


(Fol. 383 a.) 


Cap. XXIV. 17—28. 


faf 


εἰσ τὴν κυμὴν OV ἐπορεύοντο XXIV. 


και αυτοσ προσεποιήσατο Troppo epo 

πορευεσθαι καὶ παραβιασαντο avrov λεγοντεσ 29 
μεινον μεθ ἡμων ort προσ ἐσπεραν 

καικλεικεν ἡ ἡμερα και εἰσηλθεν 

μεῖναι μετ αὐυτὼν και €yevero 30 
ev τω κατακλιθηναι avrov 

λαβὼν aprov ηνλογησεν 

xa προσεδιδου avrouy λαβόντων δε 31 
GvTOV TOV αρτὸν απ αυτοῦυ 

ἡνυγῆσαν οἱ οφθαλμοι avrov 

και ἐσεγνωσαν avrov kat avrog. axbayros 


ἐγένετο ar GUTOV OL δε εἶπον προσ ἐαντοὺσ 322 


οὐχι ἢ καρδια ἣν «v κεκαλυμμενὴ 

wo ἐλαλει new εν TH οδω 

wo ἡννγεν NEW rac γραφασ 

καὶ ανασταντεσ Avrovpevot avr Ty opa. 33 
ὕπεστρεψαν eur Ἱερουσαλημ. και ευρον 


ηθροισμενουσ τουσ «τα. KAL τουσ συν AUTO 


λεγοντεσ ort οντωσ ἡγερθη 34 
OKO και ὠφθὴ σιμωνι και αντοι 35 
ἐξήγουντο τα «v τὴ οδω καὶ ort εγνωσθη 

avrour εν τη κλασει TOv aprov Tavra δὲ 36 


avrwy λαλουντων αντοσ ἐσταθὴη 


: ἐν μέσω αυτων avro δε : πτοηθεντεσ 37 


και ενῴοβοι γενομενοι eSoxovy φαντασμα 

θεωρειν οδὲε ειἰπεν αυτοισ τι τεταραγμενοι ᾿ 38 
ἐσται καὶ eia τι διαλογισμοι 

αναβαινουσιν ev Ty καρδια ὕμων 

Were rag χειρασ μον και τουσ ποδασ μου 39 
OT. ἐγω αντοσ εἰμι ψηλαφησατε και ἴδετε 

τοπνα οστα οὐκ εἐχει καὶ σαρκασ 


καθωσ ene βλεπετε ἐχοντα 


(Fol 282 δ.) 


SEO LUCAN 261 


in castellum ubi ibant 
et ipse fecit se longius 
abire et coxerunt eum dicentes 
mane nobiscum quia ad uesperum 
declinauit dies et introibit 
manerecumeis et factum est 
cum recubuisset 
accipiens panem benedixit 
et dabat illis accipientium autem 
eorum panem ab eo 
aperti sunt oculi eorum 
et cognouerunt eum - et ipse non con 
conparuitab eis adilli dixerunt ad semetipsos 
nonne cor nostrum erat coopertum 
quo modo loquebat ur nobis in uia 
sicut aperiebat nobis scripturas 
et surgentes contristati ipsa hora 
reuersi sunt in hierusalem et inuenerunt 
congregatos illos. xi-et qui cum eis erant 
dicentes quoniam uere resurrexit 
dms et uisus est simoni et ipsi 
narrabant quae in uia et quia cognotus est 
eis in fractione panis haec autem 
eorum loquentium ipse stetit 
in medio eorum ipei autem pauerunt 
et timore tacti putabant fantasma 
uidere ad ille dixit illis quare conturbati estis 
et ut quid in cogitationes 
ascendunt in cor uestrum 
uidete manus meas et pedes meos 
quia ego ipsesum palpate et uidete 
quoniam sps ossa non habet nec carnes 
sicut et me uidetis habentem 

(Fol. 284 a.) 


Cav. XXIV. 28— 39. 


262 KAT AOYK 
——— en 

τμα: ert δε απιστουντων avray 
απὸ τὴσ χαρασ και θαυμαζοντων 
evrey. exere tt βρωσιμον ενθαδε 
κα eredwxay avro ἴχθυοσ omrov 
μεροσ και λαβὼν ενωπιον 

τμβ : avrov εφαγεν: καὶ εἰπεν αντοισ' 


ovrot OL λογοι μου ovo ἐελαλησα 
προσ ὕμασ εν ὦ ἡμὴν συν ὕμειν 
ort δει πλησθηναι παντα τα γεγραμμενα 


€V TO VOLW μωνσεὼσ KO. πὶ ισ 


kat ψαλμοισ περι ἐμον rore διηνυξεν 
auTwy TOV νουν του συνΐεναι Tag γραφασ 
και εἰπεν αντοισ' OTL ουτωσ γεγραπται TOV 
χρν παθεῖν και ἀναστῆναι τὴ Τριτὴ ἡμερα 
και κηρυχθηναι ext Tw ονοματι avrov 
μετανοιαν και αφεσιν αμαρτιων 

wo ἐπὶ avro. τα εθνη apfapevuy 
αποϊερουσαλημ και ὕμεισ δε 

μαρτυρεσ τουτων και €yo ἀποστελλω 
τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν μου ed ὕμασ 

ὕμεισ δε καθισατε εν Ty πολει eng orov 
evivonobe δυναμιν εἰ ὕψουσ 

εξηγαγεν δε avrova efw προσ 

βηθανιαν ἐπαρασ δετασ χειρασ 
ηυλογήσεν avrovg καὶ eyevero 

ev τω evAoyety avroy αὐτουσ 

aec!) απ avrov και αντοι ὕπεστρεψαν 
εἰσ Ἱερουσαλὴμ - μετα χαρασ μεγαλησ 

και ἦσαν δια παντοσ εν Tw (epo 


— 
auvovvrea Toy Oy. 


XXIV. 41 


43 


45 


47 


49 


53 


ex OQOQOQQQ0000 000000 00000000 


— — =o 


papkov 


erAnpuby - ἄρχεται war 
(Fol. 284 6.) 


Som, 


[Ej 


8 CAN 


— 
adhuc autem non credent ibus eis 

a gaudio et mirantium 

dixit habetis aliquid manducare hic 

et porrexerunt illi piscis assi 

partem et accipiens in conspectu 

eorum manducauit et dixit eis 

isti sermones mei quos locutus sum 

ad uos cum essem uobiscum 

quoniam oportet impleri omnia quae scripta sunt 
in lege moysei et prophetis 

et psalmis de me tunc adaperti sunt 
eorumsensus ut intellegant scripturas 
et dixit eis quia sic scriptum erat 

xpm pati et resurgere die tertia 

et praedicari in nomine eius 
paenitentiam . et remissionem peccatorum 
super omnes gentes incipientium 

ab hierusalem. et uos autem 

testes horum et ego mitto 
promissionem meam super uos 

uos autem sedete in ciuitate usque dum 
induamini uirtutem de alto 

eduxit autem eos foras ad 

bethaniam lebans autem manus 
benedixit eos et factum est 

cum benediceret eos 

discessit ab eis et ipsi reuersi sunt 

in hierusalem cum gaudio magno 

et erant semper in templo 

laudantes dm 


QQQQUOQQQQQ0Q00000000000 007 


δάκος secund.lucam explicit 


incipit euang secund marcum 


-— | —— το 


(Fol. 285 a.) 


Car. XXIV. 41— 53. 


ses 


f» 


f*j 


f ef 


fas 


EYAITEAION KAT ΜΆΡΚΟΝ 
-- — — — — ι-ς, — 


Apxy rov evayyeuov wv χρυ vov θὺ 
wo γεγραπται εν ἡσαῖα τω προφητὴ 
Sov ἀποστελλω rov ayye\ov μου 
Trpo προσωποὺυ σου οσ κατασκενασεὶι 
τὴν οδον cov: : φωνη βοωντοσ εν rq 
---- 
ἐρήμω ετοιμασατε τὴν οδον κυ 


σ — 
ευθειασ ποιειτε rac τριβον rov θυ ὕμω 


:Eyevero Ἰωαννήσ ev τή ερήμω βαπτιζων 


καὶ κηρυσσων βαπτισμα μετανοιασ 
εἰσ αφεσιν αμαρτιων 
και ἐξεπορευετο προσ avrov πασα 7 Ἰουδαια 
χωρα και ἱεροσολυμειτε παντεσ 
και εβαπτιζοντο «v Ἰορδανὴη vm avrov 
eLopodoyoupevot τασ aua pru. avrov 
yv δεϊωαννησ ἐνδεδυμενοσ δερρὴν καμελον 
και ἐσθιων ἀκριδασ και μελι ἀγριον 
και ἐλεγεν avrouw eyo μεν ὕμασ 
βαπτιζω εν ὕδατι 
epxeraa Se owtaw μου οἴσχυροτεροσ μου 


OV OVK ιμεΐκανοσ λυσαι Tov ἵμαντα 


τῶν ὕποδηματων avrov 


we — 
xat avrog ὕμασ βαπτιζει ev yc asyeuo 


. Και ἐγένετο EV TALT ἡμέραισ €K€LVOLO 


yABe o ing avo va£apeD . τησ γαλιλαιασ' 
και εβαπτισθη w τὴν ἴορδανην ὕποϊωαννου 
και ἀαναβαινὼν ex ro ὕδατοσ 

edey ἡνυγμενουσ Tove ουρανουσ 

και TO πνὰ wr περιστεραν καταβαινων 

εἰσ &vrov καὶ φωνὴ ex Tov ουρανων 


Cv εἰ οὕιοσ μου οἀγαπητοσ εν σοι εὐυδοκησα 


M C— 
v : καὶ ευθεωσ To 7va ro αγιον ἐεκβαλλει avrov 
— 


— 
«ur τὴν «prov καὶ ἣν εν τὴ ἐρημὼ spapun μ. 
και πειραζομενοσ ὕπο του σατανα 
(Fol. 285 8.) 


4 


10 


It 


12 


13 


EUANG SECUNDUM MARCUM 
ee o — 0 — es — “SS SS --- 


Initium euangeliihu xpi fili dei 


sicut scriptum est in esaiam prophetam 
ecce mitto angelum meum 
ante faciem tuam qui praeparauit 
uiam tuam uox clamantis in 
deserto parate uiam dmi 
rectas fato semitas di' nostri 


fuit iohannes in deserto baptizans 


et praedicans baptismum paenitentiae 


in remissione peocatorum 


Et egrediebatur ad illum ‘omnis iudaea regio 


et hierosolymitae uniuersi 
et baptizabantur in iordanen ab illo 
confitentes peccata sua 


Et erat iohannes uestitus pilos camelli 


et aedebat lucustas et mel siluestrae 

et dicebat illis ego quidem uos 

baptizo in aqua 

ueniet autem post me fortior me 

cuius non sum dignus solbere corregiam 
calciamentorum eius 


e . . . — 
ipse uos baptizauit in spu sancto 


Et factum est in illis diebus 


uenit ihs a nazaret galilaeae 

et baptizatus est in iordanen ab iohannen 
et ascendens de aqua 

uidit apertos caelos 

et spm tamquam columbam descendente 
inipsum et uox de caelis 


tu es filius meus dilectus in quem conplacu 


Et statim Spa sanctus eiecit eum 


in deserto-et eratin deserto xl. diebus 
et temptabatur a satana 
(Fol. 286 a.) 


Car. I. 1—13. 


263 


204 KAT MAPKON 
—— -- = 

Ü : KQL YY pera TOV θηριων : Kat οἱ αγγελοι 1. 
7 διηκονουν avro : καὶ μετα ro παραδοθηναι 14 
θ᾽ τον ἴωαννὴν «ἡλθεν o ine ew THY γαλιλαιαν 

κηρνσσων ro εναγγελιον Tyo βασιλειασ Tov 6v 

λεγων ort πεπληρωνται οἱ Katpot 15 

και ἤγγικεν ἡ βαβασιλεια rov ὃν 

μετανοειτε καὶ πιστευεται εν TW εὐυαγγελίω 

και Tapaywy παρα τὴν θαλασσαν rye γαλιλαιασ 16 

εἰδεν τον σιμωνα καὶ ayÓpeay 

Tov αδελῴφον avrov αμφιβαλλοντασ 

τα δικτυα εν τὴ θαλασσὴ σαν yop αλειεισ 
α΄ ἴκαὶ εἰπεν avrow O io Sevre οπισω μον 17 
n και ποιήσω ὕμασ᾽ γενεσθαι αλιεισ avOpurw 

και εὐυθεωσ αφεντεσ παντα ἠκολουθησαν avre τ 
a : kas rpoo Bac ολιγον edev taxwBov rov rov LeBedaiov1 9 


και ἴωαννὴν Toy adeAdoy avrov 
Kat αυτουσ εν Tw πλοιω καταρτιζοντασ 
τα O.krva.- και ευθεωσ ἐκαλεσεν αντουσ 
και αφεντεσ τὸν πατερα AUTWY 
ζεβαιδεον εν τω πλοιω- μετα των μεισθωτων 
n : ἠκολουθησαν avro : καὶ eureropevoyro 
" εἰσ καφαρναουμ. και ευθεωσ row aa Baa 
εἰσελθων εἰσ τὴν συναγωγὴν εδιδασκεν αὐτουσ 
ty : και ἐξεπλήσσοντο ext τὴ διδαχὴ avrov | 
qv yap διδασκων avrove oc εἐξουσιαν 
EXWV OUX WO οἱἰγραμμα εἰσ 
ἰδ: και ἣν ev τὴ συναγωγή ανθρωποσ 
n e Ti axafaprw και evexpagtev λεγων 
τιημεῖιν καὶ σοι τὴν ναζαρηναι 
ἤλθεσ ἀαπολεσ απολεσαι nas 
oda σετισ εἰ οαγιοσ TOV bv 
και επετειμησεν avro Aeyoy φιμωθητι 
και ἐξελθε ex rov ανθρωπον πνα ακαθαρτον 
(Fol. 286 5.) ‘AC 


20 


21 


22 


23 
24 


25 


SEC MARCUM 


et erat cum besteis et angeli 
ministrabant ei. sed postquam traditus est 
iohannes uenit ihs in galileam 

praedicans euangelium regni del 


dicens quoniam inpleta sunt tempora 


-et adpropiauit regnum del 


paenitemini et credite in euangelio 


Et praeteriens secus mare galilaeae 


uidit simonem et andream 
fratrem eius mittentes 


retias in mare erant autem piscatores 


Et dixitilisihs uenite post me 


et faciam uos fieri piscatores hominum 


et statim relictis omnibus secuti sunt eum 


Et progressus pusillum . uidit iacobum zebedei 


et iohannen fratrem eius 

et ipsos in naui conponentes 

retiam et continuo uocauit illos 

et relicto patre suo 

zebedeo in naui: cum mercennariis 
secuti sunt eum . Et ingrediuntur 
cafarnaum et statim sabbato 

ingressus in synagoga docebat eos 

et obstupis cebant super doctrinam eius 
eratwmisn docens eos - quasi potestatem 


habens. non quasi scribae 


Et erat in synagoga homo 


in spü in mundo et exclamauit dicens 
quid nobis et tibi ihu nazorenae 
uenisti perdere‘hos 

8cl0 quifis santus del 


Et comminatus est ei dicens - ommutesce 


etexidehomine spirite immunde 
(Fol. 287 a.) 


Cap. I. 13—25. 


— 
uw; 
— 


[55] 


Me SQ ος 
KAT MAPK 


— o — --- 
oo, 
καὶ ef Oev To πνα ro axabaproy L 26 
σπαραξασ αντον - και κραξασ φωνὴ μεγαλη 
εξηλθεν ar avrov καὶ εθαμβησαν παντεσ 27 


wore συνζητειν προσ eavrove λεγοντασ rur 
ἡ διδαχὴ exeun ἡ kaum avr1) ἡ ἐξουσια 
Cà 
OTL καὶ τοισ πνευνα Tow ακαθαρτοισ εἐπιτασσει 


και ὕπακονουσιν αυτω 


xat ἐξηλθεν ἡ axon avrov evÜva 28 
eur ὁλην τὴν περιχωρον THE γαλιλαιασ 

Εξελθων δε ex rye σνναγωγησ 29 
ηλθεν εἰσ τὴν ouaav σιμωνοσ 


καὶ ανδρεου μετα ἵακωβου και iwavov 
xarexetro δε ἢ πενθερα. σιμωνοσ πυρεσσουσα 30 


καὶ ευθυσ λεγουσιν avro περι avra: 
καὶ προσελθὼν εκτεινασ τὴν χειρα 31 


κρατήσασ ἤγειρεν αὐτὴν καὶ evÜeoao 
αφηκεν avrqv o πυρετοσ και διήκονει avtow 
Οψιασ δε γενομενησ ore εδυσεν o ἡλιοσ 32 
«$«pocay προσ αὐτὸν παντασ TOUT κακωσ ἐχοντασ 
γοσοισ ποικιλαισ Kat τουσ δαιμονιζομενουσ 
και ἣν oÀ ἡ πολισ επισυνηγμενὴ 33 
προσ τὴν θυραν avrov. και εθεραπευσεν avrove 34 
και Tovg δαιμονια ἐχοντασ εἐξεβαλεν avra 
απ avrov Kat ovx ἤφιεν avra λαλειν 
Ore nedeoray avrov και εθεραπευσεν πολλσυσ 


κακωσ᾽ €XOVTAT ποικιλαισ νοσοισ 


: και δαιμονια πολλα εξεβαλεν 


καὶ πρωι ἐννυχα λειαν εξηλθεν 35 

και ἀπηλθεν εἰσ Tov ἐρημον romov 

καὶ exe προσηυξετο και κατεδιωξαν avrov 16 
τὸ σιμὼν και OL μετ αὐτου 

καὶ OT€ €vpoy avrov λεγουσιν avro 37 


ort παντεσ ζητουσιν σε. και λέγει avro ayeue 38 


(Fol. 287 δ.) 


Cap. I. 26—38. 


SEC MARCUM 265 
—— ς-ς- - 
etexiitsps inmundus 

discerpens eum - et clamans uoce magna 

discessit ab eo. et mirabantur omnes 

eb conquerebant inter se dicentes quaenam est, 
doctrina ista noua haec potestas 

quia et spiritibus inmundis inperat 


et obaudiunt ei 


Et processit rumor iste statim 


in omnem regionem galilaeae 


procedens autem de synagoga 


uenit in domum simonis 

et andreae cum iacobo et iohannen 
decumbebat autem socrus simonis febricitans 
et continuo dicunt ei de illa 

et accessit extendens manum 

adpraehensam elebauit et statim 

remisit illam febris et ministrabat ei 


uespere autem facta cum occidisset sol 


adferebant ad eum omnes male habentes 
uariis languoribus. et demonia habentes 
et erat tota ciuitas congregata 

ad ianuam eius et curauit illos 

et qui daemonia habebant  eiciebat illa 
ab eis et non sinebat ea loqui 


quoniam sciebant eum - et curauit multos 


male habentes uariis languoribus 


et daemonia multa eiciebat 


Et diluculo exsurgens 


abiit in desertum locum 


ibique orabat. et consecuti sunt eum . 


tunc simon et qui cum eo erant 


et cum inuenissent eum dixerunt ei 
quia omnes quaerunt te. et ait illis eamus 
(Fol. 288 a.) 


34 


266 KAT MAPK "SEG MARC” 
Xam, 


εἰσ TAT ενγυσ κωμασ kat εἰσ Tag πολεισ 1. in proximos uicos et ciuitates 
tva κακει imputo εἰσ Tovro yap εἐξεληλυύθα ut et ibi praedicem ad hoc enim ueni 
και ἣν κηρυσσων εἰσ TAT συναγωγασ avrov 39 | Eterat praedicans in synagogis eorum 


eur ολὴν τὴν γαλειλαιαν - ka τα δαιμονια εκβαλλῶ in totam galilaeam et daemonia eiciens 


cy : καὶ €pxerat προσ avrov λεπροσ ἐρωτωναυτον 40 | Et uenit ad eum leprosus depraecans eum 


και λεγων" «ay θελεισ δυνασαι με καθαρισαι et dicens.si uolueris potes me mundare 
και οργισθεισ exrewaa τὴν χειρα avrov 41 et iratus extendit manum suam 
ἥψατο avrov καὶ λεγει avro - eu» καθαρισθητι et tetigit eum et ait illi. uolo mundare 
και evÜeoc ἀπηλθεν ar avrov ἡ λεπρα 42 et statim decessit ab eo lepra 
και εκαθαρισθη και ενεβρισαμενοσ avro 43 et mundatus est et comminatus ei 
evÜva efeBadev avrov και λεγει avro 44. statim dimisit illum et dicit ei 
opa. μηδενι euro adda ὕπαγε δειξον σεαυτὸν . uide nemini dixeris sed bade ostende tetpam 
Tw Leper καὶ προσενενκε: περι Tov καθαρισμοῦ σου sacerdoti et offers pro emundatione tua 
a. προσεταξεν μωῦσησ εἰσ μαρτυριον avrour quae praecepit moyses- in testimonium illis 
“9 > O δεεξελθων ἡρξατο κηρυσσειν 45] δα ille egressus coepit praedicare 
και διαφημειζειν τον Xoyov et diffamare sermonem 
wore μήκετι δυνασθαι φανερωσ εἰσελθειν ita ut non possit. manifestae introire 
εἰσ πολιν adda edo ev ἐρημοισ τοποισ' ἣν in ciuitatem . sed foris in desertis locis esse 
καὶ ἤρχοντο προσ avrov παντοθεν et conueniebant ad eum undique 
n ς καὶ εἰσελθων παλιν ew καφαρναουμ In: | Etiterum intrauit in cafarnaum 
διμέρων και qx OTL εν οικω ἐστιν post dies et auditum est. quod in domo esset 
καὶ ευὐθεωσ συνηκθησαν πολλοι 2 et confestim conuenerunt multi 
WOTE μήκετι xopew pyde Ta προσ τὴν θυραν ut iam non posset capere. usque ad ianuam 
και ἐλαλει προσ avrovg λογον : et loquebatur ad illos uerbum 
Kat €«pxovTa4 προσ avrov φεροντεσ TapaAvruo 3 | Etueneruntad eum .adferentes paralyticum 
aipopevoy ὕπο τεσσαρων Kas μὴ δυναμενοι 4 qui a quattuor portabatur et cum non possent 
προσένγεισαι Gro Tov oxAou accedere prae turba 
απεστεγασαν THY στεγὴν omov ἣν o ine nudauerunt tectum ubi erat ihs 
και xadwore τον κραβαττον otov nv et dimiserunt grabattum in quo erat 
ο παραλυτικοσ κατακειμενοσ paralyticus iacens 
Ειδων deo ue τὴν πίστιν GvTOV s | cumuidisset autem ihs fidem illorum 
Aeyec τῳ παραλντικω ; ait paralytico 
τέκνον αφεωντε aov at apapriat fili dimittuntur tibi peccata tua 
(Fol. 288 ὃ.) (Fol. 289 a.) 


Carp. I. 38—1lI. 5. 


—Á 
κα 


KAT MAPKON 


noay δε τινεσ των γραμματεων 11. 6 
exer καθημενοι και διαλογιζομενοι 
ev Tato καρδιαισ avrov λεγοντεσ 
τι οντοσ οντωσ λαλει βλασφημει 7 


Tw δυναται αφιεναι rac ἀμαρτιασ ει μη o ὃσ 

Kat ἐπιγνουσ o we Tw TVL ort ουτωσ διαλογιζονται 8 
εν εαυτοισ εἰπεν avTow 
τι Tavra, διαλογιζεσθαι ev ταισ καρδιαισ ὕμων 
τι ἐστιν εὐκοπωτερον εἰπεῖν τω παραλυτω 9 
eyeipe apoy Tov κραβαττον cov 
και ὕπαγε εἰσ TOV OLKOV σου 
7) εἰπεῖν αφαιωνται σοι at αμαρτιαι 
iva δε egre ori ἐξουσίαν exet 10 
0 Vioc rov ayÜporov ext rye γησ αφιεναι 
αμαρτιασ λεγει To παραλντικω σοι λεγω 11 
ἐγειρε apoy rov kpaBarrov cov 
καὶ ὕπαγε εἰσ TOV OLKOY σου. Kat ευθεωσ qyepfa 12 
xat ἀρασ roy κραβαττον εξηλθεν evavriov 
πάντων wore εξιστασθαι παντασ 
και δοξαζειν τον ὃν xai λεγειν 
ort ουτωσ ovderore ειδαμεν 


Ka: και e{y) Bev παρα τὴν θαλασσαν και πασ οχλοσ 13 


ἤρχετο προσ avrov και εδιδασκεν avrove 

και παραγων ειδεν cake Doy rov rov αλφαιον 14 
καθημενον ert τὸ τελωνιον 
καὶ λεγει avro. ακολουθει μοι 


και ἀαναστασ ἠκολουθησεν avro 


. Και CYEVETO Κατακέειίμένων GUTOV 15 


εν TH οικεια ayrov - πολλοιτελωναι 

καὶ αμαρτωλοι CVVAYEKELVTO τω τὴν 
καιτοισ μαθηταῖσ αὐτου. σαν yap πολλοι 
ot Kaz ἠκολουθησαν avro 


και οἱ γραμματεισ Kat ot φαρισαιοι τό 
(Fol. 289 5.) 


SEC MARCUM 267 


Erant autem quidam de sacribis 
illic sedentes et cogitantes 
in cordibus suis dicentes 
quid hic sic loquitur blasphemat 
quis potest demittere peccata nisi solus da 
quo cognito ihs in spu quod sic cogitarent 
intrase dixit illis | 
quid ista cogitatis -in cordibus uestris 
quid est facilius dicere paralytico 
surge et tolle grabattum tuum 
et uadein domum tuam 
aut dicere demittuntur tibi peccata 
utautemsciatis quia habet potestatem 
filius hominis. in terra demittere 
peccata - ait paralytico tibi dico 
surge et tolle grabattum tuum 
et uade in domum tuam . et statim surrexit 
et sublato grabatto abiit coram omnibus 
ita ut admirarentur omnes 
et honorificarent dm et dicerent 
quia taliter nunquam uidimus 
Et processit iterum ad mare et omnes turba 
ueniebat ad eum . et docebat eos 
Et cum praeteriret uidit iacobum alphaei 
sedentem ad teloneum 
et ait illi sequere me 
et surgens secutus est eum 
et factum est recumbentibus illis 
in domo eius multi publicani 
et patores. simul recumbebant cum ihu 
et discipulis eius. erant enim multi 
qui et secuti sunt eum 
et scribae et pharisaei 
(Fol. 290 a.) 


Cap. 11. 6— 16. 


268 KAT MAPK 
— o — ω- — 
και εἰδαν οτιησθιεν μετα rov αμαρτωλων 
και TOV τελωνῶν. και ἐλεγον τοισ μαθηταισ 
avrov dia τι μετα των αμαρτωλων 
καὶ των τελωνων εσθιει 
Soom, ——, A 
Ky : καὶ ἀκουσασ o iyo λέγει. ov χρειαν exovaw 


ot taxvoyrea tarpov αλλ ot Kaxwo exovreo 


II. 


17 


ovx nAOov καλεσαι δικαιουσ΄. αλλα apaptwdove 


καὶ rav ot μαθηται iwayvou 
Kat οι φαρισαιοι νηστενοντεσ 
και ἐερχονται καὶ λεγουσιν avro 
δια τι ot μαθηται ἵωαννου 
και οἱ των φαρεισαίων νηστενουσὶν 
ot δεσοι μαθηται ov νηστευουσιν 
και εἰπεν avrow μὴ δυνανται οι ὕιοι 
του νυμῴφωνοσ ev o ονυμφιοσ 
μετ avrov εστιν νηστευειν 
ἐλευσονται 9e ἡμέραι οταν ἀπαρθη 
a: avrov o vup.buoo - και τοτε γηστευουσιν 
εν €k€un Ty) ἡμερα 

Ουδεισ δε exu Apa ρακκουσ ἀγναῴφου 
εἐπισυνραπτει emt ἵματιον παλαιον 
ει δε μὴ pet To πλήρωμα 
TO καινὸν απὸ TOv παλαιον 
και χειρων σχισμα γεινεται 

και ουδεισ βαλλει owov veov 
εἰσ ασκουσ παλαιουσ' 
εἰ δε μη ρήξει o οινοσ τουσ ἀσκουσ 
και O οινοσ και οἐασκοι ἀποόλουνται 

— 
xo : Kal eyevero παλιν avrov ev rou σαββασιν 

διαπορενεσθε Sta των σποριμων 
και οἱ μαθηται ἡρξαντο - TU ew Tove 
σταχνασ - o, δε φαρισαιοι eXeyoy 


ἴδε τι ποιουσὶν οἱ μαθηται σου 


(Fol. 290 δ.) 


SEC 
— ὦ 


et uiderunt quia manducat cum peccatoribus 
et publicanis. et dicebant discipulis 
eius.quare cum publicanis 
et peccatoribus manducat 

Et hoc audit ihe ait non desiderant 
qui sani sunt medicum -sed qui male babent 
non ueni uocare iustos . sed peccatores 
et erant discipuli iohannis 
et pharisaei ieiunantes 
et ueniunt et dicunt illi 
quare discipuli iohannis 
et pharisaeorum ieiunant 
tui autem discipuli non ieiunant 
et ait illis. num quid possunt fili 
Sponsi quandiu sponsus 
cum illis est ieiunare 
uenient autem dies cum auferetur 
ab ei sponsus. et tunc ieiunabunt 
in illa die 

nemo autem adsumentum panni rudis 
adsuit uestimento ueteri 
alioquin auferet supplementum 
nonuum a ueteri 
et peior scissura efficitur 

Et nemo mittit nouellum uinum 
in utres ueteres | 
alioquin disrumpet utres uinum 
et uinum et utres peribunt 

Et factum est iterum eum sabbatis 
ambulare per sata 
et discipuli eius coeperunt uellere 
spicas pharisaei autem dicebant 
ecce quid faciunt discipuli tui 

(Fol. 291 a.) 


Cap. II. 16—24. 


KAT MAPK 
BOS SS 
roo caBBacw o ovk «&eorw avrow 
και ἀποκριθεισ eurey avrow ovDemore 
aycyyort τι εποιῆσεν Saved 
OTE χρειαν ἐσχεν καὶ emtyag ey 
αντοσ καὶ Ot μετ αυτου OVTET - 
εισηλθεν εἰσ rov owoy rov bv 
Kat rovc ἀρτουσ THE προσθεσεωσ εφαγεν 
καὶ ἐεδωκεν TOUT μετ avrov ουσιν 
ove οὐκ εξεστιν φαγειν e μη Tow 


am, ee 
κε : ἵερευσιν : Aeyo δεῦμειν 
o ey 


II. 


25 


26 


27 


Ko ἐστιν οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωποῦυ Kat rov σαββατου 28 


και com) Bev παλιν εἰσ THY συναγωγὴν 
και ἣν exe, ανθρωποσ ξηραν exov τὴν χεῖρα 


Kat παρετήρουντο αντον" e, ev row σαββασιν. 


θεραπευσει ἵνα κατηγορησουσιν avrov 

και Aeye ro ανθρωπὼω 

Tw ἔχοντι τὴν χειρα εξηραμενὴν 

ἔγειρε και στήθει ev pew" και εἰπεν προσ 

αντουσ efeoriy ev row σαββασιν 

τι ἀγαθον ποιῆσαι ἡ κακοποιῆσαι 

ψυχὴν σωσαι μαλλον 

7) ἀποκτεῖναι 

Οι δεεσιωπων και περιβλεψαμενοσ avrove 

μετ οργησ συνλυπουμενοσ 

ἐπι TY) νεκρωσει THO καρδιασ avrov 

λέγει rw ανθρωπω εκτεινον τὴν χειρα σου 

και €ferewey - και αἀποκατεσταθὴη 

ἢ χειρ avrov ευθεωσ 
Ke Εξελθοντεσ Se o« φαρισαιοι μετα των ηρωδιανω 
n σνυνβουλιον ποιουντεσ Kar avrov 


ὁπωσ GUTOV ἀαπολεσωσιν 


O Se yo μετα των μαθητων avrov 


avexwpnoe εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν 
(Fol. 291 5.) 


11 


1 


SEC 269. 
-- 

sabbatis quod non licebat eis 

Et respondens ait illis num quam 
legistis quid fecerit dauid 
cum necessitate habuit et esuriit 
ipse et qui cum illo erant 
introibit in domum dei 
et panes propositionis manducauit 
et dedit eis qui cum illo erant 
quoa non licebat manducare nisi 
sacerdotibus dico autem uobis 
dms est filius hominis et sabbati 

et introibit iterum in synagogam 
et erat ibi homo aridam habens manum 
et obserbabant eum si sabbatis 
curaret ut accusarent eum 
et ait homini 
habenti manum aridam 
surge et sta in medium et dixit 
ad illos - licet sabbatis 
aliquid benefacere aut malefacere 
animam salbam facere magis 
quam perdere 

ad illi tacebant - et circumspiciens eos 
cum ira indignationis 

‘super emortua cordis eorum 
dixit homini extende manum tuam 
et extendit et restituta est 
manus illi statim 

Exeuntes autem pharisaei - cum herodianis 
consilium faciebant aduersus eum 
quo modo illum perderent 

ihs autem cum discipulis suis 
secessit ad marem 

(Fol. 292 a.) 


Capp. II. 24— III. 7. 


270 ‘KAT MAPKON 
—— — - 
"3 : Kat πολυσ οχλοσ απὸ Tyo γαλειλαιασ 
και τὴσ ιουδαιασ καὶ απὸ ἱεροσολυμων 
και τὴσ Ἰδουμεασ - καὶ οἱ πέραν Tov Lopdavov 
και οἱ περι TUDOV 
και οἱ περι σιδωνα πληθοσ πολν 
ακουσαντεσ a. ἐποίει ἡλθαν προσ αντον 
και εἰπεν τοισ μαθηταῖσ avrov -ἵνα πλοιαριον 
προσκαρτερὴ avro δια roy οχλον 
ἵνα μη θλιβωσιν avrov πολλοι 
πολλουσ yap εθεραπευσεν 
WOTE επιπιπτειν εν avro "ἵνα avrov αψωνται 
οσοι €LXOV μαστειγασ'" και πνα ακαθαρτα 
oray ovv avrov εθεωρουν 
προσεπιπτον avro καὶ ἐκραζον λεγοντεσ 
συ ειοὕιοστον bu 
c : καὶ πολλα επετειμα avrow 
ἵνα μή avrov φανερον ποιωσιν 
xO: και αναβαινει εἰσ To οροσ και προσκαλειται 
Ν ova ἤθελεν avrog καὶ ἡλθον προσ avrov 
καὶ €TOU]O €V ἵνα ὠσὶν - ιβ. per avrov 
xo. iva απρστελη αὐτουσ κηρυσσειν TO 
εναγγελιον - και eOokev avroie efovatay 
θεραπευειν rac νοσουσ 
και εκβαλλειν τα δαιμονια 
X : καὶ ἐπεθηκεν σιμωνι ονομα rerpoy 
" καὶ rov ἵακωβον τον ζεβεδαιον 
καὶ roy ἴωαννην τον αδελῴον rov taxwBov 
καὶ ἐπεθηκεν εαυτοισ ονομα βοανεργησ 
o ἐστιν ὕιοι βροντησ - και ανδρεαν 
καὶ roy και βαρθολομαιον και μαθθαιον 
και θωμαν και ἵακωβον τον του αλῴφαιον 
και λεββαιον και σιμωνα ro kavayatoy 
καιΐουδασ σκαριωθ 
(Fol. 2925.) 


11. 


9 


10 


It 


12 


14 


15 


17 


18 


19 


SEC MARCUM 
—— - = 
et multa turba a galilaea 
et iudaea et ab hierosolymis 
et ab idumea et trans iordanen 
et circa tyrum . 
et circa sidonem multitudo magna 
audientes quae faciebat. uenerunt ad eum 
et dixit discipulis suis. ut in nauicula 
sibi deseruiret propter turbam 
uti ne conpremerent eum multi 
multos enim sanauit 
ita ut inruerent in eum. ut illum tangerent 
quodquod habebant plagas. et apa . immundi 
cum uideret illum 
procedebant ei - et exclamabant dicentes 
tu ea filius del 
et multa comminabatur eis 
ut non manifestarent illum 
Et ascendit in montem et vocauit ad se 
quos voluit ipse. et uenerunt ad eum 
et fecit ut essent. xil. cum ipso 
et ut mitteret illos praedicare 
euangelium ‘et dedit illis potestatem 
curandi ualetudinems 
et eiciendi daemonia 
Et inposuit simoni nomen petrus 
et iacobum zebedaei 
et iohannen fratrem iacobi 
et inposuit eis nomina boanges 
quod est filius tonitrui - et ahdream 
et filippum - et barthilomeum et matthean 
et thoman et iacobum alfei 
et lebbeum et simonem cananeum 
et iudas scarioth 
(Fol. 293 4.) 


Car. III. 7—19. 


[ΕἸ 


f&j 


[3j 


— a — 
T MAPKON 
--- ὡς EN 


Se 
— 


07 καὶ παρεδωκεν GUTOV 


: καιεισέερχονται ELT OLKOV KGL συνερχεταὶ 


παλιν o oxÀoc - wore pn δυνασθαι 
pare aprova payer - Kas ore ἡκουσαν 


: Weplavrov * δι γραμματειν και ot λοιποι 


εἐξηλθον κρατησαισαι avrov - ἐλεγον yap 
ort ἐξεσταται avrovo - καὶ ot γραμματεισ 
ot agro ἵεροσολυμων καταβαντεσ ελεγον 
ort βεελζεβουλ exet- και ort εν τω apyovrt 
τῶν δαιμονίων -εκβαλλει τα δαιμονια 


: καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοσ αὐτουσ 


ev παραβολαισ ελεγεν o Ko err 

πῶσ δυναται catavac - carayay ἐκβαλεῖν 
καὶ «ay βασιλεια € covrqy μερισθη 

ov δυναται σταθηναι ἡ βασιλεια cxewn 
καὶ «ay οἰκια € eavrqv μερισθη 


ον δυναται ἡ οἰκεια exesvy ἐσταναι 


Kat ἐαν o carayag σαταναν εκβαλλει 


μεμερισθαι ep eavrov . ov δυναται σταθηναι 
7 βασιλεια αὐτου. αλλα ro τελοσ exer 


Ουδεισ δυναται τα σκενὴ του ἴσχυρου 


εἰσελθων εἰσ τὴν οἰκιαν διαρπασαι 
cay μὴ πρωτον Tov ἴσχυρον Syoy 
και τοτε τὴν outay avrov διαρπαζει 


M : ἀμὴν Neyo ὕμειν ort ravra. 


—, 


αφεθησεται row ὕιοισ των ανθρωπων 
Taapaprypara και βλασφημίαι 
oca αν βλασφημήσωσιν 
oc ay δετισ βλασφημησὴη 

— 


TO πνα TO Aytov ovx exe αφεσιν 


αλλα evor €gTG4 - G4)VLOU αμαρτιασ 


oTt eXeyov va axaÜaprov exew 


(Fol. 293 8.) 


20 


21 


22 


25 


27 


28 


29 


30 


λε :Ka4 ἔρχεται ἢ μητὴρ avrov. καὶ οἱ αδελῴοι αὐτοῦ 31 


BEC MARCUM 


qui et tradidit eum 


Et ueniunt in domum : et conuenit 


iterum turba uti non possent 

nec panem manducare. et cum audissent 
de eo scribae et ceteri 

exierunt tenere eum dicebant enim 
quoniam exentiat eos et scribae 

qui ab hierosolymis descenderunt dicebant 
quoniam beelzebul habet - et quia in principe 


daemoniorum eicit daemonia 


Et conuocatis eis 


in parabolam dicebat dms ibs 

quo modo potest satanas. satanan eicere 
et si regnum in se diuidatur 

non potest stare regia illa 

et si domus super semetipsam diuidatur 
non potest domus illa stare 


Et si satanas satanan eicit 


dispertitur super se. non potest stare 
regnum eius sed finem habet 


nemo autem potest uasa fortis 


ingressus in domum diripere 
nisi prius fortem alliget 
et tunc domum eius diripiet 


amen dico uobis. quoniam omnia 


dimittuntur filiis hominum 
peccata et blasphemiae 
quaecumquae blasphemauerint 
si quis autem blasphemauerit 
— ΓῚ . 
in spm sanctum non habet remissionem 
ged reus erit aeterni delicti 


quoniam dicebant spm immundum habere ea 


Et uenit mater ejus et fratres eius 


(Fol. 294 a.) 


Cap. III. 19—31. 


271 


272 


Samy, 
As : 
Samy, 


— — 
KATA MAPKON 
. — — 


και e$ eoTwres - απεστειλαν προσ avrov III. 
φωνουντεσ αντον᾿ και exabyro προσ Tov oxÀo — 32 
και λεγουσιν avro ἴδον ἡ μητὴρ σου 
και οἱ αδελῴφοι σον και αι αδελφαι σον 
εξω ζητουσιν σε 
Kat ἀπεκριθὴ avrour λεγων TUT ἐστιν ἢ μητηρμοῦ 33 
7 αδελῴοι : και περιβλεψαμενοσ 34 
τουσ κυκλω καθημενουσ ειπεν 
ἴδου ἡ μητὴρ pov και οἱ αδελφοι μου 
oc yap αν ποιηση ro θελημα του θυ 35 
ovroc pov αδελῴφοσ και αδελφη και μητὴρ ect 
και ἤρξατο παλιν διδασκειν προσ τὴν θαλασσαν 1Υ.1 
και συνηχθη προσ avrov o Àaoc πολυσ' 
WOTE avrov εἰσ ro πλοιον ἐνβαντα 
καθησται repay TH θαλασσησ.- και rac οοχλοσ 
περαν Tne θαλασσὴσ ἣν. και εδιδασκεν avrove 2 
ev παραβολαισ πολλαισ και ελεγεν avrow 
εν τὴ διδαχὴ avrov axovere 3 
ἴδου ἐξηλθεν o σπειρων και ev τω σπειραι 4 
O μεν ἐπεσεν παρα τὴν οδον 
και λθαν τα πετεινα του ουρανον 
και κατεφαγαν avro 
και αλλα ἐπεσαν eret τα πετρωδη 5 
καὶ OTL OUK εἰχεν γὴν πολλὴν 
και ευθυσ εξανεστειλεν 
δια ro μὴ exew βαθοσ την γην 


και οτε ανετειλεν οἡλιοσ εκαυματισθησαν ό 
και δια To μὴ εχειν ριζαν εξηρανθησαν 

και αλλο erecey emt rac axayÜaa 7 
και aveByoay at ακανθαι και συνεπνιξαν avro 
και καρπον οὐκ εδωκεν 

και aÀXo ἐπεσεν εἰσ τὴν γὴν τὴν καλην 8 
και ἐδιδου καρπον 

(Fol. 294 5.) 


SEC MARCUM 
— —À Ό-΄-ὀτ ῳ-- — 


et foris stantes . miserunt ad eum 
uocantes illum ‘et sedebat circa eum turba 
et dicunt ei: ecce mater tua. 

et fratres tui et sorores tuae 


foras quaerunt te 


Et respondit eis dicens. quae est mater mea 


aut fratres mei . et circumspiciens 
qui in circuitu ejus sedebant dixit 
ecce mater mea et fratres mei 
qui enim fecerit uoluntatem di 


hic meus frater. et soror et mater est 


Et coepit iterum docere ad mare 


et congregata est ad eum turba multa 
ita ut ipse in naui ascendens 

sedere circa mare. et omnis turba 
circa mare erant. et docebat illos 

in parauolis multis . et dicebat illis 


in doctrina sua audite 


Ecce exiit seminator seminare " et dum seminat 


aliut cecidit circa uiam 
et uenerunt uolucres caeli 
et comederunt illud 


Et aliud caecidit super loca petrosa 


et quoniam non habuit terram multam 

et statim exhortum est 

propter quod non habuit altitudinem terrae 
et quando exhortus est sol . exestuauit 


et quia non habebat radicem exaruit 


Et aliud caecidit in spinas 


et ascenderunt spinae. et suffocauerunt illod 
et fructum non dedit 


Et aliud cecidit in terram bonam 


et dat fructum 
(Fol. 295 a.) 


Carr. III. 31—IV. 8. 


KAT MAPKON SEC MARCUM 273 
ΠΝ πὸ — — To -- 
αναβαινοντα και avgavopevoy IV. ascendentem et crescentem 
καὶ Peper ev -À.- καὶ εν É ka ey-p.- et adferet unum . xxx -et unum .]x et unum.c- 
καὶ eXeyey 00 ext ὠτα aKOUELV axoverw 9 et dicebat qui habet aures audiendi audiat 
και οσυνειων συνειέτω et intellegens intellegat 
και OTE €yeveTo καταμογασ 10 | Et cum esset singularis 
εἐπήρωτων avrov ot μαθηται avrov interrogauerunt illum discipuli eius 
τισ ἡ παραβολὴ avr quae esset parauola ista 
και λέγει avrour ὕμειν δεδοται 11 | Etaitillis uobis datum est 
γνωναι ro uvo'r2puov Tyo βασιλειασ Tov Ov cognoscere mysterium regni del 
n : εκεινοισ Se Tour eco ev παραβολαισ illis autem qui foris sunt in parabolis 
παντα Xeyeras- ἵνα βλεποντεσ βλεπωσιν 12 omnia dicitur. ut uidentes uideant 
και μη ἴδωσιν. Kat axovovrer GKOUOULV et non uideant.et audientes audiant 
και μὴ συνωσιν- pprore επιστρεψωσιν et non intellegant. ne quando conuertantur 
και ὁμαι αντοισ τα αμαρτηματα et demittam eis peccata 
kat Neyer avrow 13 et ait illis 
ovx odare τὴν παραβολὴν ravrqv nescitis parauolam hanc 
καὶ πωσ πασασ rag παραβολασ γνωσεσθαι et quo modo omnes parauolas cognoscetis 
dy : Ὁ σπειρων roy Xoyov σπειρει 14 | quiseminat uerbum seminat 
οὔτοι δε εἰσιν 01 rapa τὴν οδον 15 hiautem sunt qui circa uiam 
ow σπειρεται o Xoyog quibus seminatur uerbum 
καὶ oray ἀκονωσιν et cum audierint 
ευθεωσ epxera o carayaa statim uenit satanas 
καὶ αφερει τον λογον Tov ἐσπαρμενον et auferet uerbum quod seminatum est 
εν Tato καρδιαισ avrov in corda e orum 


και OVTOL εἰσὶν - OF EEL τα πετρωδὴσ σπείρομενοι 16 | Ethisunt.quisuper petrosa seminantur 


ot oray axovrwov Tov Xoyov qui cum audierint uerbum 
μετα χαρασ Aap Bavovew avrov cum gaudio excipiunt illud 
και ovk €xovauw pifay ev eavrour 17 et non habent radicem in se 
adXa προσκαιροι eur sed temporalis sunt 
«cra. γενομενησ' θλιψεωσ και διωγμου deinde facta tribulatione et persecutione 
δια rov Xoyov ευθεωσ propter uerbum confestim 
σκανδαλισθησονται. καιαλλοι εἰσιν 18 scandalizabuntur ‘et alii sunt 
ot εἰσ Tac axavOac σπειρομενοι qui in spinis seminantur 

(Fol. 295 5.) (Fol. 296 a.) 

Cap. IV. 8——18. 


35 


274 


fx / fxs 


ΓΙ 


Rs Fe 


[Ξ 


ΚΑΊ MAPCON 


OVTOL εἰσὶν OL TOV λογον ἀκουσαντεσ' 
Ka4 at μεριμναισ του Biov 
και απαται TOU κοσμου. εἰσπορενομεέναι 
σννπνιγουσιν Tov λογον 
και ἀκαρποι γεινονται 

και OVTOL εἰσιν" οἱ ἐπὶ τὴν γὴν τὴν καλὴν 
O'raptyreo - οἰτινεσ ακονουσὶν Toy λογον 


και παραδεχονται και καρποφορουσιν 
— 


— —, 
ev -A-xacev:&-KaL ἐν p. 


: καὶ ἐλεγεν avrou - μήτι oarreraa o λυχνοσ 


ἵνα ὕπο τον μοδιον τε θη 

7] ὕπο THY κλεινὴν 

καὶ ouxt ἵνα ert τὴν λυχνιαν τεθὴ 
ἑου yap ἐστιν κρνπτον add wa 

φανερωθη - ovde eyevero αποκρνυῴον 

αλλ tva ελθη ew φανερον 


€L TID EXEL WTA AKOVELY AKOVETW 


: και eXeyev avrow βλεπετετα axovere 


εν ὦ μετρω μετρειτε- μετρηθησεται ὕμειν 
! og yap αν εχει προστεθήσεται avro 
και οσ οὐκ €X€L.- KaL 0 exe, αρθησεται ax avrov 
:Ka4 eXeyev * ovroc ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεια rov θυ 
wo ayÜpwroc* σπορον Bady ext τησ γησ 
και καθευδὴ και eyepOn * vuxra καὶ ἡμερα 
και οσποροσ βλαστα᾽ και μηκυνεται 
wo οὐκ οιδὲν αὐτοσ 
ort avrouary ἢ γῆ καρποφορει 
Trperoy xoprov era a ταχνασ 
etra, πληρὴσ o σειτοσ εν To OTAXUE 
Kas oray mapadot o καρποσ 
ευθεωσ ἀποστελλει ro δρεπανον 
οτι παρεστῆηκεν οθερεισμοσ 
και eXeyev "rut ομοιωσωμαν τὴν βασιλειαν 
rov Ov" 
(Fol. 296 6.) 


IV. 


SEC MARCUM _ 


hi sunt qui uerbum audiunt 

et sollicitudinem uictus 

et errores mundi . simul incedentes 
suffocant uerbum 


et sine fructum eficiuntur 


Et hi sunt qui super terram bonam 


seminati sunt qui audiunt uerbum 
et suscipiunt. et fructificant 


Samy 
unum. xxx-et unum ‘lx. et unum.c. 


Et dicebat illis num quid accenditur lucerna 


et sub modio ponitur 

aut sub lectum 

et non super candelabrum ponatur 
non est enim absconditum - sed ut 
manifestetur - nec factum est occultum 
sed ut ueniat in palam 

si quis habet aures audiendi audiat 


Et dicebat illis uidete quid audiatis 


in qua mensura metieritis- remotietur uobis 
qui enim habet . adicietur illi 


et qui non habet et quod habet auferetur abe 


Et dicebat . sic est regnum dei 


quemadmodum si homo : semen iactet in terra 
et obdormiat et exurgat. nocte et die 

et semen germinet - et increscat 

dum nescit ille 

quoniam ultro terra fructificat 

primum herbam deinde spicam 

deinde plenum granum in spicam 

et cum produxerit fructum 

statim mittit falcem 


quoniam adest messis 


Et dioebat.- cui adsimilauimus regnum dei 


(Fol 297 a.) 


Car. IV. 18— 30. 


— bam — 
T MAPKON 
---- ο΄. -ο-- 


ἡ €v ποια παραβολὴ παραβαλωμεν αὐτὴν IV. 

ὁμοια ἐστιν KOKKW σιναπεωσ 31 
0 OTLaY σπαρὴ - ert THY γὴν μεικροτερον ἐστιν 

παντῶν των σπερματων - à. €t. επι TO γησ 

και γεινεται μειζων παντων των Aaxavw 32 

και rote, κλαδουσ μεγαλουσ ‘wore δυνασθαι 

ὕπο τὴν σκειίαν avrov 


τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ OVPAYOU κατασκηνοῦν 


: καὶ τοιανταισ πολλαισ παραβολαισ 33 
ἐλαλει Tov λογον ᾿"καθωσ εδυναντο axovety 
χωρεισ δεπαραβολησ - ovx ἐλαλει avrowr 34 
καθ Bray δετοισ μαθηταισ avrov - eredve avraa 
και λεγει αντοισ΄. εν exeun τὴ ἡμερα 35 


οψιασ γενομενησ - διελθωνμεν εἰσ vo wepe 


: καὶ αφιουσιν rov οχλον - καὶ παραλαμβανουσιν 16 


GUTOV - WO ἣν εν τω πλοιω. καὶ αλλαι δε 
πλοιαι πολλαι- σαν per avrov 
και ἐγενετο λαιλαψ μεγαλη ανεμου 37 


καὶ Ta, κυματα εἐβαλεν εἰσ To πλοιον 
wore non γεμειζεσθαι το πλοιον 
καὶ ἣν αυτοσ EV τὴ πρυμνὴ 38 
ere προσκαιφαλαιου καθευδων 
και διεγειραντεσ avroy* λεγουσιν avro 
διδασκαλε. ov pede σοι ort απολλυμεθα 
και ἐγερθεισ ἐπετειμησεν 39 
τω ἀνεμὼ καὶ Ty θαλασση και ειπεν 
σιωπα και φιμωθητι. kat ἐκοπασεν 0 ἀγεμοσ 
καὶ eyevero γαληνὴ peyady 
και εἰπεν GUTOULO * τι δειλοι «oro 40 
ουπω exere πιστιν 
καὶ ἐφοβηθησαν φοβον μεγαν ‘ 
καὶ ἐλεγον προσ αλληλουσ .τισ apa ἐστιν ovreg 
or. καὶ ἢ θαλασσα καιοι ἀγεμοι 
(Fol. 2918.) 


aut in qua parauola : transferamus illud 
similis est grano sinapis 

quod cum seminatum est in terram . minor est 
omnibus seminibus. quae sunt in terram 

et fit maior. omnibus oleribus 

et facit ramos magnos . ita ut possint 

sub umbra eius 

aues caeli inhabitare 


Et talibus multis parauolis 


loquebatur uerbum. prout poterant audire 
sine parabola autem - non loquebatur eis 
seorsum autem discipulis suis - disserebat eas 


Et ait illis in illa die 


cum sero factum esset . transiamus ultra 
et dimittunt turbam . et acceperunt eum 
ita ut erat in nau1.et aliae autem 


naues multae. erant cum illo 


Et facta est procella magna uenti 


et fluctus mittebat in naui 

ita ut inpleret nauem 

et erat ipse in puppi 

super ceruical dormiens 

et excitantes eum . dicunt illi magister 
non ad te rtinet quo d pereamus 

et exurgens comminat us est 

uento et mari et dixit 

sile commutesce - et cessauit uentus 


et facta est tranquillitas magna 


Et dixit illis. quid timidi estis 


non dum abetis fidem 
et timuerunt timore magno 
et dicebant adinuicem ': quisnam est iste 
quia et mare et uenti 
(Fol. 298 a.) 


Cap. IV. 30—41t. 


216 


KAT MAPKON 


ὕπακονουσιν καιηλθον eur To repay 
και εἰσ τήν χωραν Toy γερα σήνων 


καὶ εξελθοντων αντων εκ Tov πλοιον 
εὐυθεωσ ὕπηντησεν avro ανθρωποσ 

— 
εκ TOV μνημίων εν y, ακαθαρτω 
OO εἰχεν τὴν KATOLKYOL ‘ εν TOUT. μνημειοισ 
και ovde αλυσεσιν - ovKert ουδεισ avrov 
eSvvaro δησαι Ort πολλακισ avrov 
δεδέμενον -πεδεσ και αλυσεσιν 
ev ao ἐδησαν διεσπακεναι 
και rag πεδασ συντετριφεναι 


LI 
και pndeva avrov ἴσχυν δαμασαι 


νυκτοσ Se και ἡμερασ «εν Tour ορεσιν 
και εν τοισ μνημειοισ tjv κραζον 
και κατακοπτων eavroy λιθοισ 
Ιδων δε rov ay απὸ μακροθεν 
εδραμεν και προσεκυνησεν avro 
και κραξασ φωνη 71 μεγαλη ειπεν 
τι ἐμοι Kat σοι em Sue rov Ov ov ὕψιστον 
ορκιζω ge TOV 6r. py pe βασανισησ 
Ελεγεν yap avro o τῆν ἐξελθετο πναὰ ro ακαθαρτο 
εκ του ανθρωπου- και επήρωτα avrov 
τι σοι ονομα ἐστιν καὶ απεκριθη 
ἐστιν pot ονομα Xeyuoy - ort πολλοι ἐσμεν 
και παρεκαλει avroy πολλα 
ἵνα μὴ avrove αποστειλη efw Tho χωρασ 
nv δε exet προσ Tw ope ayeAn χοιρων 
βοσκομενη - kat παρεκαλον Tov ra, Satpovia 
eurovra -πεέμψον ἡμασ εἰσ τουσ χοιρουσ 
ἵνα εἰσ avrove ἀπελθωμεν 
και ευθεωσ᾽ κα ine ἐπεμψεν avrovo 
eo Tove xoipova - και εξελθοντα τα πνὰ 


τα ακαθαρτα. εἰσηλθον εἰσ Tove χοιρουσ 


(Fol. 298 δ.) 


V.1 


12 


13 


obaudiuntei et uenerunt ultra 
in regionem gerasenorum 
et exeuntibus illis de naue 
statim orrit illis homo de 
monumentis in spu in mundo 
qui domicilium habebat in monumentis 
et neque catenis.iam quisquam eum 
poterat ligare quoniam saepius eum 
ligatum. conpedibus et catenis 
quibus ligatus erat disrumpebat 
et compedes comminuebat 
nec quisquam posset eum amplius domare 
nocte autem et die. in montibus 
et in monumentis erat exclamans 
et concidens se lapidibus 
uidens autem ihm a longe 
&d cucurrit et adorauit eum 
et clamans uoce magna dixit 
quid mihi et tibi ihu fili di excelsi 
&diuro te per dm. neme torqueas 
dicebat enim illiihs exi spe im munde 
ab homine ‘et interrogabat eum 
quod tibi nomen est - Et respondit 
est mihi nomen legio : quia multi sumus 
et deprecabatur eum multum 
ut ne se expelleret - extra regionem 
Erat autem circa montem : grex poreorum 
pascentium * et depraecabantur eum daemonis 
dicentes : mitte nos in porcos 
utin eos intro eamus 
Et statim dms ihs misit eos in porcos 
et exeuntes spe 
immundi : intrauerunt in porcos 


(Fol. 299 a.) 


Carr, IV. 41—V. 13. 


[3j 


ΓΕ! 


---ὄ ey --- 
KAT MAPKON 


SS — 

καὶ ὡρμήσεν ἢ αγελη κατα TOV κρημνον v. 
εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν wo δισχειλιοι 

και exycy ovro ev τή θαλασση 

ot δε βοσκοντεσ avrog εφυγον 14 


και ἀπηγγειλαν εἰσ τὴν πολιν και εἰσ τουσ G'ypeve 
και ἐξηλθον ειδειν τι ἐστιν To γεγονοσ 

καὶ ἐρχονται προσ TOV oy -xat θεωρονσιν αὐτὸ 15 
vov δαιμονιζομενον - καθήμενον 

ειματισμενον - καὶ σωφρονουντα 

καὶ ef οβηθησαν᾽ διηγήσαντο δε avrow 16 
ot eiDovr€a πωσ €yevero 

avro ro δαιμονιζομενω 

καὶ πέρι των χοιρων. Kat παρεκαλουν QUTOV 17 


iva ἀπελθὴ απὸ των οριων avrov 


: καὶ ενβαινοντοσ avrov εἰσ το πλοιον 18 


ἤρξατο παρακαλειν avrov 
o δαιμονισθεισ - iva ἡ μετ avrov 


O δε uno ovk αφηκεν avrov: kat εἰπεν avro 19 
ὕπαγε εἰσ TOV OLKOY σον προσ TOVT σουσ 
και διαγγειλον avrou - οσα cot o 6c εἐποιησεν 
και oTt ἡλεησεν σε: καὶ απηλθεν 20 
καὶ ἤρξατο κηρυσσειν εν Ty δεκαπολει 


Ya, — 
000. ἐποίησεν GvTO 0 LC "kat TAYTEST εθαυμαζο 


: καὶ διαπερασαντοσ του ἣν εἰσ TO περαν 21 
παλιν συνηχθὴ οχλοσ πολυσ᾽ 
προσ avrov παρα τὴν θαλασσαν 
καὶ ἐρχεται τισ των αρχισυναγωγων 22 


καιπροσεπεσεν προσ Tove ποδασ avrov 
παρακαλων avrov και λεγων 23 
το θυγατριον μον ἐσχατωσ εχει 

Abe αψαι avr10 - εκ των χειρων σου 

ἵνα σωθη και Cynon και ὕπηγεν per avrov 24 
και ἤκολονθει avro οχλοσ πολυσ 


(Fol. agg 5.) 


SEC MAÀRCUM 277 


et praecipitatus est grex * sper praeceps 

in mari ad duo milia 

et suffocati sunt in mare 

qui autem pascebant eos fugerunt 

et nuntiauerunt in ciuitate. et in agros 

et egressi sunt uidere quid esset 

et ueniunt ad ihm. et uident illum 

qui a daemonio uexauabatur. sedentem 

uestitum et sane mentis 

et timuerunt.narrauerunt autem illis 

qui uiderant qualiter factum esset 

ei qui daemonio uexauatur 

et de porcis. et rogabant eum 

ut discederet de regionibus eorum 
Et ascendente illo in naui 

coepit depraecari illum 

qui demonio uexabatur. ut esset cum illo 
ihsautem non admisit illum . et ait illi 

uade in domum tuam ad tuos 

et adnuntia illis . quanta tibi ds fecit 

et quod misertus est tui - et abiit 

et coepit. praedicare in decapoli 

quanta sibi fecisset ihs- et omnes mirabantur 
Et cum tranfretasset ihs ultra 

rursum conuenit ad eum turba multa 

&d eum circa mare 
Et uenit quidam archisvnagogus 

et procidens ad pedes eius 

rogans eum et dicens 

filia mea in extremis est 

ueni tange eam ° de manibus tuis 

ut salba sit et uibat. et ibat cum illo 

et sequebatur eum turba multa 

(Fol. 300a.) 


Car. V. 13— 24. 


278 KAT MAPKON 
— — oy — 


και συνεθλειβον avrov 
y ? KGL γυνὴ τισ ουσα. Ey ρυσει αἱματοσ 

er - 8-7 πολλα παθουσα. ὕπο πολλων ἴατρω 
καὶ δαπανησασα τα εαυτησ παντα 
καὶ μηδεν ὠφελιθεισα. αλλα μαλλον 
€TL TO χειρον .ακουσασαπετου - 
ἐλθουσα οπισθεν - και ἡψατο rov ἵματιου avrov 
εν τω οχλω. λεγουσα εν eavry 
ort Kay TOV ἵματιον εαυτου 
αψωμαι σωθησομαι 

και ευθεωσ εξηρανθη ἡ πηγη. 
TOU αιματοσ QVTYJO - καὶ EyYW TO σωματι 
οτι ειαται απὸ THO μαστιγοσ 

και ευθεωσ επιγνουσ Kat o -— 
τὴν Suvapey εξελθονυσαν ar avrov 
και επιστραφεισ ev TW OXAW eurev 
TU NWATO TOV ἵματιων μου 

O δεμαθηται avrov λεγουσιν avro 
βλεπεισ rov οχλον συνθλειβοντα σε 
και λεγεισ τισ μου ἡψατο 


και περιεβλεπετο ede - THY rovro ποιησασα 
ἢ Se yuvn φοβηθισα καιτρεμουσα 
δι o πεποιήκει λαθρα. εἰδυῖα o γεγονεν 
avry n\Gev και προσεπεσεν avro 
και εἰπεν avro πάσαν τὴν αληθειαν 
Οδε ino eure avry θυγατὴρ ἡ πιστισ σον 
σέσωκεν σε ὕπαγε εἰσ eun 
καισθι ὕγειησ απο THO μαστιγοσ gov 
€rt avrov λαλουντοσ epxovrat 
απὸ TOV ἀαρχισυναγωγον λεγοντεσ avro 


or. θυγατὴρ σου απεθανεν 
τι ετι σκυλλεισ τον διδασκαλον 


Ο δε ino akovcag Tovroy Tov λογον 


(Fol. 300 6.) 


25 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


SEC MARCUM 
— M— ee — 


et conprimebant illum 
Et mulier quendam erat in profluuio sanguinis 
annis.xii. quae multa passa erat-a conplaribes me 
et erogauerat sua omnia 
neo quicquam proficebat sed magis 
deterius habebat-audito de ihu 
uenit de retro . et tetigit uestimentum eius 
inter turbam . dicens intra se 
quia si uestimentum eius 
adtigero salua ero 
Et confestim siccatus est fons 
sanguinis eius et sensit corpori 
quod sana esset a plaga 
Et statim cognouit ihs 
uirtutem quae exierat de illo 
et conuersus in turba ait 
quis tetigit uestimenta mea 
discipuli autem illius dicunt ei 
uides turbam . conprimentem te 
et dicis quis me tetigit 
et circumspiciebat uidere. quae hoc fecerat 
mulier autem timens et tremens 
quod fecerat occultum . sciens quid esset acti 
ipsa uenit et procidit ante eum 
et dixit ei omnem ueritatem 
ihs autem dixit ei filia fides tua 
te saluam fecit, uade in pacem 
et esto sana a plaga tua 
adhuc eo loquente ueniunt 
ab archisynagogo ° dicentes ei 
quia filia tua mortua est 
quid iam uexas magistrum 
ihe autem audito hoc uerbo 


(Fol. 301 a.) 


Cap. V. 24— 36. 


λεγει Tw ἀαρχισυναγωγω μὴ φοβου 
μονον πιστευε- Kat οὐκ αφῆκεν οὐδε «va 
παρακολονθησαι αντω. εἰ μὴ πετρον καὶ 
taxwBov - και ιωαννὴν τον αδελῴον avrov 
και €PXOVTAL ELT τὴν OLKCLOY "τον ἀαρχισυναγωγου 
καὶ εθεωρει θορυβον κλαιοντων 
καὶ ἀαλαλαζοντων πολλα. και εἰσελθων 
λεγει avrow τι θορυβισθαι και τι κλαιετε 
το παιδιον ovx απεθανεν .αλλα καθευδει 
οι δε κατεγελων avrov 
avroc δε exBaXov rove οχλουσ εξω 
παραλαμβανει rov πατερα 
καὶ THY LNTEpa TOV παιδιου 
καὶ τουσ μετ G'UTOV οντασ 
και εἰσεπορεύετο οπου ἣν To παιδιον 
Kat κρατῆσασ τὴν χειρα του παιδιον 
Aeye avro ραββι- θαβιτα κουμι 
o ἐστιν μεθηρμενευομενον 
TO κοράσιον σοι λεγω cyetpe 


και evÜcoc ἀνεστὴ To κορασιον 

και περιεπατει. yy $e ery ιβ. 

καὶ ἐξεστησαν παντεσ -ἐκστασι μεγαλη 
και διεστειλατο avrour - iva μηδεισ γνοι 


TOVTO καὶ εἰπεν Sovvas αὐτὴ φαγειν. 
nas εξηλθεν εκειθεν καπηλθεν 


37 


48 


41 


43 


VI. 1 


εἰσ τὴν πατριδα avrov* καὶ axoXovÜovaw avro 


ot μαθηται αντου. και ἡμερα σαββατων 
ἤρξατο διδασκειν . εν τη συναγωγὴ 
και πολλοι axovoarrec - εἐξετλήσσοντο 
ext τὴ διδαχὴ avrov λεγογτεσ 
ποθεν rovro ταυτα. Kat τισ ἡ σοφια 
ἢ δοθεισα avro - iva. και δυναμισ τοιανται 
δια των χείρων avrov γεινωνται 

(Fol. 301 6.) 


— 


MARCU 


SEO 
—— ς-ς — 
ait archisynagogo noli timere 

tentummodo crede. et non admisit quemquam 
se sequi - nisi petrum et iacobum 

et iohannen fratrem eius 


Et ueniunt in domum archisynagogi 


et uidet turbam flentem 

et lamentantem multum - et ingressus 
ait illis. quid turbamini et quid turbatis 
puella non est mortua sed dormit 

ad illi inredebant eum 


ipse autem eiciens turba foris 


adsumpto patre 

et matre puellae 

et qui cum illo erant 

et introibit ubi erat puella 

et tenens manum puellae 

aitillirabbi thabita cumi 

quod est interpraetatum 

puella tibi dico surge 

et confestim exurrexit puella 
etambulabat. erat autem annorum ° xii* 
et obstipuerunt omnes stupore magno 
et praecepit illis- ut i nemini dicerent 
et dixit dari illi manducare 


Et egressus inde abiit 


in patriam suam - et sequebatur illum 
discipuli eius. et die sabbatorum 
coepit docere in synagogam 
et multi audientes . admirabantur 
in doctrina ipaius dicentes 
uude huic haec. et quae est sapientia 
quae data est illi - ut et uirtutes iste 
per manus eius efficiantur 

(Fol. 302 a.) 


Capp. V. 36-—VI. 21. 


279 


280 


ssf 


F3 fif 


Ovx ovToc ἐστιν 0 TEKTWY- 0 ὕιοσ μαριασ 


— Se — 
KAT MAPKON 


και οαδελῴφοσ taxwBov - και Ἰωσητοσ και ιουδα 
και σιμωνοσ - οὐχι καὶ G4 αδελφαι avrov 
δε προσ ἡμασ εἰσιν 


και εσκανδαλιζοντο εν avro 


— 
: Kat ελεγεν avrour o ino 


OTL OUK ἐστιν προφητὴσ ατιμοσ 

ει μὴ εν τὴ πατριδιαντον - καὶ € ταῖισ συνγενεσι 
και εν TY] οἰκια αντου. καὶ OUK NOVVATO εκει 
ουδεμιαν ποιησαι δυναμιν 

ει μη ολιγοισ ἀαρρωστοισ 

επιθεισ rac χειρασ eÜepamevaey 


και εθαυμαζεν δια τὴν πιστιν avrov 


: καὶ περιηγεν τασ Kopjuag - κυκλω διδασκων 
: και προσκαλεσαμενοσ τουσ - 9 - μαθητασ 


απεστειλεν αυτουσ ava .8. 

Sove αὐτοισ εξονυσιαν 

TOV πνευμάτων των ακαθαρτων 

καὶ παρηγγειλεν avrou - eua. μηδεν epwow 
«wr οδον - εἰ μη ραβδον povov 

parre πῆραν μήτεαρτον 

pyre εἰσ τὴν Govqy χαλκον 

αλλα ὕποδεδεμενουσ σανδαλια 


και μη ἐνδυσησθαι .B- χιτωνασ 


και eXeyev avrour - orov ay εἰσελθητε 


exei μενεται" eod αν εξελθητε εκειθεν 


: καὶ οσοὶ εαν μὴ δεξωνται ὕμασ 


μῆδε ακουσωσιν ὕμων εκπορενομενοι 
ἐκειθεν exrewa£are rov χουν 


Toy ποδων ὕμων - εἰσ μαρτυριον avrour 


και ἐξελθοντεσ εκηρυξαν 


ἵνα μετανοωσιν᾽ καὶ δαιμονια πολλα 
εξεβαλον. και αλειψαντεσ ἐλεω 


(Fol. 302 5.) ‘AH 


VI. 3 


nonne hic est faber. filius mariae 


et frater iacobi . et iosetis et iudae 

etsimonis. nonne et sorores eius 

hic nobiscum sunt 

et scandalizabantur in illo 

et dicebat illis ibs 

quia non est propheta sine honore 

nisiin patriasua etin genere suo 

et in domo sua et non potuit ibi 

ullam facere uirtutem 

nisi paucos infirmos 

inponens manum curauit 

et mirabatur propter incredulitatem illorum 

et circuibat castella . et circumibat docens 

et conuocatis duo decim : discipulis 

misit eos per uinos 

dans illis potestatem 

spirituum immundorum 

et praecepit illis. ut ne quid tollerent 
in uiam. nisi uirgam tantum 

non peram non panem 

neque in zonam aes 

sed calciatos sandalia 

et ne indueritis duas tunicas 
Et dixit eis. quocumque introieritis 

illic manete. donec exeatis inde 

etquicumque non receperint uos 

nec audierint uos. exe untes 

inde excutite puluer 

pedum uestrorum - in testimonium illis 
Et exeuntes praedicabant 

ut paenitentiam agerent. et, daemonia molta 

eiciebant. et unguentes oleo 

(Fol. 303 a.) 


Cap. VI. 3—13. 


- 
v: 
— 


[3f 


[8 


fef 


— και — 
. T MAPKON 
— Ss — 


πολλουσ ἀρωστουσ εθεραπευον 
και ἤκουσεν ἡρωδησ o βασιλευσ 
pavepoy yap eyevero 
TO ovopa GUTOV καὶ €Aeyogay 
ort twarvno o Bamrwrrgo - ἐγήγερται 
εκ νεκρων - καὶ δια TOVTO ἐνεργουσιν 
a: δυναμισ ev avro 
: ἀλλοιδεελεγον οτιἡλιασ ἐστιν 
αλλοι δε eXeyov- ort εἰσ των προφητων 
axovcag δε ἡρωδὴσ «urty .ον eyo απεκεφαλισα 
: ovrog ex vexpuy ἡγερθη : üvroa yap ηρωδησ 
αποστειλασ expaTnoey 
τὸν Ἰωαννὴν και ἐδησεν avrov 
καὶ εβαλεν εἰσ φυλακὴν. δια ηρωδιαδα 
τὴν γυναικα φιλιππου του αδελῴου avrov 
ort ἐγαμησεν αὐτὴν 
: ἔλεγεν yap ἴωαννησ τῶ ἡρωδὴ 
ovx εξεστιν σε exe av 
τὴν γυναικα Tov αδελῴου cov 
H δεηρωδιασ ἡνιχεν avro 
καὶ ἤθελεν ἀποκτεῖναι avrov 
και ουχ ἡδυνατο 


o yap npwina εφοβειτο rov Ἰωαγνὴν 
edwo avrov ανδρα δικαιον 


και αγιον εἰναι" και συνετήρει avrov 
Kas ἀκουσασ avrov πολλα εποιει 
καε ἤδεωσ avrov ἤκουεν 
και γενομενὴσ δεημερασ εὐκαιρου 
ηρωδησ τοισ γενεχλιοισ αὐτου 
δειπνον ἐποιῆσεν Tow μεγειστασιν 
Kat TOL χειλιαρχοισ 
και TOUT Tpwrow THE γαλιλαιασ 
Εισελθουσὴησ 9« rgo θυγατροσ avrov 
(Fol. 303 5.) 


VI. 


4 


I5 


16 


17 


19 


20 


multos aegros sanauerunt 


Et audiit herodes rex . 


manifestum enim factum est 

nomen eius et dicebant 

quod iohannes baptista resurrexit 

a mortuis. et propter ea efficiuntur 
uirtutes in ipso 

alii autem dicebant quoniam helias est 

alii autem dicebant.quasi unus ex profetis 


audito autem herodes ait. quem ego decollaui 


hic a mortuis surrexit. ipse enim herodes 
misit ac tenuit 

iohannen et alligauit eum 

et misit in carcerem - propter herodiaden 
uxorem philippi fratris sui 


quod duxisset eam uxorem 


dicebat enim iohannes herodi 


non licet tibi habere 


uxorem fratris tui 


herodes autem insidiabatur illi 


et quaerebat occidere eum 

et non poterat 

herodes enim metuebat iohanen 
sciens eum uirum iustum 

et sanctum esse. et custodiebat eum 
et audito eo multa faciebat 

et liuenter eum audiebat 


Et cum dies opportunus accidisset 


hero dis natali suo 
cenam fecit principibus 
et tribunis 
et primis a galilaeae 
Cumque introisset filia ipsius 
(Fol 304 a.) 


Cav. VI. 13—22. 


36 


281 


282 IT ΜΆΡΚΟΝ 
— --. — 


ηρωδιαδοσ kat ορχησαμενησ καὶ αρεσασηῃσ ὉἹ. 
Tw ἡρωδη - Kat Tour συνανακειμενοισ 
εἰπεν o βασιλευσ τω κορασιω 
αἰτησον με θελεισ καὶ δωσω σοι 
καὶ ὡμοσεν αντὴ πολλα. εἰ τι αν με αἰτηήσησ 23 
δωσω σοι. και το ἡμεισντησ βασιλειασ μου 

ἢ δε ἐξελθουσα εἰπεν Ty μητρι αυτὴσ 24 
τι αἰτησωμαι ἡ δεειπεν 
τὴν κεφαλὴν ἴωαννου του βαπτιστόυ 

καὶ εἰσελθουσα προσ τον βασιλεα ειπεν 25 
Soo μοι emt πινακι whe 
τὴν κεφαλὴν toayov rov Barrurrov: 
περιλυποσ γενομενοσ o Bac eve 26 
wo ἤκουσεν δια rove ορκουσ 


καὶ δια rove συνανακειμενουσ 


ovx ἤθελησεν avrny αθετησαι 
αλλα ευθεωσ αποατειλασ σπεκολατοραν 27 
εἐπεταζεν ἐνεχθηναι- τὴν κεφαλὴν avrov; 

O δεαπελθων. απεκεφαλισεν avrov 28 


ev τῇ φυλακη. και yeykey THY κεφαλὴν 
emt πινακει. καὶ ἐδωκεν αὐτὴν τω κορασιω 
και TO κορασιον edwKev τὴ μητρι avro 
ακονσαντεσ Se ot μαθηται avrov yAGov 29 
καιηραν TO πτωμαὰ αντον' 
και εθηκαν avro' εν Tw μνημειω" 
fa $ KaL ovvayoryTat οἱ ἀποστολοι Trpoe TOV op 30 
kat ἀπήγγειλαν avro Tavra 
oca εποιησαν καὶ οσα εδιδαξαμ 
ἐβ : καὶ εἰπεν αυτοισ o «qo - Sevre ὕπαγωμεν 31 
7 εἰσ ἐρημον Tro?ov - καὶ αναπανεσθαι oAryov 
ἤσαν yap ot ἐρχομένοι 
Kas οἱ ὕπαγογτεσ πολλοι 
και ovde φαγειν ευκαιροσ εἰχον 
(Fol. 304 5.) 


SEC 
omy 


— 


JES 


RCUM 


‘herodiades et saltasset.et placuisset 
herodi .gimul que recumbentibus 
dixit rex puellae 
pete a me. quod uis et dauo tibi 


et iurauit illi multa ‘quod quidquid me petieris 


dabo tibi licet dimidium regni mei 
quae cum exisset. dixit matri suae 
quid petam . et illa dixit 
caput iohannis baptistae 
Cumque intro isset ad regem ait 
da mihi in disco hic 
caput iohannis baptistae 
et contristatus est rex 
mox audiit propter iusiurandum 
et propter simul recumbentibus 
noluit am contristare 
sed statim mis speculatore 
praecepit adferi caput eius 
Et cum abisset decollauit eum 
in carcerem. et adtulit capud 
in disco. et dedit illud puellae 
et puell a dedit matri suae 
audientes autem discipuli eius uenerunt 
et tulerunt corpus eius 
et posuerunt.illud .in monumento 
Et conuenerunt apostoli ad ihm 
et renuntiauerunt illi omnia 
quae egerant et quae docuerant 
Et ait illisihs uenite eamus 
in desertum locum . et requiescite pusillum 
erant enim qui rediebant 
et qui ibant multi 
et nec manducandi spatium habebant 
(Fol. 305 a.) 


Cap. VI. 23— 1. 


FR 


je 


A— -οὐἬ te — 
KAT MAPKON 
—=—_—_, 0 — 


καὶ ἀαναβαντεσ εἰσ ro πλοιον VI. 32 


: ἀπηλθον eur ἐρημον roov kar ιδιαν 


καὶ ebay avrove ὕπαγοντασ 33 
καὶ ἔγνωσαν πολλοι 

και πεζὴ aro wayTwy πολεων 

ν ἐκει . καὶ συνηλθον avrov 

και fed Buy και εἰδων- πολυν οχλον o - 34 
ἐπλαγνισθη em αὐτουσ ort σαν wo προβανα 

μὴ ἔχοντα opera 


συνε 


και ἤρξατο διδασκειν αυτουσ πολλα 
59 δερασ πολλησ γεινομενὴσ 35 
προσελθοντεσ ot μαθηται avrov 
Aeyovau avro ort ερημοσ᾽ ἐστιν τοπὸσ 
ἤδη wpa πολλη- axoAÀvcov αὐτουσ 36 


ἵνα ἀπελθοντεσ εἰσ Tove eyywrra aypovo 
και εἰσ τασ κωμασ ἵνα ἀγορασωσιν εαντοισ 
τι φαγειν καὶ asrokpiÜeur εἰπεν avrow o - 37 
Sore avrowr υμεισ φαγειν - καὶ λεγουσὶν αντω 
απελθοντεσ ἀγορασωμεν 
διακοσίων δηναρίων ἀρτουσ 
καὶ δωσωμεν avrowr φαγειν 

και Aeyet avrow o wo" ποσουσ aprave £xeTar — 38 
ὕπαγετε dere. καὶ γνοντεσ Aeyavow aut. 
-- ἀρτουσ και δνω ἴχθνασ - και erera£ey.o ws 39 
ανακλειναὶ TOTO - κατα THY συνποσιαν 


ext Tw XÀopo χορτω- Kat avemeoov 40 
a 


TpacuA πρασιαι" KATA*p- και κατὰ πεντήκοντα 


: καιλαβὼν ve. prove - xai rove. B- ixÜvam — 41 


αναβλεψασ ew Tov ovpayoy  ευλογησεν 


και κατεκλασεν Tove - €- aprovc 

και εδιδου Tour μαθηταισ avrov 

ἵνα ἐν" κατέναντι GUTOV 

και rove. β. ἴχθνασ .ἐμερισεν πασιν 
(Fol. 3055.) 


283 


Et ascendentes in naui 
abierunt in desertum locum seorsum 
et uiderunt eos abeuntes 
et cognouerunt multi 
et pedestre de omnem ciuitatem 
concurrerunt illuc. et uenerunt ibi 
et exientes et uidens. multam turbam ihs 
condoluit super eos . qui erant sicut oues 
non habentes pastorem 


Et coepit docere illos multa 


et cum iam ora multa fieret 

accesserunt discipuli eius dicunt ei 

quia desertus est lacus 

et iam ora multa . dimitte illos 

ut euntes. in proximas uillas 

et vicos. et emant sibi 

quod manducent Et respondens ait illis ihs 
date illis uos manducare. et dixerunt ei 
euntes emamus 

ducentis denariis panes 


et dauimus eis manducare 


. Etdicite inihs quod panes habetis 


ite uidete. et cum cognouissent dicunt ei 
.u.panes et duos pisces - et praecepit illis ihs 
uti discumberent omnes - secundum contaubernia 
super uiridem faenum - et discubuerunt 

in partes - per *c-et per 1: 

et acceptis . Ὁ * panibus. et. ii. piscibus 
aspiciens in caelum . benedixit 

et fregit- u* panes 

et dedit discipulis 

ut adponerent.ante eos 

et duos pisces. diuisit omnibus 


(Fol. 306 a.) 


Cap. VI. 33—41. 


284 


Γ᾿ 


[ΚΓ Off 


SJ 


en 
Se 


KAT. MAPKON 


Ka, εφαγον παντεσ καὶ εχορτασθησαν VI. 42 


Kat npay κλασματων 43 

(B - κοφινουσ πληρεισ. καὶ απὸ των ἴχθνων 

και ἦσαν οἱ φαγοντεσ 4 ανδρεσ 44 
: και εὐυθεωσ εξεγερθεισ ηναγκασεν 45 


Tovg μαθητασ avrov. ἐνβηναι eur To πλοιον 
και προσαγειν αντον εἰσ τὸ περαν 


προσ βησσαΐῖδαν 


: avrog Se aroAvet TOV oxAov ‘kat αποταξαμενοσ 46 


αντοισ ἀπηλθεν εἰσ το οροσ προσευξασθαι 


> καὶ oru γενομενήσ . ἣν παλαι τὸ πλοῖον 47 


ev pea τὴ θαλασση 

και αντοσ μονοσ ert THE γησ 

και εἰδων αὐτουσ βασανιζομενουσ 48 
και €eAavyovrag * ἣν yap o ἀνεμοσ 

εναντιοσ GUTOUG - και περι ‘pt τεταρτὴν φυλακὴν 


TNO VUkTOC - ἔρχεται o ine περιπάτων 

ἐπι tno θαλασσησ 

καὶ ἤθελησεν παρελθειν avrove 

ot δε εἰδοντεσ avrov περιπατουντα 49 


ἐπι 20 θαλασσησ - εδοξαν φαντασμα ewat 


και avexpafay rayreg - xa, εταραχθησαν 50 
και ehadyoev προσ avrove Aeywy 
θαρσειτε eyo eua μη φοβεισθαι 

: καιανεβὴ εἰσ τὸ πλοιον προσ avrove 51 


και EKOTAC EY 0 AVELOT καὶ περισσωσ εν € 

avrog- ἐξεσταντο και εθαυμαζον 

ov yap συνῆκαν em rour aprour $2 
ἣν yop 7 καρδια αντων'πεπωρωμενη 


και διαπερασαντεσ εκειθεν 53 


1ABov erc τὴν γὴν γεννησαρ 


: και εξελθοντων avrov εκ του πλοιον £4 


ευθεωσ ertyvocay αὐτὸν 


(Fol. 306 5.) 


SEC MAROUM 


et manducauerunt omnes et saturati sunt 
et sustulerunt fragmentorum 

xil. cofinos plenos et de piscibus 

et erant qui manducauerant *u - milia uiroru 
et statim oxsurgens coegit 

discipulos suos. ascendere in nauem 

ut praecederent eum ultra 

ad bessaidan - dum ipse 

demitteret turbam ‘et cum dimisisset 
eos abiit in montem orare 

et cum sero esset factum . iam erat nauis 
in medio mare 

et ipse solus in terra 

et uidens eos remigantes et laborantes 
erat enim uentus contrarius illis 

et circa quartam uigiliam 

noctis. uenit ihs ambulans 

super mare 

et uolebat transire illos 

ad ill i ut uiderunt illum ambulantem 
super mare'putauerunt fantasma esse 
et clamauerunt omnes. et conturbati sunt 
et locutus est ad eos dicens 

confidete ego sum nolite timere 

et ascendens in nauem ad illos 

et cessauit uentus . et plus magis intra se 
stupebant et mirabantur 

non enim intellexerant de panibus 

erat enim cor eorum obtusum 

et cum transfretasset inde 
peruenerunt in terram gennesar 

et egredientibusillis de naui 


continuo cognouerunt eum 


(Fol. 307 a.) 


Cap. VI. 442—854. 


fe fs 


: καὶ συνάγονται προσ avrov ot φαρισαιίοι 


ων 9 = — * 
KAT MAPKON 
- κοι BS --- 
περιδραμοντεσ ὃ € oÀy τὴν περίχωρον 
exewny ἤρξαντο ert γραβαττοισ 


φέρειν παντασ. Tove κακωσ ἐχοντασ 


VI. 55 


περιεφερον yap avrova 

οπου ay ἤκουσαν TOV ay εἰναι 

καὶ που αν εἰσεπορένετο εἰσ κωμασ 56 
ἡ εἰσ a-ypova - ἢ εἰσ Tad πολισ 

ev ταισ πλατειαισ'. ετειθουν rove acbevouvras 

και παρεκαλουν avroy* ἵνα kay TOV κρασπεδου 
τουΐματιον αυτου αψωνται 

καὶ οσοι ἥψαντο avrov ἐσωζοντο 

VIT. 1 
καὶ τινεσ TOV γραμματαιων 

ἔλθοντεσ αποϊἵεροσολυμων 

και εἰδοτεσ τινασ "roy μαθητων avrov 2 
κοιγεσ᾽ χερστν" τουτεότιν ανιπτοισ 

ἐσθιοντασ Tove aprove κατεγνωσαν 

ot yap φαρισαιοι- καὶ παντεσ οι ἵουδαιοι 3 
ἐαν μὴ rv κμὴ νυψωνται 

Tac χειρασ ovk ἐσ θειουσιν aprov 

κρατουντεσ᾽ τὴν παραδοσιαν 

Tov πρεσβυτερων 

καὶ ar ἀγορασ οταν ελθωσιν 4 
cay μη βαπτισωνται ovk εἐσθιουσιν 

καὶ αλλα πολλα ἐστιν. a παρελαβον 

avrow rypew - βαπτισμουσ ποτηρίων 

και ξεστων και χαλκιων και κλεινων 

και ἐπερωτωσιν avrov ot φαρισαιοι 5 
Kat οἱ ypa p. uua meur λεγοντεσ 

δια τι ot μαθηται σου ov Trepurarovay 

κατα τὴν παραδοσιν των πρεσβυτερων 


αλλα κοιναισ ταισ χερσιν αἰσθιουσιν 


Toy αρτον. οδεαποκριθεισ «urey aovrour 6 


(Fol. 307 5.) 


SEO MARCUM 985 
— ie, te 


circumcurrentes autem ‘totam regionem 
illam. coeperunt in grabattis 
ferre omnes male habentes 
circumferebant enim eos 
ubicumque audierant ihm esse 
et quocumque intr oibat in uicos 
uel in uillas - aut in ciuitates 
in plateis - ponebant infirmos 
et deprae cabantur eum ‘ut uel fimbriam 
uestimenti eius tangerent 
et quodquod tangebant eum salui fiebant 
et conuenerunt ad eum pharisaei 
et quidam de sscribis 
uenientes &b hierosolymis 
et cum uidissent quosdam discipulorum suoru 
communibus manibus. id est non lotis 
manducare panem uituperauerunt 
pharisae i enim. et omnes iudaei 
nisi primo lauerint 
manus non manducant panem 
tenentes traditionem 
seniorum 
et cum uenerint a foro 
nisi baptizentur non capiunt cibus 
et alia multa quae tradita sunt 
illis seruare- baptismos calicum 
et orceorum et aeramentorum et lectoru 
et interrogant eum pharisaei 
et scribae dicentes 
quare discipuli tui non secuntur 
secundum traditionem saeniorum 
sed communibus manibus manducant 
panem. ad ille respondens ait illis 

(Fol. 308 a.) 


Carr. VI. 55— VII. 6. 


286 


mim Ὡς 
KAT ΜΑΡΚΟΝ 
tay — ey — 


ort καλωσ expo φητευσεν 001a περι ὕμω 
ὕποκριτων - καὶ εἰπεν . Ολαοσ' ουτοσ 

Tow χειλεσιν μεαγαπα. ἢ Se καρδια avrwy 
Toppw αφεστῆκεν ad ἐμου | 
paryy δεσεβονται με. διδασκοντεσ 
διδασκαλειασ. evraApara αγνθρωπων 
βαπτισμουσ ξεστων - και ποτηρίων 

και αλλα παρομοια.α ποιειται τοιαυτα πολλα 
αφεντεσ τὴν τολὴν του By 

xparecre τὴν παραδοσιν roy ayÜponrav 

καὶ Acyey αντοισ - καλωσ ατεθειτε 

τὴν ἐντολὴν του bv 

tva τὴν παραδοσιν ὕμων στησηται 

Pavone yap ειπεν . τειμα τὸν πατερα σὸν 
καὶ τὴν μήτερα . καὶ 0 κακολογων 

πατερα ἡ μήτερα θανατω τελευτειτῳ 


ὕμεισ δε λεγεται. cay eor ανθρωποσ 


TW πατρι αὐτου ἡ τὴ μητρι 

κορβαν o ἐστιν δωρον 

o ay μου ὠφεληθησ 

ovx εναφιεται avrov οὐδεν ποιησαι 


Tw πατρι ἡ TH μήτρι ακυρουντεσ Toy Xoyov 
του θυ Ty παραδοσει ὕμων 

τή μωρα ἡ παρεδωκατε" και παρομοια 

τα αυτα πολλα ποιειτε: καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοσ 
παλιν Tov οχλον ἔλεγεν avrour 

ακουσατε μου παντεσ καὶ συνιτε 

ουδ ἐστιν εἐξωθεν τον ανθρωπου 
εισπορενομενον εἰσ avrov οδυναται αὐτὸ 
κοινωσαι- ἀλλα τα εκ rov ανθρωπον 
ἐκπορενομενα. εκεινα ἐστιν 

τα κοιγουντα roy ayÜpenrov 


εἰ τίσ EXEL WTA AKOUELY AKOVETO) 


(Fol. 308 δ.) 


YII. 


10 


1I 


12 


14 


15 


SEC 


MARCUM 
— - SS — 
quia bene profetauit esaias de uobis 
Upocritis et dixit. populus hic 
labiis me honorat. cor autem eorum 
longe est a me-in uanum autem 
coluntme docentes 
doctrinas. praecepta bominum 


baptizantes orceos - et calices 


et alia similia- quale faciunt huius modi mults 


relinquentes mandatum dei 
tenentes traditiones hominum 
et dicebet illis . bene inritum facitis 
praeceptum del 
ut traditionem uestram tradatis 
moyses enim dixit. honora patrem tuum 
et matrem. et qui maledixerit 
patri aut matri morti merietur 

uos autem dicitis - si dixerit homo 
patri suo aut matri 
corbam quod est donum 
quodcumque ex me tibi proderit. iam non 
missum facitis eum quidquam facere 
patri aut matri . scindentes uerbum 
del per tra ditionem uestram 
stultam quam tradedistis . et similia 
huius modi multa facitis et aduocans 
iterum turbam dicebat illis 
audite me omnes et intellegite 
nihil est extra hominem 
introiens in eum quod possit eum 
communicare. sed que de homine 
procedunt illa sunt 
quae coinquinant hominem 
si quis habet aures audiendum audiat 


(Fol. 309 a.) 


Cap, VII. 6— τό. 


f3f 


KAT MAPKON SEC MARCUM 
— — ey — a — .-. — 


: καὶ ore εἰσηλθεν εἰσ τὴν οἰκειαν VIL 17 et cum introisset in domum 
απὸ TOV OXÀov ἐπηρωτων avrov a turba . interrogabant eum 
ot μαθηται avrov τὴν wapaBoAnv discipuli eius parabolam 
καὶ λεγει avrour - ovrog και ὕμεισ 18 et ait illis. sio et uos 
ασυνετοι εσται OV γοειτε inprudentes estis non intellegitis 
ore way To ἐξωθεν quo domne extrensecus 
εἰσπορεύομενον εἰσ Tov ayÜpenroy introiens in hominem 
ov δυναταε avrov κοινωσαι non potest eum communicare 
ov yap eurepxerat eur THY καρδιαν avrov. 19 nec enim introiit in cor eius 


αλλ eur τὴν κοιλειαν᾿ και εἰσ' TOY OXETOY sed in uentrem . et in secessum 


e£epxerat ᾿ καθαριζει WavTa Ta. βρωματα exiit. purgans omnes escas 
eXeyov δε ort ro ex rov avOpwrov 20 
ἐκπορενομέενον "ἐκεῖνα KOLVOL Toy ανϑρωπὸ 

ἐσωθεν yap «x Tho καρδιασ των ανθρωπων 21 


ot διαλογισμοι kaxot exropevorras 


dicebat autem quoniam quae de homine 
exeunt.illa communicant hominem 

- abintus autem de corde hominum 
cogitationes malae procedunt 


πορνεια κλεμματα. μοιχειαι φονοσ' 
πλεονεξία δολοσ - πονήρια ἀσελγεια 


adulteria furta . fornicationes homicidia 


auaritia dolus. nequitia inpudicitia 


οφθαλμοσ πονηροσ. βλασφημίαι ix ται oculus malus. blasphemia superuia 
adpor wn avra ravra. τα πονήρα 23 stultitia: omnia haec mala 

ἐσωθεν exropeveras: Kat Kotyot abintus procedunt. et communicant 
τον ἀνθρωπον. καὶ avac rac: exei ey 24 hominem. et exurgens inde 


απηλθεν εἰσ τα opus τυρου. καὶ cre Done abiit in fines tyri . et ingressus 
in domum neminem uoluit scire 

25 et non potuit latere. mulier autem statim 
ut audiit deeo cuius habebat filia 


— e . . . . 
spm in mundum intrauit et procidit 


εἰσ τὴν oweiay - ovSeva ἡθελεγνωναι 
καὶ ovk ἡδυνηθὴη λαθειν - γυνὴ δε ευθεωσ 
wo ακουσασα περι avTOv - no εἰχεν ro θυγατριο 


và axaÜaprov - eÜovaa και προσεπεσεν 


: προσ rove ποδασ avrov : ἢ δε γυνὴ me 26 ad pedes eius. mulier autem erat 
ελληνισ φυνισσα TO yever graeca syrophoenissa - genere 


et rogabat eum . ut daemonium eiceret 
de filia eius. et dixit ei 


sine prius saturari filios 


και »pora. avroy - ta ro δαιμονιον exad7 

απὸ tha θυγατροσ avro Kat λεγει αὐτὴ 27 
aec πρωτον χορτασθηναιτα Texva 

ov yap ἐστιν kaXoy - λαβειν τον aprov των non est enim bonum. accipere panem 
filiorum "οὗ mittere catellis 


(Fol. 310a.) 


Tekvow - και Badsy Tour κυναριοισ 
(Fol. 309 5.) 


Car. VII. 17—27. 


287 


288 


[8 


sas fxs 


— Ss -ο-- 
T MAPKO 
— ey 


iones] 


1 δεαπεκριθη avro λεγουσα. «€ adda και ra. VIL 28 


κυναρια Vrrokaro rgo τραπεζὴσ εἐσθιουσιν 
gro τῶν ψιχὼν roy πεδων - καὶ εἶπεν avr 
ὕπαγε. δια Tovroy Xoyov 

εξεληλυθεν το δαιμονιον ex THO θυγατροσ σου 
και ἀπελθουσα εἰσ owov ευρεν τὴν Üvyarepa. 
βεβλημενὴν επι τὴν κλινὴν 

καὶ To δαιμόνιον ἐξεληλυθοσ 


: καὶ παλιν εξελθων ex των opusy τυρου 


λθεν δια σιδωνοσ εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν 

Tyo γαλιλαιασ'. ava μεσον των ορίων 

ano δεκαπολεωσ' « καὶ φερουσιν avro 

κωφον και μογιλαλον" και καρακαλουσιν αὐτὸ 
ἵνα επιθη avro τὴν χειραν' Kat απολαβομενοσ 
avrov απὸ του οχλου xar tay 

πτυσασ εβαλεν rove δακτυλουσ αὐτου 

εἰσ τα ὦτα αὐτοῦ 

καὶ ἥψατο THO γλωσσὴσ αὐτου 

και αναβλεψασ - εἰσ Tov ovpayoy 

ἀνεστεναξεν και λεγει avro εφφεθα o core 
διανυκθητι.. και ἡνυγησαν at axoat αὐτου 

καὶ eXvO: οδεσμοσ rye γλωσσὴσ avrov 


και ἐλαλει ορθωσ και διεστειλατο αντοισ 


iva μηδενει μηδὲν εἰπωσιν 


: ot Se avrot μαλλον περισσοτερωσ ἐκήρυσσο 


καὶ ὑπερεκπερισσὼωσ ἐξεπλήσσοντο λεγοντεσ 


: καλωσ παντα πεποιήῆκεν - καὶ τουσ κωφουσ 


ποιε ιακουειν - καὶ Tove ἀλαλουσ λαλειν 
εν ἐκειναισ δεταισ ἡμεραισ 


παλιν πολλουν oxXov ovroc 


καὶ μὴ ἐχοντων avrov τι φαγωσιν 
προσκαλεσαμενοσ τουσ μαθητασ λέγει ovrow 
σπλαχνιζομαι ert του OXÀov TOVTOV 


(Fol. 3105.) (ΛΘ 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


VIL 1 


A 


— 


ad illa rearespondit ei dicens . dme sed et 
catelli subtus mensa manducant 
de micis puerorum . et ait ei uade 
propter hunc sermonem 
exiit daemonium de filia tua 
et cum abisset in domum : inuenit filiam 
iacentem supra lectum 
et daemonium exisse 
et iterum exiens de finibus tyri 
uenit per sidonem ad mare 
galilaeae -inter medios fines 
decapoleos . et adferent ei surdum 
et mutum - et depraecabantur illum 
ut inponeret illi manum ' et suscipiens 
eum.de turba seorum 
expuens misit digitos suos 
in auriculas eius 
et tetigit linguam eius 
et aspiciens in caelo 
ingemuit et ait illi . effecta quod est 
adaperite. et apertae sunt aurea eius 
et solutum est uinculum linguae eius 
et loquebatur confidenter "οὗ praecepit eis 
ne cui aliquid dicerent 
ad illi magis tentum praedicabant 
ete o amplius admirabantur dicentes 
bene omnia fecit et surdis 
praestat auditum et multis loqui 
in illis autem diebus 
iterum cum multa turba esset 
et non habentibus eis quod manducent 
conuocatis discipulis ait illis 
misereor super istam turbam 

(Fol. 311 a.) 


Carr. VII 28—VIII. 2. 


[3j 


— o — οο-΄-. — 
KAT MAPKON 


ort non ἡμέραι τρισ εἰσιν - azo more woe εἰσιν VIII. 


και OUK ἐεχουσιν τι φαγωσιν 


και ἀπολυσαι αυτουσ YHOTELT εἰσ OLKOY ov θελω 
μὴ ἐκλυθωσιν εν τη οδω. ort καὶ τινεσ εξ αυῷ 
axo μακροθεν ἡκασιν - και ἀπεκριθησαν avra 


ot μαθηται avrov - ποθεν τουτουσ δυνησεται 


TW χορτασαι ἀρτων ἐπ ἐρημειασ 


και ἐτηρωτα AUTOVO - TT000VO ἀρτουσ εχεται 


οἱ δε εἰπον’ ζ. καὶ παραγγελλει Tw οχλω 


3 


5 
ό 


i 
ayamegty exe THO yo - Kat λαβὼν rove * £- aprove 


καὶ εὐχαριστησασ ἐκλασεν καὶ εδιδου 
rou μαθηταισ avrov -ἵνα παραθωσιν 

καὶ παρεθηκαν τω οχλω. και εἰχαν 

ἴχθυδια ολιγα και ευχαριστησασ εἰπεν 
καὶ avrovg ἐκελευσεν παρατειθεναι 

καὶ epayov καὶ ἐεχορτασθησαν 

καὶ npay τὸ περισσευμα 

Tuy κλασματων σφυριδασ i 

ἤσαν e ot φαγοντεσ. wo τετρακισχειλιοι 


καὶ ἀπελυσεν avrovg : - καὶ avrog aveBy 


: €w TO ?Tiotov pera των μαθητων avrov 


καὶ λθεν εἰσ τα opua. μελεγαδα 
και εξ ηλθοσαν οι φαρισαιοι. και ἡρξαντο 
σννζητειν συν avro* ζητουντεσ παρ avrov 


TO σήμειον απὸ TOV ουραγου 


: πειραζοντεσ avrov : kat αναστεναξασ 


TO x Aeye 


τι ἢ yevea avr ζητει σήμειον 


ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν εἰ δοθησεται 


Τὴ γενεα TAUTN σήμιον 


και αφισ αντουσ παλιν 


ἐνβασ εἰσ το πλοιον ἀπηλθεν εἰσ ro repay 


καὶ ἐσελαθοντο .οἱ μαθηται λαβειν aprove 


(Fol. 311 δ.) 


SEO MARCUM 
— 0 — 


a, 


quoniam iam triduum est. ex quo hic sunt 


et non habent quod manducent 


et dimittere eos ieiunos nolo in domo 


ne fatigentur in uia. quoniam qui dam ex illis 


de longe uenerunt . et responderunt ei 
discipuli sui "unde istos possit 

quis saturare panibus in solitudinem 
et interrogauit eos. quod panes habetis 
qui dixerunt septe.et praecepit turbae 


discumbere in terram - et accepit - uii . panes 


et gratias agens fregit et dedit 
discipulis suis . ut &dponerent 

et adposuerunt turbae. et habebant 
Pisces paucos. et gratias agens dixit 
et ipsos iussit adponi 

et manducauerunt et saturati sunt 
et sustulerunt quod superauerat 


fragmentorum . sportas septem 


erant autem qui manducauerant . ad - iiii - milis 


et dimisit eos - et ipse ascendens 

in nauem. cum discipulis s uis 

et uenit in partes magidan 

et exierunt pharisaei et coeperunt 
quaerentes ab illo 

signum de caelo 

temptantes eum - et ingemiscens 
spu- ait 

quid generatio ista quaeret signum 


amen dico uobis si dabitur 


generationi huic signum 

et missum faciens illos iterum 

ascendit in nauem abiit ultra 

et obliti sunt discipuli sumere panes 
(Fol. 3124.) 


Cap. VIII. 3—14. 


37 


289 


Vay KH, —, 
KAT MAPK 
-- 


€t μη €ya. αρτον εἰχον μετ «avTOv 


: εντωπλοιω : kat διεστελλετὸ avrour λεγων 


βλεπετε απο rye ζυμησ των φαρισαιων 


: καὶ tno ζυμησ ἡρωδου : και διελογιζοντο 


προσ αλληλουσ - ort ἀρτουσ ovk εἰχαν 


KQ4 yVOUG 0 ne λεγει αυτοισ "τε διαλογιζεσθαι 


εν ταισ καρδιαισ ὕμων « ort αρτουσ ουκ ἐχεται 
ονπω νοειτε ovóe συνΐεται 

πεπηρωμενὴ ἐστιν ἢ καρδια ὕμων 
οφθαλμουσ εχοντεσ ον βλεπεται 

καὶ WT ἐχοντεσ OUK ἀκονετε 

ovde μνημονενετε 

ore rove. € αρτουσ Tove ἐκλασα 

εἰσ τουσ πεντακισχειλιουσ 

καὶ ποσουσ κοφινονσ κλασματων 
ἤρατεπληρεισ.. λεγουσιν avro - B - 

ore 8e rove -[- εἰσ rove τετρακισχειλιουσ 
ποσασ σφυριδασ κλασματων ypare 

οι δε euroy "C και λεγει αντοισ 


FOC OvT'O συννοειτε 


: και epxovrat εἰσ βηθανιαν - και φερουσὶν 


aurw τυφλον - και παρακαλουσιν avroy 
ἵνα avrov αψηται 

xat λαβομενοσ τὴν χειρα του τυφλου 
ἐξήγαγεν avrov εξω rho κωμησ 

και πτυσασ εἰσ τὰ ομματα αὐτου 
επειθεισ rac χειρασ avro ἐπερωτα avroy 
«cTt βλεπεισ και avaBrepac λεγει 
βλεπω rove avOpwrove wo δενδρα 


wepimarovrrag - και παλιν επειθεισ rac χειρασ 


ert τουσ οφθαλμουσ avrov 
και ἤρξατο ἀναβλέψαι. και αποκατεσταθὴ 
wore ἀαναβλεψαι τηλαυγωσ παντα 

(Fol. 412.) 


CAP. 


VIIL 


17 


20 


VIII 


SEC MARC 
— iy --- — 


nisi unum p anem quem habebant secum 
in nauem. et praecepit eis dicens 
uidete a fermento pharisaeorum 
et fermento herodis et cogitabant 
ad alterutrum quod panes non haberent 
quo cognito ihs ait illis. quid cogitatis 
in cordibus uestris. quia panes non habetis 
nondum intellegistis nec perspicitis 
sic obtusa sunt corda uestra 
oculos habentes non uidetis 
nec aures habentes non auditis 
nec meministis 
quando de ju panibus quos fregi 
in quinque milia 
et quod cofinos fragmentorum 
sustulistis . ad illi dixerunt. xii. 
quando autem - uii .in quattuor milia 
quod sportas fracmentorum tulistis 
ad illi dixerunt uii . et ait illis 
quomodo non intellexistis 
et ueniunt uethaniam ‘et adferunt 
ei caecum et rogauerunt eum 
ut illum tangeret 
et adpraehendi manum caeci 
eduxit eum extra uicum 
et expuens in oculos eius 
et inpositis manibus illi interrogabet eu. 
si quid uideret et aspiciens ait 
uideo homines uelut arbores 
ambulantes. et iterum inposuit ei manus 
super oculos eius 
et coepit uidere et restitutus est 
ita ut uideret clare omnia 

(Fol. 313 a.) 


. 14— 258. 


fs 


ff 


— Vey ey 
KAT MAPK 


καὶ αἀπεστειλεν αντον εἰσ OLKOV αυτου VIII. 


Kat λεγει auTe ὕπαγε εἰσ TOV OLKOV σου 


καὶ μηδενι εἰπὴσ εἰσ τὴν κωμὴν 


: καὶ ἔξηλθεν o ine καὶ ot μαθηται avrov 


eur καισαριαν THO φιλιππου - Kat ey TH οδω 
ἐπήρωτα rove μαθητασ avrov λεγων 

Twa με λεγουσιν ειναι οἱ ανθρωποι 

οι e απεκριθησαν avro λεγοντεσ 
ἴωαννην roy βαπτιστην -αλλοι δεηλιαν 
αλλοι δε oc eva των προφητων 

αντοσ δε ernpwra avrove 

ὕμεισ δετεινα με λεγεται εἰναι 


« 
αποκριθεισ δε o πετροσ Xeyet avro avi o χρσ 


> καὶ ἐπετειμήσεν αὖτ OL 


ἵνα μήδενει εἰτωσιν περι avTov 

και ἤρξατο διδασκειν avrove - ort Oe TOV Vier 
Tov avOpwrrov πολλα παθειν 

καὶ ἀποδοκιμασθηναι ὕπο των πρεσβυτέρων 
καὶ ἀπὸ TOV ἀρχιερεων καὶ των γραμματεων 
και ἀποκτανθηναι 

καὶ μετὰ τρεισ ἡμερασ ἀναστηναι 

και παρρησία τον λογον ελαλει 


> καὶ προσλαβομενοσ o πετροσ ἡρξατο επιτειμαν 


avro * o δε ero τραφεισ και eioy 
Tove μαθητασ' avrov. ἐπετειμησεν πετρω 
Acyw v ὕπαγε οπεισω pov σατανα 


— 
ort ov pori ra rov θυ 


αλλα rov ανθρωπων 


: καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοσ Tov οχλον 


συν Tow μαθηταισ avrov evrey 


eu reo θελει οπισω μου ακολουθειν 
om, 
ἀρνήσασθω eavroy - και aparo TOV στρν αὐτοῦ 


και ακολονθειτω μοι. oc yap av θελη 
(Fol. 313 δ.) 


26 


33 


34 


291 


et dimisit illum in domum suam 


et ait illi uade in domum tuam 

et nemini dixeris in uico 

et profectus est ihe et discipuli eius 

in caesariam philipphi.et in uia 

interrogabat discipulos suos dicens 

quem me dicunt esse homines 

qui responderunt ei dicentes 

iohannen baptistam . alii autem heliam 

alii autem quasi unum ex prophetis 

ipse autem interrogauit eos 

uos autem quem me dicitis esse 

respondens autem petrus. dicit illi tu es xps 

et comminatus est eis - 

nemini dicerent de illo 

et coepit docere illos quoniam oportet filium 

hominis multa pati 

et reprobari a senioribus 

et a summis sacerdotibus et scribis 

et tertia die resurgere 

et palam uerbum lo quebatur 

quem respiciens petrus . coepit obiurgare eu 

&d ille conuersus uidens 

discipulos suos comminatus est petro 

dicens uade retro me satana _ 

quoniam non sapis quae sunt di 

sed quae sunt hominum 

et con uocata turba 

cum discipulis suis dixit 

si quis uult post me sequi 

deneget seipsum 

et tollat crucem suam 

et sequatur me. qui enim uoluerit 
(Fol. 314a.) 


Car. VIII. 26—38. 


292 


— — --- 
ΚΑΊ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ 
— ε΄ -- — 


VIII. 


τὴν ψυχὴν avrov σωσαι ἀπολέσει αὐτὴν + οσ ὃ αν 


ἀπολέσει αὐτὴν 
evexev του εναγγελιου σωσεὶ αὐτὴν 


τι yap ὠφελήσει τον ανθρωπον 
«ay κερδησὴ Toy κοσμον ολον 


και ζημιωθη τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 
ἢ τιγαρ δωσει ανθρωποσ ἀνταλλαγμα 


37 


T0 ψυχησ avrov : ὃσ ὃ αν επεσχυνθησεταιεμε 38 


καὶ τουσ ἐμουσ λογουσ εν τὴ γενεα ταυτὴ 
τὴ μοιχαλιδι καὶ αμαρτωλω 


Kat οὕϊοσ του ανθρωπον επεσχυνθησεται avro 
oray ελθη ev τη δοξη τον πατροσ avrov 
μετα των ἀγγέλων των αγιων 


: και eAcyey αντοισ «ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 


ort εἰσιν tier δετων εστήκοτων μετ ἐμοῦ 
οἰτινεσ ov μη γεύσωνται θανατου 

εωσ ay educw την βασιλειαν του θυ 
εληλυθυιαν εν δυναμει και μετα ἡμερασ εξ 
παραλαμβανειο ine. TOV Tr€TpOV 

και τὸν taxwBov και Tov wayyy 

καὶ avayet αυτουσ εἰσ οροσ ὕψηλον 
κατιδιαν povovg - καὶ Tare μορφωθη 
ἐνπροσθεν avrov 

καιτα εἰματια αυτου ἐγενενοντο στιλβοντα 
λευκα ua wo χιων 


WO OV VATAL TUT λευκαναι ere THO y"nc 


και ὠφθη avrour ἡλειασ συν μωῦσει 


om, 

και συνελαλουν Tw tqv ‘Kat αποκριθεισ 
— 

o πετροσ eurey ro tqu paBBe 

καλον ἐστιν ἡμασ woe εἰναι 

θελεισ ποιήσω σκηνασ. y- 

σοι μιαν και μωῦσει μιαν και ἡλεια μειαν 

ov yap noe Tt λαλήσει 


expoPot yap eyevovro 
(Fol. 314 6.) 


SEC MARC 
— = -- 


animam suam saluam facere. perdet eam (αὶ sate 


perdiderit eam . 
propter euangelium saluam faciet eam 


quid enim proderit homini 

8i lucretur uniuersum orbem 

et detrimentum patiatur animae suae 
hut quid dauit homo commutatione pro anims 
sua. qui autem confessus fuerit me 

et mea uerba .in generatione hac 

adultera et peccatrice 

et filius hominis. confundetur eum 

cum uenerit in gloriam patris sui 

cum angelis sanctis et dicebat illis 

amen dico uobis 

quod sunt quidam hic. cireumstantium meca 
qui non gustabunt mortem 

donec uideant regnum dei 

ueniens in uirtutem ‘et post dies sexs 
adsumpsit ihs petrum 

et iacobum . et iohannem 

et ducit illos in montem excelsum 

seorsum solus. et transfiguratus est 

coram ipsis 

et uestimenta eius facta sunt splendida 
candida nimis 


qualia non potest quis candida facere super terms 


Et apparuit illis helias cum moysen 


et erant loquentes cum ihu-et respondens 
petrus dixit ad ihm rabbi 

bonum est nos hicc esse 

uis faciam tauernacula . iii. 

tibi unum et unum moysi - et heliae unum 
nosciebat enim quid loquebatur 

timore enim exterriti erant 


(Fol. 215 4.) 


Capp. VIII. 35—IX. 6. 


— — οὕ. — 
KAT MAPKON 


και eyevero νεφελη επισκιαζουσα avrow 


και λθεν φωνὴ ex Tho νεφελὴσ λεγουσα 


ovrog ἐστιν οὕιοσ [407 0 AYATYTOS ἄκοῦετε αὐτοῦ 


avrov kat evÜeoa περιβλεψαμενοι 
ovxert ovdeva εἰδον 
et μη TOY - μονον μεθ εαυτων 
xat καταβαινοντων avruv εκ του ορουσ 
διεστιλατο αντοισ ἵνα μηδενει a εἰδοσαν 
διηγήσωνται εἰ μὴ oray οὕιοσ 
Tov ανθρωπονυ εκ νεκρων αναστη 

: καὶ τὸν λογον exparnoav 


προσ εαυτουσ συνζητουντεσ 


[3] 


τι ἐστιν οταν EK VEKPWY AVATTH 


Saf 


Kat ἐτήρωτων avrov Aeyovrea 

οτι οἱ γραμματεισ λεγουσιν 

ἡλειαν de πρωτον ελθειν 

o δεαποκριθεισ ειπεν αντοισ 

εἰ λειασ ελθων πρωτοσ -αποκαταστανει παντα 
και TWO γεγραπται ἐπὶ TOV ὕιον του QVÜpusroU 

ἵνα πολλα παθη και εξουδενηθη 

αλλα λεγω ὕμειν ‘ore και ἡλειασ ἐληλυθε 

Kat εποιησαν avro oca neo 

καθωσ y ἐγραπται ἐπ avroy 


kat ελθων προσ τουσ μαθητασ ειδεν οχλον 


fos 


qoÀvy προσ GUTOUG - και TOVT γραμματεισ 
συνζητουντασ avrow ‘Kat ευθεωσ 
vag οχλοσ. εἰδοντεσ Tov iv εθαμβησαν 
καὶ προσ χεροντεσ .ἡσπαζοντο avroy 
Qa: και εἐπτηρωτησεν avrovg τι συνζητειτε 
εν ὕμειν καὶ απεκριθη avro 
eu εκ του οχλου. διδασκαλε 
ἤνεγκα roy ULOV μουπροσσε 
exovra. ava. adadov 
(Fol. 3155.) 


IX.7 


το 


II 


12 


13 


16 


17 


293 


[o 
J EJ 


σ᾽ MARCUM 
— -- 
et facta est nubs- obumbrans illos 
et uenit uox de nube dicens 

hic est filius meus xarissimus audite 
eum et statim circumspicientes 
neminem amplius uiderunt 

nisi ihm tantum secum 

et descendentibus illis de monte 
praecepit illis. ut ne cui quae uidissent 
narrarent.nisi cum filius 

hominis a mortuis resurrexisset 

et uerbum continuerunt 

aput se conquaerentes 


quid esset quod a mortuis surrexisset 


Et interrogabant illum dicentes 


quia scribae dicunt 
quia heliam oportet primum uenire 
ad ille respondens ait illis 


si helias uenit primum restituere omnia 


Et quo mo do scriptum est. in filium hominis . 


ut multa patiatur ‘et contemnatur 
sed dico uobis. quia et helias uenit 
et fecerunt illi quaecumque uoluerunt 
Sicut script um est in eum 
et ueniens ad discipulos uidit turbam 
magnam ad eos et scribae 
conquirentes cum illis. et comfestim 
omnis turba. uidentes ihm expauerunt 
et gaudentes salutauerunt eum 
et interrogauit illos quid conquiritis 
inter uos et respondit ei 
unus de turba magister 
adtuli filium meu m ad te 
habentem spm mutum 

(Fol. 316a.) 


Cap, IX. 7— 17. 


294 


"T 


SY  ςι — 
KAT MAPKON 
— ey v — 
καὶ otrov ay avrov Kara\aBy IX. 


ρασσει και αφριζει και τριζει rove οδοντασ 

και Enpeverat- καὶ εἰπὸν τοισ μαθηταισ σου 

ἵνα avro εκβαλωσιν᾽ και ovk ισχυσαν 

εκβαλειν αντο. και αποκριθεισ αυτοισ λέγει 

€) γενεα ATLOTE EWO ποτεπροσ ὕμασ ἐσομαι 

εωσ ποτεανεξομαι ὕμων - φερετεαντον 

προσ με: και ἤνεγκαν αντον 

καὶ εἰδων avroy τοπνα. εταραξεν avrov 

καὶ πεσὼν ert THO yo - exuALeTo αφριζων 
και ἐτηρωτησεν TOY πατερα αντου 

ποσοσ XPOvoT ἐστιν ὡσ TOVTO γεγονεν αὐτω 

o δε eurey εκ παιδοσ. καὶ πολλακισ avroy 

εἰσ πυρ. Kat eur ὕδατα βαλλει 

iva, avrov ἀπολεση  αλλα εἰ τι Óvy 

βοηθησον ἡμειν κε. σπλαγχνισθεισ ες ἡμασ 
O δε "e εἰπεν avro - εἰ δυνη πιστευσαι παντα 


δυνατα τω πιστενοντι" 

καὶ ευὐθεωσ κραξασ o πατὴρ Tov παιδιου 

μετα δακρνων λεγει πιστενω 

βοηθει τη απιστεια μου. και ore edev ine 

OTL ἐσισυντρεχει οχλοσ 

επετειμησεν τω TVL TO ακαθαρτω 

εὐτων avro To ἀλαλον καὶ kodov πνα 

€yo σοι επιτασσω εἐξελθελθε εξ avrov 

και μηκετι εἰσελθησ εἰσ avrov 

και κραξασ. καὶ πολλα σπαραξασ' 

εξηλθεν απ avrov. καὶ eyevero wo νεκροσ 

wore πολλουσ λεγοντασ ort ἀπεθανεν 
Οδε ino κρατῆσασ THO xetpoo avrov 

ἤγειρεν avrov και avert) 

και εἰσελθοντοσ avrov εἰσ οἰκον 


ot μαθηται avrov karuay npwrwy avrov 


(Fol. 3168.) 


19 


20 


41 


22 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


fm 


C MARCUM 
— — - 
et ubicumque eum adpraehenderit 
applontat et spumat. et stridet dentibus 
et arescit - et dixi discipulis tuis 
ut eicerent illut. et non potuerunt 
eicere eum ‘et respondens eis dixit 
o generatio incredula . quandiu apud uos ere 
quandiu uos patiar ‘adferte illum 
ad me et adtulerunt eum 
et uidens illum apa -conturbabit eum 
et elisus in terra . uolutabatur spumans 
et interrogauit patrem eius 
quantum temporis est ‘ex quo hoc accidit ei 
ad ille dixit ab infarttia . et frequenter illum 
in ignem - et in aquam mittit 
ut eum perdat sed si quid potes 
subueni nobis dme. misertus super nos 
ihs autem dixit ill i-si potes credere omnia 
possibilia credenti 
et continuo exclamans pater pueri 
cum lacrimis ait credo . adiuua 
incredulitatem meam. et cum uideret ihs 
quod concurreret turba 
comminatus est spiritui immundo 
dixit illi mute et surde spe 
ego tibi praecipio exi ab ill o 
et cabe ne introeas in eum 
et clamans. et multum discerpens 
exiit ab 60. et factus est sicut mortuus 
ita ut multi dicerent quia mortuus est 
ihs autem tenens manum eius 
eleuabit illum et surrex it 
et cum introisset ipse in domum 
discipuli eius secreto . interrogabant eum 
(Fol. 317) 


Cap. IX. 18—28, 


fj 


f$ 


sj 


— --...- ες 
ΚΑΤ ΜΑΡΚ 


δια τι ἡμεισ ov κηδυνηθημεν ἐκβαλεῖν avre 


καὶ €COr€y avTOLO - TOUTO TO γένοσ 


εν ουδεν δυναται εξελθειν 
€t μη ἐν προσευχὴ Kat νηστεια 


: κακειθεν εἐξελθοντεσ. emopevovro 
, δια rgo γαλιλαιασ - καὶ ov κηθελεν iva rur γνοι 


«ban key yap rove μαθητασ avrov | 


καὶ ἐλεγεν avrow - ort ὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπου 


παραδιδοται «wr χειρασ ανθρωπον 


— 
καὶ AWOKTELVOUCLY GUTOV - KGL μετὰ Ὕ * )p«pac 


ἀναστήσεται : οἱ δε sryvoovy To ρημα 
xat εφοβουντο avrov ἐπερωτησαι 


: και ἤλθοσαν ew καφαργασυμ 


καὶ ἐν T1) OLKELA 'y€VOJ.€VOG - ἐτῆρωτα Avrovae 


: Ti €y Ty οδω διελογιζεσθαι : δι δε εσιωπων 


προσ αλληλουσ γαρ διελεχθησαν 
ree μιζων γενηται avrwv 
τοτε καθισασ εφωνησεν τουσ - (B - 
και λαβὼν το παιδιον 
εστήσεν AUTOY εν μεσω GUTOV 
καὶ ανακλισαμενοσ αντὸ εἰπεν αὐτοισ' 


oo αν των τοιουτων παιδιων 


δεξηται ev τω ονοματι μου ej δεχεται 


: καὶ OC ay ene δεξηται 


ow en δεχεται. αλλα Tov ἀαποστειλαντα με 


: ἀπεκριθὴ avro Ἰωαννησ καὶ εἰπεν 


διδασκαλε ad apey τινα εν τω ονοματι σου 

ἐκβαλλοντα δαιμονια 

og ovx ακολονθει μεθ ἡμων 

και ἐεκωλνομεν avrov - o δε αποκριθεισ axe 

pn κωλυνετε. ovÓeur yap ἐστιν 

oc ποιήσει Óvvagay * emt TO ογοματι pov 

και δυνήσεται ταχυ Kaxodoynoas με 
(Fol. 317 5.) 


IX. 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


SEC | MARC 


. quare nos non potuimus eicere illud 


et dixit illis. hoc genus 
in nullo potest exire 
nisi in orationibus et ieluniis 
et inde profecti- transiebant 
in galilaea. nec uolebat quem quam scire 
docebat enim discipulos suos 
et dicebat illis quia filius hominis 
tra detur in manus hominum 
et occident eum et in tres dies 
resurget - ad illi ignorabant uerbum 
et timebant eum interrogare 
et uenerunt in cafarnaum 
qui cum domi esset interrogabat eos 
quid in uia tractatis - ad illi tacebant 
inter se enim disquirebant 
quis esse illorum maior 
tune consedit et uocauit . xii. 
et accipiens puerum 
Statuit illum in medio eorum 
quem cum conplexus est ait illis 
quis quis ex huiusmo di pueris 
receperit in nomine meo me recipit 
et quicumque me susceperit 
non me suscipit ‘sed eum qui me misit 
respondens illi i ohannes dixit 
magister uidemus quem dam in nomine tao 
eicientem dae monia 
qui non sequitur nobiscum 
et prohibuimus eum. ad ille respon dens ait 
nolite prohibere.nemo est enim 
qui faciat uiruirtutem -in nomine meo 
et poterit. malel o qui de me 
(Fol. 318 a.) 


Cap. IX. 28— 39. 


295 


IS) 


[9] 


SR J 


eR ee — 
KAT MAPK 


Ο-- a — 


oc yap ovk εστιν καθ υμων ὕπερ ὕμων eon 


> 07 yap ay ποτισὴ ὕμασ 


ποτήριον ὕδατοσ εν τω ονοματι μον 
οτι χρυ ἐσται: αμην Acyw ὕμειν 


ort ov μὴ απολεσειτον μισθον avrov 


: καὶ oc αν σκανδαλιζη 


ενα των μεικρων τοντων * TOV πιστιν 


ἐχόντων καλον ἐστιν avro μαλλον 


— 


IX. 40 
41 


€t TEPLEKELTO μυλοσ OVLKOD - επὶ TOV τράχηλο αὑτοῦ 


και εἰσ τὴν θαλασσαν εβληθὴη 


᾿ καὶ eay oxavdadiln a v) xetp σου 


αἀποκοψον avry]v* καλον ἐστιν σοι 
κυλλον εεελθειν εἰσ τὴν ζωὴν 

7: B χειρασ exovra βληθηναι 

εἰσ τὴν γεενναν - oov ἐστιν TO πυρ 
το ac B'eorov- οπου οσκωληξαντων 
ov τελευτα. Kat τὸ πυρ ov a Devvre 
Kay οπουσ σου σκανδαλιζ ἡσε 
αποκοίον avrov 


καλον σοι ἐστιν χωλον ee Oe 


εἰσ τὴν ζωὴν αιωνιον 
5 τουσ .B- ποδασ exovra βληθηναι 
εἰσ τὴν yeevvay * εἰσ To πυρτοασβεστον 
oTov 0 σκωληξ αντων ov τελευτα 
Kat ro wup ov σβεννυτε 
kat οοφθαλμοσ σου i σκανδαλιζεισε 
exBade avrov 
καλον σοι ἐστιν μονοφθαλμον εισελθειν 


— 
eur την βασιλειαν του θν 


43 


45 


46 


47 


9: B: οφθαλμου o exovra απελθειν εἰσ my γεεννα 


: ὁποῦ οσκωλῆσ αντων ov τελευτα 


και ro rvp ov σβεννυτε 


saga yap θυσια-αλι αλισθησεται 
(Fol. 318 6.) 


48 


jmp 
[9j 
[ΕΞ 
z 
d 


qui enim non est aduersus uos - pro uobis est 


quisquis enim potum dederit uobis 
calicem aquae in nomine meo 
quia xpi estis. amen dico uobis 
quia non perdet mercedem suam 
quisquis scandalizauerit 
unum ex his pusillis fidem 
habentium bonum illi magis 
8i circum daretur mola collo eius 
et in mare mitteretur 
et si scandalizat te manus tua 
abscide illam . bonum est tibi 
deuilem introire in uitam 
quam duas manus habentem mitti in 
gehennam - ubi est ignis 
in extinguibilis. ubi mermis eorum 
non morietur.et ignis non extinguetur 
et gi pes tuus scandalizat te 
abscide ill um 

bonum est tibi clodum introire 
in uitam aeternam 
quam duo pedes habentem mitti in 

) gehennam . in ignem extinguibilem 
ubi uermis eorum non morietur 
et ignis non extinguitur 

quo d si oculus tuus scandalizat te 
exime illum 
bonum est tibi cum uno *oculo introire 


. u? 
in regnum di 


quam duos. oculos habentem ire in gehennam 


ubi uermis eorum non morietur 

et ignis non extinguitur 

omne enim sacrificium . sali salietur 
(Fol. 319a.) 


Cap. IX. 40—49. 


Ss — 
KAT MAPKON 
—- — — 
tom, 
ρβ : καλὸν ro ἀλασ'. eay δε To αλασ 
ayaAoy γενήσεται. εν τινι αὐτὸ αρτυσεται 
€xere ev εαυτοισ aÀa και εἰρηνενεται 


: ἐν αλλήλοισ : και exeiÜev αστασ 


faf 


€pxeraa εἰσ ra, opta THO Ἰουδαιασ 

wepay Tov iopSavou - και συνέρχεται 
παλιν 0 oxÀoc προσ avrov wo ew & 
kat παλιν εδιδασκεν avrova kat ἐτηρωτων 
avrov εἰ εξεστιν ανδρι 

yovaixa ἀπολυσαι. πειραζοντεσ avroy 
οδεαποκριθεισ evrey avrour 

τι ὕμειν ετειλατο pw ὕσησ οι δεειπαν 
ἐπέτρεψεν puvono βιβλιον αποστασιου 
δουναι γραψαι kat απολυσαι 

και ἀαποκριθεισ o we eurev 

προσ τὴν σκληροκαρδιαν ὕμων 

ἐγραψεν po ὕσησ τὴν ἐντολὴν ταυτὴν 
απὸ δεαρχῆσ ἀαρσεν και θηλυν 

ἐποιῆσεν o Oo και cure 


evexev rovrov καταλειψει avÜpesos 


TOV πατερα Kat THY μητερα «avrov 
kat προσκολληθήσεται. προσ τὴν γυναικα 
αὐτου Kat ἐσονται OL .B- €w σαρκα μεαν 
WOTE οὐκετι εἰσιν B aAAa μια σαρξ 

--- 
οοθσ εζευξεν -ανθρωποσ μὴ χωριζετω 


> καὶ εἰεισ τιν οἰκίαν ra)uy - ot μαθηται αὐτοῦ 


f$. 


wept TOV αὐτου Àoyov 


> ἐπηρωτησαν avrov * kat Neyer αυτοισ' 
07 αν απολυσὴ THY γυναικα avrov 


ΓΞῚ 


καὶ aXX yy γαμησὴη μοιχαται ἐπ αὐτὴν 
και «ay γυνὴ εἐξελθὴ απο του ανδροσ 


καὶ αλλον γαμησήη- μοιχαται 
pr : και προσεφερον avro παιδια 
(Fol. 319 5.) 


10 


11 


12 


13 


SEC MARCUM 
—— — = 
bonum est sal quod si sal 
insulsum fuerit-in quo illud con dietur 
habete in uobis salem - et pacem habete 
inter uos. et inde exurgens 
uenit in fines iudaeae 
ultra iordanen - et conuenit iterum 
turba ad eum sicut consuerat 
et iterum docebat eos. et interrogabant 
illum si licet uiro 
uxorem dimittere temptantes eum 
ad ille respondens dixit eis 
quid uobis praecepit moyses qui dixerunt 
permisit moyses- libellum repudii 
dare scriptum et dimittere 
et respondens ihs ait 
&d duritiam cor dis uestri 
scripsit moyses - praeceptum istut 
ab initio autem . masculum et feminam 
fecit ds et dixit 
propter hoc relinquet homo 
patrem et matrem suam 
et adherebit ad uxorem suam 
et erunt duo in carne una 
it ἃ quae non sunt duo. sed una caro 
quo d ergo ds coniunxit. homo non deiungat 
et in domum iterum. discipuli eius 
de eodem sermonem 
interrogauerunt eum dixit illis 
quicumque dimiserit uxorem suam 
et aliam duxerit. moechatur super eam 
et si mulier exiet & uiro 
et alium duxerit. moechatur 
et adferunt ill i pueros 
(Fol. 320 a.) 


Capp. IX. so—X. 13. 


38 


297° 


ς΄ amm 


298° 


[2j 


—- — 0 —  ὡ--ὖ 
KAT MAPK 


ἵνα αψηται avrov «οἱ Se pabyrat avrov 
ETETELMLWY TOLD προσφερουσιν 

Ld — 

ἴδων δε o na ἡγανακτησεν 

και εἰπεν avro, αφεται τα παιδαρια 
ἐρχέσθαι προσ je - και μη κωλνεται avra 


— 
τῶν yap τοιουτων ἐστιν -*j βασιλεια rov Ov 


ἀμὴν Aeyw ὕμειν oo av py δεξηται 


θυ 
τὴν βασιλειαν του. wo παιδιον 
OV μὴ εἰσ αὐτὴν εἰσελευσεται 
Kat προσκαλεσαμενοσ avra 
ετιθει rao χειρασ ez avra. 


kat evdoye Lavra 


: Kat ἐκπορενομενοῦ avrov εἰσ οδον 


προσδραμων εἰσ. και γονυπετων avroy 
"pora avrov λεγων..διδασκαλε αγαθε 


τι ποιήσω ἵνα ζωὴν αἰωνιον κληρονομήσω 


am, 
O δειησ εἰπεν avro τι με λεγεισ ayaborv 


ουδεισ αγαθοσ - «t μὴ μονοσ εἰσ ὃσ 

Tac ἐντολασ οιδασ 

μη μοιχευσὴσ μὴ πορνευσησ- μὴ κλεψὴσ 
μὴ ψευδομαρτυρήσεισ 

μὴ αποστερήσεισ 

τειμα TOV πατερα και τὴν μητερα 

o δεαποκριθεισ εἰπεν avro 


διδασκαλεπαντα ravra εφυλαξα 
€K νεοτήτοσ μου 


— —- Y 
pn: O Seino εβλεψασ avro "ηγαπησεν avrov 


sj 


και ELITEV AUTW - EV σοι ὕστερει 
ὕπαγε oca, ἐχεισ πωλῆσον 
και δοσ τοισ TTOXOUT 


και ἐξεισ θησαυρον ev ovpavo 


: καὶ δευρο ἀκολούθει μοι : ὃ δε εστυγνασεν 


ἐπὶ τουτω Tw λογω. Kat ἀπῆλθεν λυπουμενοσ, 


(Fol. 320 5.) 


x. 


8 


21 


SEC MARCUM 
—— — 
ut tangeret eos discipuli autem eius 
comminabantur offerentibus 
uidens autem 188 indigne tulit 
et ait illis sinite pueros 
᾿ uenire ad me et ne prohi 608 
talium est enim regnum di 
amen dico uobis.quisque non recep it 
regnum di uelut puer 
non intrauit in illum 
et conuocans eos 


inponebat manus super illos 


. et bene dicebat eos 


et cum egressus esset ipse in uia 
adcurrit unus ‘et adgeniculans 
. rogabat eum dicens magister bone 
quid faciam ut uitam aeternam percipiam 
ihs autem dixit illi quid me dicis bonum 
nemo bonus nisi solus unus da 
praecepta nosti 
neadulteres ne occidas - ne fureris 
ne falsum testimonium dicas 


ne fraudem fe ceris 


' honora patrem et matrem 


ad ille respondens ait illi 


: magister omnia haec obseruabi 


‘ad iuuentute mea 
ihs autem aspiciens eum dilexit eum 
' et dixit illi unum tibi deest 

uade quaecumquae habes uende 

et da pauperibus 

et habebis thensaurum in caelo 

et ueni sequere me .ad ille contristatus 
' in hoc uerbo. et abiit tristia 

(Fol. 321 a.) 


Cap. X. 713—223. 


ff 


SSS 


‘KAT MAPK 
SaaS 
ἣν yop €xuv πολλα χρήματα 
καὶ περιβλεψαμενοσ o qe «λέγει TOUT. μαθηταισ 
αντου -πωσ δυσκολωσ οἱ τα χρηματα 
exovrec εἰσ τὴν βασιλειαν του θυ 
εἰσελευσοντ -T εἰον καμηλοσ 
δια τρυμαλιδοσ ραφιδοσ᾽ διελευσεται 
ἢ πλουσιοσ eur τὴν βασιλειαν τον bv 
ot δε μαθηται avrov : 


εθανβουντο emt row Xoyow avrov 
O de ine παλιν .αποκριθεισ Xeyet avrour 


τεκνα πωσ Ova koXov cow 

τουσ πεποιθοτασ emt Tow χρήμασιν 
ew τὴν βασιλειαν του θυ εἰσελθειν 

οι δε περισσωσ εξεπλησσοντο Xeyovrea- 
προσ «avrovg - και τισ δυναται σωθηναι 
ἐνβλεψασ δε αυτοισ o ine Aeyet 

παρα ανθρωποισ rovro αδυνατον «ori 
παρα Se ro Bo Suvarov 

και ἤρξατο πετροσ Xeyecy avro 

ed ov peur αφηκαμεν Tavra 


Kat ἠκολουθηκαμεν σοι. αποκριθεισ Se o ino 


: ἀμὴν Aeyo ὕμειν ovder ἐστιν o0 αφηκεν 
ἢ abe dove ἡ ἀαδελφασ ἡ μητερα 
ἢ τέκνα ἡ αἀγρουσ ἐνεκεν ἐμου 
ἢ ἕνεκα rov εναγγελιον. οσ ay μὴ Aa By 
εκατονταπλασίονα εν τω Katpw τουτω 
oo δεαφηκεν αἰκειαν και αδελῴφασ 
και αδελῴφουσ και μητερα και τεκνα και a'ypove 
μετα διωγμου. εν τω awe To ἐρχομένω 
ζωὴν αἰωνιον λήμψεται 
πολλοι Se ἐσονται πρωτοι ἐσχατοι 
και ἐσχατοι πρωτοι 
: σαν δε ev τὴ οδω αναβαινοντεσ 
(Fol. 321 δ.) 


23 


32 


— 


SEC MARCUM 299 


' erat enim habens multas pecunias. 


et cireumspiciens iba. ait discipulis suis 
quam difficile qui pecunias habent 

in regnum di 

introibunt. facilius est camellum 

per foramen acus transire 

quam diues in regnum di 

discipuli autem eius 


pauebant in uerbis eius 


Et ibs rursus respondens ait illis 


fili quam difficile est 

confidentes in pecunias 

in regnum di introire 

magis autem admirabantur dicentes 

ad semetipsos - et quis poterit saluus fieri 
intuens autem eos ihs ait 

aput homines hoc ‘inpossibile est 

aput dm uero possibile 

et coipit petrus dicere ei 

ecce nos missum fecimus omnia 

et secuti sumus te respondens autem ihs 
amen dico uobis nemo est qui reliquerit 
aut fratres aut sorores- aut ma'rem 

&ut filios aut agros propter me 

aut propter euangelium ‘qui non accipiet 
centiens tantum: nunc in hoc tempore 
qui autem reliquerit domum et sorores 
et fratres. et matrem et filios et agros 
cum persecutionibus. in aeuo uent uro 
uitam aeternam accipiet 

multi autem erunt primi nouissimi 


et nouissimi primi 


"Erant autem in uiam ascendentes 


(Fol. 322 6.) 


Cap. X. 233—321. 


300 


ΓΕ, 


KAT ^ MAPKON 

— —— — 
εἰσ ἱεροσολυμα. Kat ἣν προσαγων αὐτουσοησ — X. 
και εθαμβουντο. καὶ παραλαβὼν παλιν τουσ. iB 
ηρξατο αντοισ λεγειν τα μελλοντα avro 
σνυνβαινειν .οτι edov αναβαινομεν 33 
εἰσ ειεροσολυμα 
και οὕιοσ του ανθρωπου παραδοθησετι. 
τοισ ἀρχειερευσιν Kat γραμματευσιν 
kat κατακρινουσιν avrov θανατον 
καὶ παραδωσουσιν αὐτὸν 
τοισ εθνεσιν και ενπεξουσιν avro 34 
καὶ ενπτυξουσιν αντω 


και μετα τρισ ἡμερασ αναστήσεται 


: kat προσπορενοντε avro Ἰακωβοσ 35 


και toayyqo «οι vox ζεβεδαιου 


καὶ λεγουσιν avro διδασκαλε 
θελομεν o av σε epwrnowper 
ποιησὴσ ἡμεῖν 
O δελεγει avrow ποιήσω 9 μειν 36 
και εἶπαν avro Soo new 37 


tva. εἰσ εκ δεξιων σον και εἰσ εξ εὐωνυμων 
καθισωμεν ev τὴ δοξὴ σον 

Ο de no αποκριθεισ ειπεν avrowr 38 
ουκ οιἰδατετει αιτισθε. δυνασθαι rev To ποτηριο 
o €yo πεινω ἢ τὸ βαπτισμα 
o eyw βαπτιζομαι βαπτισθηναι 
ot δεειπαν δυναμεθα.ο δὲ - εἰπεν avrow 39 
TO μεν ποτήριον - O €y€ Tre .vo 'πειεσθαι 
και ro βαπτισμα 
o eyo βαπτιζομαι βαπτισθηεσθαι 
qo δε καθισε εκ δεξιων μον - ἡ εξ εὐωνυμων 40 
ovK ἐστιν ἐμον δουναι - aÀXowr ητοιμαθαι 


: ἀκουσαντεσ ot λοιποι" ε ἤρξαντο ἀγανακτεν 41 


περι Tov take ov και ἴωαννου 


(Fol. 3226.) 


SEC ' MARC 
——— εἰς 
hierosolyma et erat praecedens ibs 

et pauebant. et adsumpsit iterum : xii 
coepit illis dicere quae ei essent 
uentura ‘quia ecce ascendimus 

in hierosolyma 

et filius hominis tradetur 

summis sacerdotibus et scribis 

et damnabunt eum morte 

et tradent eum 

gentibus et inludent eum 

et conspuent eum 

et post tres dies resurget 

et accesserunt ad illum iacobus 

et iohannes. fili zebedei 

et dicunt illi magister 

uolumus ut quod cumque petieremus te 


praestes nobis 


ad ill e dixit illis praestabo uobis 


et dixerunt ei da nobia 
ut unus ad dexteram tuam * et unus ad sinistra 


sedeamus in gloria tua 


e 
Et ihs respondens ait illis 


nescitis quid petatis potestis bibere calicem 
quem ego uiuiturus sum ‘aut baptismum 
quod ego baptizor baptizari 
ad illi dixerunt possumus. ihs autem dixit illis 
calicem quidem ‘quem ego bibero bibetis 
et baptisma 
quod ego baptizor baptizamini 
sedere autem ad dexteram uel ad sinistram 
non est meum dare. aliis paratum est 
et audientes ceteri . x coeperunt indignari 
de iacobo et iohanne 

(Fol. 323 a.) 


Cap. X. 31—41. 


πὰ v ὼς 
ΚΑΊ ΜΑΡΚ 


καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοσ αντουσ 0 ine X. 42 
Aeyet avrow - Dare ort οἱ δοκουντεσ 

ἄρχειν των eÜvov- xat karakvpueveovsw 

GvTOY - καὶ οἱ μεγαλοι avrov 

κατεξονσιαζουσιν avrov 

OVX OUTWO ἐστιν εν ὕμειν 43 
αλλ oc ay θελη μεγασ ev ὕμειν evar 


ἐστε ὕμων διακονοσ 


καὶ oc ay θελη ὕμων etvat Tporroo 44 


: ἐσται ὕμων δουλοσ : καὶ γαρ o tue TOU ανθρωπου 


ovx ἡλθεν διακονηθηναι.. aXXa διακονησαι 45 
και Sovvat τὴν ψυχὴν avrov 


: Avrpov ἀντι πολλων : καὶ ἐρχεται 46 


εἰσ Teptyw - kat ἐκπορενομενου avrov 
ἐκειθεν μετα των μαθητων avrov 
και oxXov ἵκανον - o ὕιοσ τιμεον 
βαριτειμιασ - τνυῴλοσ ἐκαθητο παρα τὴν οδον 
ἐπέτων : καὶ AKOVTAT OTL ine o ναζορηνοσ 47 
ἐστιν «ἤρξατο κραζειν και Aeyew 
ϑιοσ δαυειδ apy ἐλεησὸον με 
Kat ἐπετειμων avro πολλοι. ἵνα gana 43 
o δεπολλω μαλλον - expagey ϑιοσ Saved 
ἐλεησον με" kat στασ 0 ae 49 
eurev avrov φωνηθηναι 
ot e Neyovow τω Tv φλω 
θαρσει eyerpe φωνει oe 
o δε αποβαλων το ἵματιον avrov 50 
avarndnoac ἡλθεν προσ avrov 

και ἀποκριθεισ avro o ino eurey 51 
τι θελεισ ποιησω σοι. € rupAow eurey avro 
Ke ραββει iva αναβλεψω .ο de - evrevavro 52 
ὕπαγε ἡ πιστισ σον σεσωκεν σε 
και εὐθεωσ avefJAey εν 

(Fol. 323 δ.) 


SEC MARC 301 
quos cum aduocasset ihs 


ait illis. scitis quo d hi qui uidentur 
principari gentibus et dominantur 

eorum - et maiores eorum 

potestatem habent illorum 

nop ita est in uobis 

sed quicumque uoluerit maior inter uos esse 
erit uester minister 

et quicumque uoluerit uestrum primus esse - 
erit uester seruus nam et filius hominis 


non uenit ministrari sed ministrare 


et dare animam suam 
redeptionem pro multis. et uenit 
hiericho - et proficiscente eo 
inde cum discipulis suis 
et turba plurima. filius timeae 
baritimeas. caecus saedebat circa uiam 
mendicans: — Et cum audisset quia ihs nazorenus 
est. coepit clamare et dicere | 
fili dauid ihu miserere mihi i 
et conminabantur illi multi - ut taceret 
ad ille multo magis - clamabat fili dauit | 
miserere mei. etstansihs 
dixit illum uocari 
ill autem dixerunt caeco 
animaequior esto surge uocat te 
ille autem proiecto uestimento suo 
exiliens uenit ad eum 
Et respondens ill i ihs dixit 
qui d uis faciam tibi - caecus autem dixit ei 
dme rabbi ut uideam .ihs autem ait ill i 
uade fides tua te saluum fecit 
et confestim uidit 
(Fol. 324 a.) 


Car. X. 497—852. 


302 


SRS 


sas 


Sy — 
KAT MAPKON 
Sey — 
και ἠκολουθει avro ev Ty οδω x. 
και ore ἤγγιζεν εἰσ Ἱεροσολυμα XI. 1 
και εἰσ βηθανιαν poc: To οροσ των ελαιων 
— 

αποστελλει. B - rov μαθητων avrov 
και ELITEV αυτοισ ὕπαγετε ELT THY κωμὴν 2 
τὴν κατέναντι ὕμων᾽ Kat evÜeocr " 
εἰισπορενομενοι- evpyoreTat πωλον 
δεδεμενον - ε ον ουδεισ ανθρωπων 
καικαθηκεν λυσαντεσ' avrov και aya-yere 
και ay τισ ὕμειν εἰπη τι Àvere rov πωλον 3 


— 
€LTATE OTL o κα αὐτου xpeuv €xet 


καὶ «vÜva avrov αποστελλει παλιν woe 


: καὶ ἀαπελθοντεσ evpov πωλον δεδεμενον 4 


προσ τὴν θυραν e£o* ert του αμῴφοδον 
και λυουσιν avrov 
και τινεσ των EKEL €T T)KOTOV 5 
eXeyov avrow τι ποιειτε λνοντεσ Tov πωλον 
my, 

ot δε εἰπον καθωσ εἰρήκει avrouw o tho 6 
Kat αφηκαν avrovo 

— . 
και ἤγαγον Tov oXov προσ TOV tj» 7 
και επιβαλλουσιν avro. ra ἵματια avrov 
και καθειζει em avrov 
πολλοι Ó« ra. ἵματια avro 8 
ἐστρωνννον εἰσ τὴν οδον -αλλοι δε εστιβαδασ 
exomroy εκ των δενδρων 


καὶ ἐστρωνννον τὴν οδον 


: καὶ οἱ προσ αγοντεσ'. Kat οἱ ακολουθουντεσ 9 


ἐκραζον Aeyovrea - ευλογήμενοσ o ἐρχομενοσ 
io, . 


εν ovojg.a TL KU 


καὶ εὐλογημενὴ ἢ ἐρχομενὴ 10 
βασιλεια rov πατροσ ἡμων Saved 
oc'cayya ev Tour ὕψιστοισ 
: καὶ εἰσελθων εἰσ ἐροσολυμα ΕΙΣ 11 
(Fol. 324 6.) 


Carp. X. 52—-XI. rr. 


SEC MARCUM 
— 0 ÁÀ —Á 
et sequebatur eum in uia 


et cum adpropinquaret hierosolyma 

et in bethaniam ad montem oliueti 
mittit duos ex discipulis suis 

et ait illis ite in castellum 

qui est contra uos . et statim 
introeuntes inuenietis pullum 

ligatum super quem nemo hominum 
sedit soluite illum et adducite 

et si quis uobis dixerit. quid soluitis pullum 
dicite quia dmo necessarius eat 

et continuo illum dimittet .iterum hoc 
et abeuntes inuenerunt pullum alligatum 
ante ienuam foris in transitu 

et soluerunt eum 

et qui erant illie stantes 

dixerunt illis quid facitis soluentes pullum 
ad illi dixerunt sicut praeceperat illis ihs 
et permiserunt illos 

et adduxerunt pullum ad ihm 

et inponunt illi -uestimenta sua 

et sedebat super eum 

multi autem uestimenta sua 

sternebat in uia. alii autem frondes 
caedebant de arboribus 

et sternebat in uiam 

et qui praeibant.et qui sequebantur 
clamabant dicentes. benedictus qui uenit 
in nomine dmi et 

benedictum quod uenit 

regnum patris nostri dauid 

ossanna in excelsis 


et cum introisset in hierosolyma 
(Fol. 325 a.) 


3 


31 


KAT MAPKON 

— — X — 
και εἰσ TO ἵερον περιβλεψαμενοσ avra. 
οψειασ 299 ουσασ ὡρασ εξηλθεν 
εἰσ βηθανιαν μετα των. B. μαθητων 
καὶ τὴ eravptovov εξελθοντα aro βηθανιασ 
ἐπινασεν - και εἰδων απὸ μακροθεν 
συκην exovoay φνλλα ηλθεν ειδειν eay τι 
ἐστιν εν αὐτὴ Kot μῆδεν evpuv εἰ μη PvAAG 
ov yap NV ο καιροσ συκων 


αποκριθεισ eurev αὐτὴ 
μῆκετι eur τὸν αἰωνα 

ae 

efov μηδεισ xaprov φαγὴ 
Kat ἤκονον ot μαθηται avrov 


και εἰσελθων evo ἱἹεροσολυμα 


* καιοτεὴν €V τωΐἵερω 


ἡρξατο exBaAXew εκειθεν 

Tove πωλουντασ καὶ ayopafovrar 

ev Tw (epo καὶ rax τραπεζασ των κολλυβιστω 
καὶ rac καθεδρασ των πωλουντων 

TAT περιστασ Kat ουκ Nd Ley 

ἵνα Tur διενεγκὴ σκενοσ δια του tepov 
και εδιδασκεν λεγων avrour γεγραπται 
ο οἰκοσ μου οἰκοσ προσευχησ 
κληθησεται πασιν τοισ εθνεσιν 

ὕμεισ δε ἐποιήσατε αὐτὴν 

σπηλεον λήστων : και ἤκουσαν 

οἱ Gapxeuepeur και οἱ γραμματεισ 


εζητουν πωσ avrov απολεσωσιν 


εφοβουντο yap avrov 
ort πασ o oxAoc ἐξεπλησσετο 


: ἐπὶ τὴ bay avrov : και ore owe eyevero 


eferopevero ex THT πολεωσ 
και παραπορενομενοι TO πρωι 


‘Woy τὴν συκὴν εἐξηραμμενὴν 
(Fol. 325 5.) 


Cap. 


XI. 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


18 


19 


20 | 


SEC MARC 303 


et in templ um circumspex isset omnia 
cum uespera iam esset hora 

exiit in bethaniam cum. xii. discipulis 
et alia die cum exissent a bethania 
esuriit. et cum uidisset a longe ficum 
habente folia uenit uidere si quid esset 
in ea ‘et nihil inuenit praeter folia 

non enim erat tempus ficum 
respondens dixit ei 

iam non amplius in aeternum 

ex te quis quam fructum manducet 

et audiebant discipuli eius 

et intrauerunt in hierosolyma 

et cum esset in templum 

coepit eicere inde 

uendentes et ementes 

in templo et mensas. nummulariorum 
et cathe dras uentium 

columbas euertit - et non sinebat 

ut quisquam transferret uas. per templum 
et docebat dicens illis scriptum est 
domus mea domus orationis 

uocauitur omnibus gentibus 

uos autem fecis eam 

speluncam latronum et audierunt 
summi sacerdotes et scribae 


quaerebant quo mo do illum perderent 


timebant enim eum 


quoniam omnis turba admirabatur 

super doctrina eius. et cum uespere esset factu 
egrediebantur de ciuitate 

et cum transirent mane 

uiderunt ficum aridam factam 


(Fol. 326 a.) 


XI. 11—20. 


304 KAT MAPK SEC MARC 
«τς -- -ς ——— GS 
. ex piLov- και ayap.ymaÜ eu οπετροσ XI. 21 8 radicibus. et recordatus petrus 
Xeye avro ραββει -ἴδου ἡ συκη ἣν κατήηρασω ait illi rabbi - ecce arbor ficui maledixisti 
pa: efnpavOn : και αποκριθεισ o ino Aeyeravroe 22 aruit. et respondens ihs ait illis 
€t €xere TU TU TOV ὃν ἀμὴν λεγω ὕμειν 23 si habueritis fidem di- amen dico uobis 
OC ay εἰπὴ TO OPE TOVTO quicumque dixerit monti huic 
αρθητι και βληθητι εἰσ την θαλασσαν tollere et mittere in mare | 
και μὴ διακριθησ ev Tn καρδια avrov et non aesitauerit in corde suo 
αλλα Turrevo ro μελλον.ο ay eum sed crediderit futurum . quodcumque dixert 
pre: yerna eras avro * δια rovro Aeyo ὕμειν 24. erit illi propterea dico uobis 
avra ova προσευχεσθαι και ετεισθαι omnia quaecumque oratis et petitis 
wurreveras ort λήμψεσθαι. και eoraa ὕμειν credite qui accipietis et uenient uobis 
pre : KQLOTAY στήκεται pog evyop.evot 25 et cum stabitis ad orandum 
n αφιετε erret ἐχεται κατα TOT dimittite si quid habetis aduersum aliquem 
ἵνα καὶ o πατὴρ Ujp.ov - 0 Qv εν TOU. ουράνοισ ut et pater uester. qui est in caelis 
αφησει ὕμειν τα παραπτωματα dimittat uobis delicta uestra 
ec de ὕμεισ ovx αφιεται 26 si autem uos non dimiseritis 
ovde o πατὴρ ὕμων neque pater uester 
o ἐν ουρανοισ αφήσει ὕμειν qui est in caelis remittet uobis 
TO. παραπτωματα ὕμων delicta uestra 
ext: καὶ _pxeTat παλιν ew ἵἹεροσολυμα 27 et uenit iterum hierosolyma 
Kat εν TW Lepo περιπατουντοσ αὐτου et in templo deambulante eo 
€pXovrat προσ avrov accedunt ad eum 
οἱ αρχίερεισ και ot γραμματεισ summi sacerdotes et scribae 
καὶ ot peo Bvrepot rov Xaov. Kat Meyovew ovre 28 et seniores populi. et dicunt ei 
ev ποιὰ εἐξουσια ταυτα TTOLELO in qua potestate haec facis 
O de ine αποκριθεισ ειπεν avrour 19 ihs autem respondens dixit illis 
επερωτήσω pag Kayw interrogauo uos et ego 
eva Xoyov ἀποκριθητε μοι unum uerbum respondite mihi 
και €yo Aeyw ὕμειν et ego dico uobis 
ev ποια ἐξουσια Tavra. Tow in qua potestate haec facio 
το βαπτισμα το iwayvov 30 baptisma iohannis 
ef ovpavov nv ἡ εξ ανθρωπων de caelo erat an ex hominibus 
αποκριθητε μοι respondete mihi 
(Fol. 326 5.) ‘MA (Fol. 327 a.) 


Cap. XI. 20— 30. 


KAT MAPK 
——— uu 
και διελογιξοντο προσ eavrove XI. 31 
λεγοντεσ τι εἴπωμεν - eay εἴπωμεν ef οὐρανοῦ 
Aeyet υμειν - Sua rt ovy ovx επιστευσατε avro 
cay εἴπωμεν εξ ανθρωπων 32 
φοβουμεν rov λαον. παντεσ yap ἡδεισαν 
Toy ἴωαννὴν * ort αληθωσ προφητὴησ ἣν 
και αποκριθεντεσ λεγουσιν τω op OUK οιδαμα 33 
αποκριθεισ o ine Aeyet avro 
ovde eyo λεγω ὕμειν eur rouxy εξουσιαν 
p : ταῦτα wow * και npgaro avrow XI. 1 
ev παραβολαισ λεγειν 
ανπέλωνα εφυτευσεν ανθρωποσ 
και περιεθηκεν ῴραγμον 
και ὡρυξεν ὕποληνιον - Kat ὠκοδομησεν πύργο 
και ἐξεδοτο avroy- Tow γεωργοισ 
και απεδημησεν 
καὶ ἀπέστειλεν προσ τουσ᾽ γεωργουσ 2 
Tw ka4pxo δουλον -ἵνα απο TOV καρπου 
του αμπελωνοσ δωσουσιν avro 
καὶ λαβοντεσ avrov εδειραν 3 
και ἀπεστειλαν Katy ov προσ avrov 
kat παλιν απεστειλεν προσ avrovo 4 
αλλον δουλον - kat ἐκεινον εκεφαλαιωσαν 
Kat ἡτίιμησαν 
και αλλον απεστειλεν δουλον 5 
KGK€LVOV ἀπέκτειναν 
καὶ πολλουσ aAXovo - ove μεν δεροντεσ 
αλλουσ δε arroxrevvovrer 
Ext ovy eva exov ὕιον ayaryrov 6 
KQK€LVOV αἀπεστειλεν - ἐσχατον λεγὼν 
οτι TOV ULOV μον ἐντραπήσονται 
οι δεγεωργοι εἰπαν προσ εαυτουσ 7 


ovroc ἐστιν 0 κληρονομοσ 


(Fol. 325 5.) 


SEC MARCUM 
BSS —- 
et cogitabant inter semetipsos 
dicentes quid dicemus si dixerimus de caelo 
dicet nobis quare non crededistis ill i 
si dixerimus ex hominibus 
timemus plebem ‘omnes enim sciebant 
iohannen - quia uere profeta erat 
et respondentes dixerunt ad ihm nescimus 
respondens ihe ait illis 
nec ego dico uobis in qua potestate haec 
facio - et coepit illis 
in parauolis loqui 
uineam plantauit homo 
et circum dedit saepem 
et fodit lacum - et fabricauit turrem 
et tradidit eam colonis 
et peregre profectus cet 
et misitadcolonos - 
in tempore seruum.- ut de fructibus 
ex uinea darent ei 
et adpraehensum eum caeciderunt 
et dimiserunt uacuum ad eum 
et iterum misit ad illos 
alium seruum - et illum in capite 
uulnerauerunt et contumeliis adfecerunt 
Et alium misit seruum 
et illum occiderunt 
et plures alios . quosdam caeciderunt 
alios autem occiderunt 
adhuc et iam unum habens filium carissimum 
et illum misit. nouissimum dicens 
quia filium meum uerebuntur 
coloni autem dixerunt ad inuicem 
hic est haeres 
(Fol. 328 a.) 


Carp, XI. 31—XII. 7. 


39 


305 


306 


ΓΞ! 


J 


KAT MAPK 


Sevre αποκτεινωμεν avrov 

και ἡμῶν εσται ἢ κληρονομια 

και λαβοντεσ avrov απεκτειναν 

και εξεβαλον αντον e$o rov αμπελωνοσ 
TL OVV ποιήσει O KG. TOV αμπελωνοσ 
ελευσεται και απολεσει τουσ γεωργουσ 


και δωσει τον αμπελωνα αλλοισ 
ovde THY γραφὴν ταυτὴν aveyvore 


Aor ov απεδοκιμασαν οι οικοδομουντεσ' 
ovroc ἐγενηθη ew κεφαλὴν γωνειασ' 
παρα κυ eyevero αντη. καὶ εστιν θανμαστη 
εν οφθαλμοισ ἡμων 
Kat ἐζητουν avrov κρατῆσαι 
και εφοβηθησαν τον οχλον 
εἐγνωσαν yap ort προσ αντουσ 
τὴν παραβολὴν eurev - Kat αφεντεσ avrov 

:απηλθαν 'και αποστελλουσιν taa 
των φαρισαιων - καὶ των ἡρωδιανων 
ἵνα avrov παγιδευσωσιν λογω 
καὶ ἐπηρωτων avrov ot φαρισαιοι 
διδασκαλε οιδαμεν - orc αληθησ e 
και ov μελει σοι περι ουδενοσ 
ov yap BXereur εἰσ προσωπὸον ανθρωπων 
αλλα er αληθειασ τὴν odov του ϑυ διδασκεισ' 
eure ovy que. εἰ ἐξεστιν ἡμασ δουναι 
επικαιφαλαιον καισαρι 7 OU 

Οδε qe edwy avrov τὴν ὕποκρισιν 
εἰπεν avrou «τι pe repa eere 
φερετε pot δηναριον iva edw 
ot Se nveyxay και Neyer avrow 
TLVOO ἢ ELKWY αντη "και ἢ Ertypady 
εἰπαν avro καισαροσ 


— 
αποκριθεισ Se o tno eurey 


(Fol. 328 5.) 


I5 


17 


ARCUM 


—À 


SEC 
— ς- 
uenite occidamus eum 

et nostra erit hereditas 

et adpraehensum eum occiderunt 
et eiecerunt eum extra uineam 
quid ergo faciet dms uineae 
ueniet et perdet colonos 

et dauit uineam aliis 


nec scripturam hanc legistis 


lapidem quem reprobauerunt aedificantes 


hic factus est in caput anguli 

a dmo factus est iste “et est admirabiles 
in oculis nostris 

et quaerebant eum tenere 

et timuerunt turbam 

cognouerunt enim . quoniam ad eos 
parauol am dixit. et relicto eo abierunt 
et mittunt quosdam 

pharisaeorum et herodianis 

ut eum caperent uerbo 

et interrogabant pharisaei eum 
magister scimus quia uerax eg 

et non curas quemquem 

non enim aspicis in faciem hominum 
sed in ueritatem uiam dmi doces 

dic ergo nobis. si licet nobis dare 


tributum caesari aut non 


ihs autem uidens illorum uersutiam 


ait illis quid me temptatis 

adferte mihi denarium ut uideam 
ad illi attulerunt. et ait illis 

cuius est imago haec et superscriptio 


dicunt illi caesaris 


respondens autem ihs ait 


(Fol. 329a.) 


Cap. XII. 7—17. 


—— -— ὡ-ς 
KAT MAPK 
KS —- — 
arodore Ta TOV καισαροσ TO καισαρι 
— ο-ς 
και τὰ του Ov Tw θω. και εθαυμαζοντο em avrov 
καὶ ἐρχονται προσ avrov σαδδουκαιοι 


οἰτινεσ λεγουσιν -αναστασιν μὴ εἰναι 


καὶ ἐπήῆρωτων avroy λεγοντεσ' 
διδασκαλε-. μωῦσησ ἡμεῖν eypoajey 
eay rwog ἀαδελῴοσ αποθανὴ 
καὶ €X1] γνναικα και τεκνα μὴ αφη 
ἵνα λαβὴ o ἀαδελῴφοσ avrov τὴν γυναικα avrov 
καὶ ἐζξαναστησὴ σπερμα- τω αδελφω avrov 
ἤσαν ovy παρ μειν. ζει αδελῴφοι 
και o proc ἐλαβεν γυναικα. καὶ απεθανεν 
καὶ οὐκ αφηῆκεν σπερμα 
και o δευτεροσ ἐλαβεν αντην. και ameÜavey 
και ove αυτοσ ovk αφηκεν σπερμα 
καὶ ὡσαυτωσ ἐλαβον αντην οι. p 
καὶ ovK adyKay σπερμα 
Ka4 7) γυνὴ areBavev 
εν T αναστασὶ ovy 
τίνοσ avTwY εἐσται ἢ γυνὴ 
οι γαρ "2 €0 Xov αὐτὴν yvy aka. 
αποκριθεισ Seo ae €urey avrow 


ov δια Tovro πλανασθαι 


μὴ yewwoKovres rad γραφασ 

pede τὴν Óvrapay rov θυ oSare 

οταν yap εκ vexpoy αναστησουσιν 

ov γαμουσιν οὐδε γαμιζουσιν 

αλλα εἰσιν wo αγγελοι εν τοισ ουρανοισ 
περι δε τῶν vekpav - ort ἐγειρονται 

ovx ανεγνωται "εν Ty βυβλω ibo eor 


homey 
ext tno Batov- wo evrey avro o θσ Xeyov 


ἐγὼ 60 αβρααμ. καὶ Oo ἴσακ + και Oo Ἰακωβ᾽ 


— 
ovx εστιν Oo νεκρων αλλα ζωντων 


(Fol. 329 5.) 


XIL 


18 


19 


20 


21 


23 


24. 


25 


27 


reddite quae sunt caesaris caesari 

et quae sunt dei do-et mirabantur super eum 
et ueniunt ad eum sadducaei 

qui dicunt. resurrectionem non esse 

et interrogabant eum dicentes 

magister moyses nobis scripsit 

ut 81 cuius frater decesserit 

et habuerit uxorem et filios non reliquerit 
ut accipiat frater eius. uxorem eius 


et resuscitet semen fratri suo 


fuerunt ergo aput nos. septem fratres 


et primus accepit uxorem ‘et mortuus est 
et non reliquid semen 

et secundus accepit eam et mortuus est 
et nec hic reliquid semen 

et similiter acceperunt eam uii. 

et non reliquerunt semen 

et mul ier mort ua est 

in resurrectione ergo 

cuius illorum erit uxor 


uli. enim habuerunt eam uxorem 


respondens autem ihe ait illis 


non ideo erratis 

non intellegentes scripturas 

neque uirtutem di scitis 

cum enim & mort uis. resurrexerint 
non nubunt neque nubuntur 


sed erunt sicut angeli in caelis 


de mort uis autem ‘quo d resurgant 


non legistis in libro moysi 


. Ld . = . 
. inrubum ‘quo modo dixerit ill i ds dicens 


— =, —. 
ego ds abraham ‘et ds isac- et ds iacob 
non est ds mortuorum -sed uiuorum 


(Fol. 3304.) 


Cap. XII. 17—27. 


307 


$08 


I 


4 


ΓΞ! 


— ---- eS — 
KAT MAPKON 


ὕμεισ ovy πολυ πλανασθαι 


: και προσελθὼν εἰσ των γραμματεων 


akovcag avro συνζητουντων 
και ειἰδων ort καλωσ avrouw απεκριθη 
exnpurnoey avrov λεγων διδασκαλε 
ποια ἐστιν ἐντολὴ por 

— 
αποκριθεισ Seo ino eurev avro 
παντων πρωτη - akovt io TPAanA 
Ss --ῳ 


— 
kc οθσ ἡμων Ko εἰσ ἐστιν 


a, — 
και αγαπησεισ Ky Toy θν σου 


XII. 


28 


29 


30 


mo 
ef ολησ καρδιασ σον. και εξ ολησ THE ψνχησ σον 


καὶ εξ ολησ THO ἴσχνοσ σον 

Gvr1) πρωτὴ evroÀn 

Sevrepa δεομοια ravry 

αγαπησεισ TOV πλησιον σου wo σεαυτὸν 


μειζων τουτων evroAn αλλὴ ovx ἐστιν 


. Και €UT€V αὐτω O Ypappateve 


καλωσ eurea διδασκαλε. em αληθειασ 
ort εἰσ ἐστιν o OG και ovk ἐστιν πλὴν avrov 
και TO αγαπαν αντον εξ ολησ THO καρδιασ 
και εξ ολησ tho δυναμεωσ 
και εξ ολησ THO ψυχησ avrov 
και TO ayaTray τον πλήσιον Wo g'eavroy 
πλειον ἐστιν παντων των ολοκαυτωματω 
και θυσιων 
— 

και ο tno ειδων ort νουνεχωσ απεκριθη 

εἰπεν αὐτω" ov μακραν εἰ 


απὸ Tha βασιλειασ του ὃν 


: καὶ οὐδεισ ἐτολμα avroy ἐπερωτησε 


—, 
Kat αποκριθεισ o ine 


: διδάσκων : ἕν τω tepw εἰπεν 


πωσ λεγουσιν οἱ γραμματεισ 


v 
oreo xpo iio Saved ἐστιν 


(Fol. 330 5.) 


31 


32 


33 


35 


SEC MARC 
SOS 

uos ergo multum erratis 

et accessit unus de scribis 

qui audierat illos conquerentes 

et uidens quoniam bene illis respondit 
interrogabat eum dicens magister 

quod est praeceptum primum 
respondens autem ihs dixit illi 

omnium primum - audi istrahel 

dms da noster dms unus est 

et diligis dmn dm tuum 

ex toto corde tuo. et ex tota anima tua 
et ex tota uirtute tua 

hoc est primum praeceptum 

secundum autem simile illi 

diligis proximum tuum sicut te ipsum 
maius horum praeceptorum aliud non est 
et ait illi scriba 

bene dixisti magister in ueritate 

quo d unus sit 48. et non est praeter ill um 
et diligere illum ex toto corde 

et ex tota uirtute 

et ex tota anima tua 

et diligere proximum ‘tamquam teipsum 
maius est omnibus ol o cautomata 


et sacrificiis 


Et ihs cum uidisset quod sapienter respondisset 


dixit illi.non es longe 

a regno di 

et nemo iam audebat eum interrogare 
et respondens ihs 

docens in templo dixit 

quomodo dicunt scribae 


quia xps filius dauid est 


(Fol. 331 a.) 


Cap. XII. 27—35. 


[ΣΙ 


— — ey — 
KAT MAPKON 


—À 0 . — 


— 
καὶ ovrog Saved eurey ey To πνι τωαγίω XII. 36 


Aeyet KG Tw Kw μον. καθου ex δεξιων prov 
«og θωσω Tove ἐκχθουσ σον 

ὕποκατω των ποδων σου 

avroc dav ed λεγει avroy κν 

και ποθεν ἐστιν ὕιοσ avrov - καὶ πολυσ οχλοσ 


καὶ ἡδεωσ αὐτου ἤκουεν 


: οδεδιδασκων apa. * ἔλεγεν avrow 


BXerere aso rov γραμματαιων 

καὶ TOV τελωνων εν στολαισ περιπατεῖν 
και ασπασμουσ ἐν Taur ἀγοραισ ποιεισθαι 
καὶ mpwroxabedpiac - ev aur συναγωγαισ 


Kat πρωτοκλισίιασ ev Tour δειπνοισ 


: ot κατεσθιουσιν οικειασ χήρων 


καὶ ορφανων -προφασει μακρα 
προσευχόμενοι. ovrot λήμψονται 
περισσοτερον κριμα 


και κατέναντι Tov γαζοφυλακιου 


καθεζομενοσ o ino - Bewper rue o οχλοσ' 
εβαλλον πολλα. eAÜovaa Se apa χηρα 
εβαλεν λεπτα $vo o ἐστιν κοδραντησ 


και προσκαλεσαμενοσ Trove μαθητασ avrov 


εἰπεν αυτοισ᾽ αμην λεγω ὕμειν 

οτι ἢ χήρα ἡ πτωχή αὐτὴ 

πλεῖον παντων εβαλεν" των βαλλοντων 
εἰσ ro ξβαζοφυλακιον - rayreo yap οντοι 
εκ TOV περισσενυοντοσ αντοισ eBadov 
avr δε ex rgo ὕστερησεωσ αὐυτὴσ 
παντα ova euxev εβαλεν 


oXov τον βιον αυτησ 


> καὶ ἐεἐκπορενομενοῦ GUTOV EK του ἵερον 


Àeyet avro εἰσ ex των μαθητῶν avrov 
διδασκαλε ede ποδαποι MÓ ox 
(Fol. 331 5.) 


37 


38 


39 


40 


41 


43 


44 


XIII. 1 


SEC MARC 
— — — = 

et ipse dauid in spo sancto 

e v = 

dixit dms dino meo.sede ad dexteram meam 

donec ponam inimicos tuos 

scamillum pedum tuorum 

ipse dauid dicit eum dmn 

et unde est filius eius. et multa turba 

et libenter eum audiebat 

et ille do cens dicebat eis 


uidete ab scribis 


- et qui uolunt in stolis ambulare 


et salutationes in foro facitis 

et primas cathedras in synagogis 
et primos cubitos in conuiuiis 
qui deuorant domos uiduarum 
et pupillorum .sub obtentu 
orantes. isti accipient 


prolixius iudicium 


et contra gazophylacium 


sedens ihs aspiciebat quo mo do turbae 
mitterent aes. cum uenisset autem unas uidua 


et misit aera duo quod est quadrans 


Et conuocans discipulos suos 


ait ill is amen dico uobis 

quoniam uidua aegena haec 

plus omnibus misit mittentibus 

in gozophylacio- omnes enim hii 

ex eo quod abundat illis miserunt 

haec uero de penuria sua 

omnia qua habuit misit 

totum uictum suum 

et procedente eo de templo 

ait illi unus ex discipulis suis 

magister. aspice qual is lapides 
(Fol. 332 a.) 


Carr. XII. 36—XTII. 1. 


909 


910 


ff 


— πὶ v — 
KAT MAPK 


και ποδαπαι οἰκοδομαι του Cepov 


v 
και αποκριθεισ eurev avrowr o ine 


BXerere ταντασ τασ peyadac οἰκοδομασ 
αμὴν λεγω ὕμειν . 

ort ov μὴ αφεθη woe λιθοσ 

ἐπι λιθω oc ov μη καταλυθη 

και δια τριων ἡμερων 

aÀXoc αναστήσεται ayev χειρων 


: καὶ καθημένου avrov εἰσ ro οροσ των ἐλαιων 


κατέναντι του ἵερου 


ἐπήρωτων avrov κατειδιαν οπετροσ 


Kat taxwBoo και ωαννησ - καὶ ανδρεασ' 


εἰπὸν ἡμειν WOTE TAVTA εσται. καὶτι τὸ σημῶ 


οταν μελλει ravra ταντα. συντελεισθαι 


— 
Kat αποκριθεισ o tno ELEY αὐτοισ 


: βλεπετε μη reo ὕμασ πλανήσει 


πολλοι yap ελευσονταῖ ert Tw ονοματι pov 
λεγοντεσ eyo eui και πολλου πλανησουσιν 
oray δεακουσητε πολεμουσ' 

και ακοασ πολέμων μη θορυβεισθαι 

Seu yap ενεσθαι aXXa. ουπω το τελοσ 
ἐγερθησεται yap εθνοσ em εθνοσ 

και βασιλεια er ι βασιλειαν 

ἐσονται σεισμοι κατα τοπουσ και λειμοι 
ἀρχῇ ὡδεινων ravra 

«ra, ὕμασ avrovg παραδωσουσιν 

εἰσ συνεδρια και εἰσ συναγωγασ δαρησεσθαι 
και ἐπι ἤγεμον wy και βασιλεων 


σταθησεσθαι ενεκεν € μου 


: εἰσ μαρτυριον avrour : και eur avra. εθνὴ 


πρωτον Set κηρυχθηναι ro ἐεναγγελιον 


«v πασιτοισ εθνεσιν 


: Kat οταν αγωσιν ὕμασ παραδιδοντεσ 


(Fol. 332 δ.) 


XIII. 


et quales structurae templi 


Et respondens dixit illis ihs 


uidete has magnas structuras 

amen dico uobis 

quia non relinquetur hic lapis 

super lapidem qui non destruatur 

et post tertium diem 

aliut resuscite tur sine manibus 

et sedente eo in monte oliueti 

contra templum 

interrogabant eum seorsum petrus 

et iacobus et iohannes et andreas 

dic nobis quando haec erunt. et quod signum 
cum omnia haec :consummabuntur 

et respondens ihs ait illis 

uidete ne quis uos seducat 

multi enim uenient in nomine meo 
dicentes ego sum et multos seducent 
cum autem audieritis bella 

et opiniones bellorum ne timueritis 
oportet enim fieri sed nondum est finis 


insurget enim gens contra gentem 


‘et regnum contra regnum 


erunt terre mota per loca et famis 

initium dolorum haec 

deinde uos ipsos tradent 

in conciliis et in synagogis uapulabitis 

et ante praesides et reges 

stabitis propter me 

in testimonium illis. et in omnes gentes 

primum autem oportet praedicari eusngeliu 

in omnibus gentibus 

et cum produxerint uos tradentes 
(Fol. 333 a.) 


e CAP. XIII. 1—11. 


KAT MAPKON 
—— ς-, — 
μὴ προμεριμνατετι AaAnonre 
αλλα o ay δοθη ὕμειν ev εκεινη τὴ wpa 
avro λαλειτε- ov yap ἐστε μεισ 
οἱ λαλουντεσ αλλα To πνὰ το aytov 
καὶ παραδωσει aded hoo abe φον εἰσ θανατο 
καὶ πατὴρ T€KVOV 
και επταναστήσονται τεκνα ἐπὶ γονεισ 
και θανατωσουσιν avrove 
καὶ ever Gat μεισουμενοι 
ὕπο ravroy δια τὸ ovopa μου 
o δε ὕπομεινασ εἰσ τελοσ 
ovroc σωθήσεται 
pug : oray δε εἰδητε ro βδελυγμα 
B THO epujuxreog exrynKog οπου οὐ δι 
0 αναγεινωσκων VOEUTO TU αναγεινωσκει 


: TOT€ Ot ἐν TH ιουδαια φευγετωσαν 


^5 
Σ 


f 


εἰσ τα Opn Kat o ext Tov δωματοσ 
py καταβατω ew τὴν oweuay 
μῆδε εἰσελθατω αραι τι. €x THO οικιασ αὐτου 
καὶ 0 εἰσ TOY αγρον μὴ επιστρεψετω οπισω 
αραετο ἵματειον avTov 
ρμὸ: Οναιταῖσ ev γαστρι ἐχουσαισ 
Kat ταῖσ ὁμεναισ 
εν ἐκειναισ ταισ ἡμέεραισ 
pue : και προσευχεσθαι 
ἵνα μὴ χειμωνοσ γενωνται 
pue : evovrat yap αιμεραι exervat θλειψεισ 
B Ot. οὐκ ἐγένοντο TOUXUTOA 
aT αρχὴσ κτισεωσ ewe TOV νυν 
ovde μη yevovrat 
ppt : καὶ €t μὴ κσ εκολοβωσεν tac ἡμερασ 
n δια rove exXexrove avrov 


ovx ay εἐσωθη aca caps 
(Fol. 333 5.) 


XIII. 


12 


SEC MARCUM 311 
— — SY — 
nolite cogitare quid loquamini 


sed quod datum uobis fuerit in illa hora 
hoc lo quimini - non enim eritis uos 
loquentes sed sps sanctus 

et tradet frater fratrem in mortem 

et pater filium 

et insurgent filii in parentes 

et morti adficient eos 

et erit is odio 

ab omnibus propter nomen meum 

qui autem sustinuerit in finem 

hic saluus erit 

cum autem uideritis abominationem 
desolationis stantem ubi non debet 
qui legit intellegat quod legit 

tunc qui in iudaea sunt fugiant 

in montem et qui super tectum 

ne descendat in domum 

nec introeat tollere qui d de domo sua 
et qui in agro non reuertatur retro 


tollere tunicam suam 


Uae autem praegnantibus 


et nutrientibus 


: in illis diebus 


et orate 
ut non hieme ueniant 
erunt enim diebus illis. tribulationes 
quales non fuerunt tales 
ab init io creat urae. usque modo 
neque erunt post haec 
et nisi dms breuiasset dies 
propter electos suos 


non fieret salua ulla caro 
(Fol. 334 a.) 


Car. XIII. 11—20. s 


312 


αλλα δια rove exXexrova- ovo εξελεξατο 


VÀ ee 
pry : ἐκολοβωσεν rac nuepac : και τοτε ay TL 
— 


ὕμειν ev iov woe o χρσ 7 εἰδε εκει 


μη πιστευετε 


: ἐγερθησονται yap Ψψευδοπροφηται 


και ποιήσουσιν σήμεια καὶ τερατα προσ TO 
αποπλαναν εἰ Suvatov rove ἐκλεκτουσ 
ὕμεισ δε βλεπετε 

ἴδου mpoeipyxa ὕμειν παντα 

αλλα εν εκειναισ Taur ἡμεραισ 

μετα την θλειψειν εκεινην 

o ἤλιοσ σκοτισθησεται 

Ka4 7) σεληνὴ ov δωσει To φεγγοσ avrqa 
καὶ οἱ αστεραισ Ot εκ τον ουρανου 

ἐσονται πειπτοντεσ - καὶ at δυναμισ 


τῶν ουρανων σαλευθησονται 


: Kat TOTE οψονται TOV Utoy του ανθρωπου 


ἐρχομενον erc rov γεφελων 

μετα Suvapewo πολλησ και δοξησ 

Kat Tore ἀποστελεῖ τουσ ἀγγελουσ' 

και επισυναξει τουσ εκλεκτουσ 

ex των" δ. ἀνέμων 

GT ἀκρων γὴσ εωσ axpov ovpayov 

απὸ Se Tae σνυκησ μαθεται τὴν παραβολὴν 

oray 7901 o κλαδοσ avro -απαλοσ γενῆται 

και exun ra φυλλα ev avry- γεινωσκεται 

ort ἤδη εγγνσ το θεροσ ἐστιν 

οντωσ και ὕμεισ orav eure 

παντα ταντα γεινομενα 

γεινωσκεται ort ἐεγγυσ ἐστιν emt θυραισ 
Αμην Xeyo ὕμειν 

ort ον μη Taper ἡ γενεα avr 


εωὡσ OU TTG y TO. Tavra γένηται 


(Fol. 334 δ.) 


. 
ΜΒ 


XIIL 


AT 


22 


23 


24 


26 


27 


28 


29 


10 


SEC MARCUM 
Sy -. — 


sed propter electos quos elegit 
breuiauit dies. et tunc si quis 

uobis dixerit ecce hic xps aut ecce ill ic 
nolite credere 

exsurgent enim pseudoprophetae 

et facient signa et prodigia ad se 
ducendos. si potest fieri etiam electos 
uos ergo uidete 

ecce praedixi uobis omnia 

sed in illis diebus 

post tribulationem illam 

sol contenebricauit 

et luna non dauit splendorem suum 
et stellae quae sunt de caelo 

erunt cadentes. et uirtutes 

caeles tium mouebuntur 

et tunc uidebunt filium hominis 
uenientem cum nubibus 

cum uirtute multa et gloria 

et tunc mittet angelos 

et congregauit electos 

& quattuor uentis 

a summum terrae usque ad summum caeloru. 
a ficu autem discite parabolam 

cum iam ramus eius tener fuerit 

et nata fuerint folia in illa . cognoscetis 
quod in proximo est aestas 

sic et uos cum uideritis 

omnia haec fieri 


scitote quod in proximo est in osteis 


amen dico uobis 


quoniam non transiet generatio haec 


donec haec omnia fiant 
(Fol. 355 a.) 


Ἵν Cap. XIII. 20— 30. 


Ry 


SBS SRS 


[3j 


j 


pys 
— 


3l 


SS i -ἰ — 
KAT MAPKON 
ey uy — 


ὁ ovpayor Kat ἢ yn παρελευσονται 
ot 8¢ Xoyot pov ov παρελθωσιν 


: wept Se Tyo ἡμέερασ εκεινὴσ 


καὶ T no wpac ovdeur οιδεν 


οὐδε ot αγγελοι ev τω ovpayw 
οὐδε o Utoc et μὴ o πατὴρ 


: βλεπεται ovy aypurvire 


ovK odare yap ποτε O καιροσ 


: ex αγθρωποσ ἀποδημων 


αφεισ τὴν οἰκειαν avrov 
και Sova τοισ δουλοισ avrov τὴν εξονσιαν 
ἐκαστω TO €yyov avrov 


καὶ Tw Üvpovp« ενετειλατο ἵνα γρηγορη 


> γρήγορειτε ovv ovx odore yap 
—, 


ποτε O κα THT οικειασ ἐρχεται 
οψεη μεσοννκτιου 

ἢ αλεκτοροφωνιου ἡ πρωι 

pm εξελθων εξεφνησ 

«vp ὕμασ καθευδοντασ 

eyo δε λεγω ὕμειν γρήγορειτε 


: ἣν de ro πασχα μετα. β΄. ἡμερασ 
: καὶ εζητουν οἱ ἀρχιερεισ 


Kat οἱ γραμματεισ 
TOO αὐτὸν κρατήσαντεσ καὶ 


αποκτεινωσιν 


XIII 31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 
XIV. 1 


Acyov yap μήποτε ev τὴ eopry ἐσται ÜopuBos — 2 


: TOV Aaov : καὶ ovrog: του την ev βηθανια 


εν τή OK ta σιμωνοσ του λεπρου 
κατακειμέενον αὐτου nev yvyn 

ἔχουσα ἀλαβαστρον μυρου 

xat θραυσασα τὸν αλαβαστρον 

κατέχεεν ἐπι τὴσ κεφαλὴσ avrov 

οἱ Se μαθηται avrov διεπονονντο και eXeyo 


(Fol. 335 5.) 


CaPr. XIII 


3 


4 


SEC MAR 313 
— SS 


J 


caelum et terra transibunt 
uerba autem mea non trans ibunt 
de die autem illo 

et hora nemo scit 

nequae angeli in caelo 

neque filius nisi pater 

uidete ergo uigilate 

nescitis en im quando tempus sit 
sicut homo peregre profectus 
relinquat domum suam 

et data seruis suis potestate 
cuiusque operis 

et ostiario praecepit ut uigilaret 
vigilate ergo nescitis enim 
quando dms domus ueniat 

sero aut media nocte 

an galli cantum an mane 

ne cum uenerit repente 
inueniat uos dormientes 

ego autem dico uobis uigilate 


futurum autem erat pascha post biduum 


et quaerebant summi sacerdotes 

et scribae 

quo mo do illum dol o tenerent 

et occiderent 

di cebant enim ne in die festo tumultus feret 

populi -et cum esset ihs in bet haniam 

in domum simonis leprosi 

recumbente eo uenit mulier.habens 

ampullam nardi pistici praetiosi 

et fracto alabastro 

effudit super caput eius 

discipuli autem eius - indigne ferebant et dice 
(Fol. 336 a.) bant 


.31—XIV. ἃ 


40 


814 ‘KAT MAPK' SEC MARC 
SSS OS aren 
εἰσ τι ἡ απωλεια αὐτὴ του μυρου XIV. ut qui d perditio ista unguenti 
ἤδυνατο πραθηναι ro μυρον rovro 5 potuerat ueniri unguentum istut 
crave Ἃ T. Kat δοθηναι row πτωχοισ plus quam X ccc et dari pauperibus 
και ἐνεβριμωντο εν αυτη- et fremebant in eam 
o Oc qe εἰπεν avrou : acere αὐτὴν 6 ihs autem ait illis sinite eam 
TL αὐτὴ κοπουσ παρεχεται qui d illi molesti estis 
καλον epyov npyac aro ev ejuo t b onum opus operata est in me 
πάντοτε yap τουσ Wrwxove 7 semper enim pauperes 
ἔχετε μεθ υμων. καὶ oray θεληται habet is uobiscum . et cum uolueritis 
δυνασθαι αντοισ ev ποιήσαι potestis illis benefacere 
ene Se ov wavrore exerat me autem non semper habetis 
p? * οεσχεν avr «ποιήσεν 8 quod habuit haec fecit 
προελαβὲν μυρισετοὸ σωμα μον praeuenit unguento unguere corpus meum 
εἰσ Toy eyradua pov in sepulturam 
apny Se Neyo ὕμειν 9 | amen dico uobis 
orrov ay κηρυχθη το εναγγελιον quod ubicumquae praedicatum fuerit euangeia 
εἰσ oXov Tov κοσμον in uniuersum mundum 
Kat 0 ἐποιῆσεν avr λαληθησεται et quo d fecit haec narrabitur 
εἰσ βμνημοσυνον avro in memoriam eius 
et : καιϊουδασ oKapwrno εκ roy iB - 10 | etiudasscariotes unus de. xii- 
αἀπηλθεν προσ rovc apxupewr abiit ad summos sacerdotes 
ἵνα προ Sot avrov «οἱ Se exapyoay I1 ut proderet eum . ad illi gauisi sunt 
καὶ ἐπηγγείλαντο avro - apyuptov δουναι et promiserunt ei pecuniam dare 
και εἐζητει πωσ εὐκαιρωσ' et quaerebat quo mo do oportunae 
avrov πάραδοι. Kat τὴ πρωτὴ ἡμερα 12 eum traderet. et prima die 
τῶν αζυμων - ore ro πασχα eÜvoy azymorum: quando pascha immolabatur 
Aeyovaty avro ot pabyras- rov θελεισ dicunt ei discipuli quo uis eamus 
απελθοντεσ ετοιμασωμεν σοι et parem us tibi 
ἵνα payne τὸ πασχα. Kat αποστελλει δυο 13 ut manduces pascha οὗ misit duos 
ex τῶν pabytev avrov λεγων ex discipulis suis dicens 
ὕπαγε eu τὴν πολιν . και ἀπαντήσει ὕμειν ite in οἰαἰξαὺθ΄ οὐ occurret uobis 
ayÜpwrroc κεραμειον ὕδατοσ βασταζων homo amphorae aquae portans 
axoXovÜncare avro* και omov ay εἰσελθη 14 sequimini eum. et quocumque introierit 
(Fol. 336 5.) (Fol. 337 a) 


Car. XIV. 4— 14. 


SHS 


εἴπατε To οικοδεσποτή - ort o διδασκαλοσ 
λεγει πον ἐστιν To καταλυμα μου 

σπου μετὰ των para pov 

Payopat To πασχα. καὶ avrog ὕμειν 
Saker - avayatov owov ἐστρω μενον 

μέγαν ετοιμον + κακει ετοιμασατε NEY 
καὶ ἐξηλθον οἱ μαθηται avrov 

καὶ εἐξηλθον οἱ μαθηται avrov 

και ἤλθον εἰσ την πολιν 

καὶ exov)gay καθωσ εἰπεν avrow 

και ἡτοιμασαν TO πασχα 

οψιασ δε γενομενησ - epxerat pera των iB * 
και ἀνακειμένων avrov καὶ ἐσθιοντων 
λεγειο ine αμην λεγω ὕμειν 

ort εἰσ εξ ὕμων παραδωσει με 

o coOusy per ἐμουν 


: οἱ δεηρξαντο λυπισθαι 


και λεγειν avro eur καθ ew pyre eyo 
καὶ ἀλλοσ μήτι eyo * o δελεγει avrow 
εἰσ x των * if - o ἐνβαπτιζομενοσ μετ ἐμου 


εἰσ To τρυβαλιον 


: O μεν ὕιοσ του ανθρωπου παραδιδοτε 


καθωσ ἐστιν γεγραμμενον περι avrov 
οναι δε ro ανθρωπω εκεινω. δι ov παραδιδοτε 


: καλον ἣν avro εἰ οὐκ ἐεγεννηθη 


: οανθρωποσ εκεινοσ * και ἐσθιοντων avrov 


λαβὼν aprov ευλογησεν 
και εκλασεν καὶ ἐδωκεν αντοισ Kat εἰπεν 


Aaffere rovr ἐστιν To σωμα μου 


: καὶ λαβὼν ποτήριον ευχαριστησασ 


εδωκεν avrove καὶ ery εξ avrov παντεσ 


καὶ ELEY GUTOLO * TOUT ἐστιν TO ALLA μου 


το rng διαθηκησ 


(Fol. 337 5.) 


XIY. 


SEC MARC 
— —— -- 
dicite dmo domus. quia magister dicit 
ubi est refectio mea 
ubi cum discipulis meis 
manducem pascha. et ipse uobis 
demonstrauit stratum paratum 
grande. et illic parate nobis 
et abierunt discipuli eius 
et uenerunt discipuli eius 
et uenit in ciuitate 
et fecerunt sicut dixit illis 
et praeparauerunt pascha 
uespere autem facta . uenit cum. xii. 
et discumbentibus illis. et manducantibus 
ait ihs. amen dico uobis 
quia unus ex uobis tradet me 
qui manducat mecum 
ad illi coeperunt contristari 
et dicere illi singuli numquid ego 
et alius nun quid ego:quibus ait 
unus ex - xii. qui intingit mecum 
in parapside 
filius quidem hominis tradetur 
sicut scriptum est de illo 
uae autem homini illi*per quem tradetur 
bonum erat illi si non esset natus 
homo ille. et manducantibus illis 
accipiens panem benedixit 
et fregit et dedit illis et dixit 
accipite hoc est corpus meum 
et accipiens calicem gratias egit 
et dedit illis οὐ uiberunt ex illo omnes 
et ait illis - hoc est sanguis meus 
qui est testamenti 
(Fol. 338 a.) 


Cap. XIV, 14—--24. 


$16 


316 KAT MAPK 


San — 
TO ὕπερ πολλων exxvvvojuevov xiv. 
αμην λεγω ὕμειν - ort ov μὴ 25 
προσθω πειν εκ του γεννηματοσ 


THO apwedou ewo THE ἡμέρασ εκεινησ 
OTQY αὐτὸ πεινω KOLVOV εν τὴ βασιλεια του Ov 
pet :ka1 ὕμνησαντεσ εξηλθον. eur ro opog Toy ἐλαίω 26 
— 
tore Neyer avTow o tno 27 


οτι παντεσ ὕμεισ σκανδαλισασθαι 


faa f 


ort yeyparrat- zraraZo Tov ποιμενα 

καὶ ta, tpoBara διασκορπισθησονται 

αλλα pera To €yepÜnva pe 28 
προαξω ὕμασ εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 

: οδεπετροσ Aeyet av ro 29 


ssf 


και «ay παντεσ σκανδαλισθωσιν 


αλλ ovx €yo ov σκανδαλισθησομαι 
.--- 
και λεγει αυτω 0 ino 20 
αμην λεγω σοι ort ταυτὴ τὴ VUKTEL 
πριν aXexropa φωνῆσαι τρισ μεαπαρνησῚ 
C 
poa : o δε εκπερισσωσ ελαλει 31 
«ay μὴ Sen συναποθανεῖν σοι 
ου μὴ σεαπαρνήσομαι 
ὡσαντωσ δὲεπαντεσ eXeyoy 
* KQL €pxovTa4 εἰσ χωρίον 32 


: OU τοονομα γήησαμανει : Kat Acyet αντοισ 


EL 


xaÜwrare oe «nc προσευξομαι 

καὶ παραλαμβανει Tov πετρον 33 
και ἴακωβον Kat Ἰωαννὴν 
μετ avrov καὶ ἡρξατο 
ἐκθαμβεισθαι και ακηδεμονειν 

: Tore λέγει avrour 34 
περιλνποσ ἐστιν ἡ ψυχὴ μου 


εωσ Üavarov μεινατε woe 


fj 


: Kat γρήγορειτε : Kat rpoaeXDov μεικρον 35 
(Fol. 338 5.) 


SRS 


SEC MARC 
———— 
qui pro multis effunditur 
amen dico uobis- quia non 
adpon am bibere ex generatione 
uitis usque in diem illum 


cum ill u d bibam nouum in regno di 
Et hymno dicto exierunt.in montem oliueti 
tunc ait illis ihs 
qui omnes uos scandalizari habetis 
quia scriptum est: percutiam pastorem 
et oues dispargentur 
sed posteaquam surrexero 
praecedam uos in galilam 
petrus uero ait illi 
etai omnes scandalizati fuerint 
sed ego non scandizabor 
et ait ill i ihs 
amen dico tibi quod hac nocte 
priusquam gallus cantet ter me negabis 
ad ille amplius loquebatar 
etai oportuerit simul me commori 
non te negabo 
similiter autem et omnes dicebant 
et ueniunt in praedium. cui nomen est 
gesa mani . οὗ ait illis sedete hic 
donec orem 
Et adsumpsit petrum 
et jacobum et iohannen 
secum et coepit 
pauere et taediari 
tunc ait ill is 
contristata est anima mea 
usque ad morte sustinete hic 


et uigilate . et cum processisset paululum 


(Fol. 3394.) 


Car. XIV. 24—35. 


sg J 


BS 


FUIS f 


fas 


ary 


era: 


pap :Εδωκεν Se o παραδιδουσ avrov 


CXETEY EXt TPOTWTOY EMT NT γὴσ XIV. 
και προσήνχετο. εἰ δυνατον ἐστιν 

iva παρελθη απ avrov ἢ wpa avr 

και ἐλεγεν.- αββα o xarnp δυνατα παντα 36 
σοι GOL παρενεγκετοντο 


To ποτήριον ἀπ᾿ ἐμου. αλλ ovx o eyo θελω 


: αλλοσυθελεισ : και ἔρχεται Kat ευρισκι αυτοὺσ 37 


καθευδοντασ - και eye τω πετρω 

cuum καθευδεισ : ovk ισχυσατε 

μέαν opay γρηγορῆσαι 

γρηγορειτε καὶ προσευχεσθαι 38 
px ewe rre εἰσ πειρασμον 

ro pav πνὰ προθυμον- ἢ δε capt ασθενησ 

και παλιν ἀπελθων προσηυξατο 39 


: καὶ ελθων evpev αυτουσ καθευδοντασ 40 


"cav yap οἱ οφθαλ μοι avrov 
καταβαρου μενοι. Kat ovk ἡδισαν 
τι ἀποκριθωσιν avra - και ἐρχεταῖ TO τριτον 41 


καὶ λεγει avrow καθευδετε λοιπὸν 


: καεαναπαεσθαι : ἄπεχει TO τελοσ καὶ ἢ opa. 


ἴδου παραδιδοτε οὕιοσ Tov ανθρωπον 
εἰσ τασ χειρασ τῶν αμαρτωλων 
εγειρεσθαι αγωμεν 42 
ἴδον ἡγγικεν οπαραδιδων με 
καὶ ert avrov λαλουντοσ᾽ παραγεινεται ιουδσ 43 
σκαρ ιωτὴσ εἰσ των B. : καὶ μετ avrov 
oxXoc πολυσ μετα μαχαιρων και ξυλων 
παρα τῶν Gpxtepeov - καὶ απὸ των Ypappareas 
Kat των πρεσβυτερων 


σημεῖον λεγων 
ov αν φιλησω avrog ἐστιν κρατ noare avro 
καὶ amayere avroy ασφαλωσ 

(Fol. 339 5.) 


44 


f 


SEC MARG 317 
— Gy ue — 


cecidit in faciem super terram 

et orabat si fieri potest 

ut transiret ab eo ora haec 

et dixit.abba pater si possibilia omnia 
tibi sunt transferre 

hunc calicem a me non sicut ego uolo 
Bed sicut tu bis. et uenit et inuenit eos 
dormientes. et ait petro 

simon dormis .non potuistis 

una hora uigilare 

uigilate et orate. . 
ne intretis in temptationem 

ups quidem promtus.caro autem infirma 
et iterum abiit orare 

et ueniens inuenit eos dormientes 
erant enim oculi eorum 

grauati a somno: et ingnorabant 

quid responderent ei . et uenit tertio 
et ait illis dormite iam 

et re quiescite. sufficit finis et ora 
ecce traditur filius hominis 

in manus peccatorum 

surgite eamus 

ecce prope est qui me tradet 


Et adhuc eo loquente uenit iudas 


scariotes unus ex .xü -et cum illo turba multa 
cum gladiis et fustibus 
& summis sacerdotibus. et ab scribis 


et & senioribus 


dederat autem traditor eius 


signum dicens 
quem osculatus fuero ipse est. tenete eum 
et ducite eum diligenter 

(Fol. 340 a.) 


Car. XIV. 35—44. 


318 


ΠΥ! 


— ο.ἰ:- i, 
KAT MAPKON 
- eee — 


Kat προσελθων λεγει avro pa Bec και 


XIV. 45 


xaredU ao «v avroy - oLÓe ereBadov rao Xepas avre 46 


καὶ ἐκρατῆσαν G.UTOV - καὶ TUF σπασαμενοσ 
μάχαιραν εἐπεσεν roy δουλον 
του ἀρχιερεωσ.- 


και αφιλεν avrov το wraptov 


--- - 
pr : O 8e tno eurev avrow ext Anoryy eg Mare 


ΠΙΆ! 


ij 


μετα μαχαιρων και ξυλων avvAo ew με 
καθ ἡμέραν ἡμὴν προσ ὕμασ 
ἐν τω ἵερω διδασκων . και ovk ἐκρατησατε με 


: ἀλλινα πληρωθωσιν at γραφαι 


: καὶ adevreo avrov παντεσ epvyov 


ψνεανισκοσ δετισ ἡκολουθει avrove 
περιβεβλημενοσ συνδονα em γυμνου 
Kat κρατουσιν GUTOV * 0 δε καταλειπων 
τὴν σινδονα ᾿ γυμνοσ εφυγεν ax avrov 
και ἀπήγαγον TOV - 

προσ Tov apxtepaua. 

καὶ συνέρχονται παντεσ οἱ apxuepeur 


και γραμματεισ και πρεσβυτεροι 


: καὶ οπετροσ απὸ μακροθεν “nx ἐν avro 


εωσ €u7 τὴν αυλὴν του ἀαρχιερεωσ 


Καιην καθημενοσ pera τω ὕπηρερων 


θερμενομενοσ προσ To φωσ 


: οἱδεαρχειέρεισ 


kat oXoy To συνεδριον 

ἐζήτουν xara του em paprupiay 
iva θανατωσουσιν avrov 

και OVX ἡυρισκον 

πολλοι yap ἐψευδομαρτυρουν 
ἐλεγον κατ avrov 


και εἰσαι αἱ μαρτυριαι OUK σαν 


ao, 
pa * καιαλλοιανασταντεσ 


(Fol. 340 δ.) 


47 


49 


50 


51 


52 


53 


54 


55 


56 


57 


SEG MARC 
- — 0 S --- 


et accedens ait illi rabbi et 
osculatus est eum . ad illi manus iniecerunt 
et tenuerunt eum: et unus eiciens 
gladium percussit seruum 
principis sacerdotis 
et amputabit illi auricula 
ihs autem ait illis ad latronem existis 
cum gladiis et fustibus conprehendere me 
cottidie eram aput uos 
docens in templo. et non tenuistis me 
sed ut ad impleantur scripturae 
et relinquentes eum omnes fugierunt 
adulescens autem quidam sequebatur illos 
amictus sindone nuditatis 
et tenuerunt illum . ad ille relicta sindone 
profugit nudus ab eis. 
et ad duxerunt ihm 
ad summum sacerdotem 
et conuenerunt omnes summi sacerdotes 
et scribae et seniores 
et petrus ἃ longe.se quebatur eum 
usque in atrium summi sacerdotis 
Et erat sedens. cum ministros 
calefacientes se ad ignem 
summi uero sacerdotes 
et uniuersum concilium 
quaerebant aduersus ihm testimonium 
ut morti traderent eum 
et nec inueniebant 
mult i enim falsum testimonium 
dicebant aduersus eum 
et conuenientia testimonia non erant 
et alii surgentes 
(Fol. 341 a.) 


Car. XIV. 45—57. 


[2j 


BIBS 


ny 


2 


J 


i — -ο-ς, toy 
KAT MAPKON 


εψευδομαρτυρου v και ελεγον 
κατ αὐτου. οτιἡμεισ ἠκουσαμεν 


' avrov λεγοντοσ' 


ort eyw καταλυσὼω TOV yaoy 

TOY χειροποιῆτον 

και δια Tpewn ἡμέρων αλλον ayac T2009 
αχειροποιήτον και ovde ουτωσ 

ἣν ἰσὴ ἡ μαρτύρια avrov 

και QVAOTAC 0 ἀρχιερευσ᾽ εἰσ TO μεσὸν 
ετηρωτησεν τον ip λεγων 

OUK αποκριψγὴ οὐδεν τι οντοι σὸν 


καταμαρτυρουσιν᾽ exevoo δε evevya 
καὶ ovdey απεκριθη 


Kat λεγεῖ avro 0 apxiepevo 


am, 
OV € LO χρσ' οὕιοσ TOV εὐλογητον 


— 
o Se ino αποκριθεισ λεγει avro €yo εἰμι 


: καεοψεσθαι rov ὕιον rov ανθρωπου 


ex δεξιων καθημενον δυναμεωσ 
μετα τῶν νεφελων rov ουρανου 
o δεαρχιερευσ 


yxovoare THY βλασφημιαν avrov 
τι ὕμειν Ooket - παντεσ Se 


κατέκριναν avro evoxov θανατου 

και ἡρξαντο τινεσ ἐγπτυειν 

τῶ προσώπῳ avrov- καὶ εκολαφιζον avro 
και ἐλεγον avro προφητευσον 

και ραπισμασιν ἐλαμβανον avrov 


> καὶ οντοσ TOV Tr€rpov ἐν Τὴ αυλη 


€pxere προσ avrov - pia των παιδισκων 


TOV ἀρχιερεωσ 
και εἰδουσα Tov πετρον θερμενομενον 


(Fol. 341 6.) 


XIV. 


58 


59 


61 


62 


: διαρρηξασ rove χειτωνασ avrov : Kat Aeyet 
Ti ert χρειαν ἐχομεν μαρτυρων 


64 


65 


66 


67 


319 


falsum testimonium dicebant 

aduersum eum ‘quoniam nos audiuimus 
hunc dicentem 

quia ego destruam hunc templum 

fanu factum 

et post tertium diem aliut suscitabo 

non manibus factum et nec sic erat. 
conueniens testimonia illorum 

et exsurgens summus sacerdos in medium 
interrogabat ihm dioens 

non respondes nihil : quid isti tibi testantur 
ille autem tacens 

nihil respondit 


Et ait illi summus sacerdos 


tu es xps filius benedicti 


hs uero respondens dixit illi ego sum 


et uideuitis filium hominis 

ad dexteram sedentem uirtutis 
uenientem cum nubibus caeli 
summus autem sacerdos 

scidit uestimenta sua et ait 


qui d adhuc desideramus testes 


&udistis omnes blasphemias eius 

qui d uobis uidetur. omnes autem 

condemnauerunt eum reum mortis 

et coeperunt qui dam conspuere 

in faciem eius. et colaphizabant eum 

et dicebant ei profeta 

et alapis caedebant eum 

et cum easet petrus in atrium 

uenit ad eum una ex ancill is 

summi sacerdotis 

et cum uidisset petrum calefacientem se 
(Fol. 342 a.) 


Car. XIV. 57—67. 


320 


— ey eS --- 
KAT MAPKON 
— — ο- — 


evBAejaca Xeye avro av pera rov - 
tov vaLopyvov 100a. . o 9« npyycaro λεγων 
ovre oi ovre ἡπισσαμαι τι λεγεισ 


om, 
pas : εξηλθεν εξω εἰσ THY προσαυλην 


και ἀαλεκτὼρ εφωνησεν 


'παλιν δε ειδουσα avrov ἡ παιδισκὴ 


o δεπαλιν ἠρνήσατο. και ἤρξατο λεγειν 


XIV. 
68 


69 


TOU παρεστήκοσιψ - OTL Kat ανυτοσ εξ αὐτῶν ἐστι 


και μετα μεικρον παλιν" ot παρεστηκοτεσ 
ἐλεγον αληθωσ εἶ avrov ει 

και yap γαλιλαιοσ €t- 0 δε ηρξατο 
αναθεματειζειν και λεγειν 

ort oux οιἰδα τον ανθρωπον ον λεγεται 

και ευθεωσ ex Sevrepou 

adexrwp εφωνησεν 

και ανεμνήσθη οπετροσ 

τορήμαο evrey op ) 

καὶ npfaro κλαιειν - kat εὐθεωσ πρωι 
συνβουλιον εποιησαν οι ἀρχιερεισ 

μετα των πρεσβυτερων καὶ των γραμματῶ 
καὶ oXov To συνεδριον 

και δησαντεσ Toy ay amrryyayov 

εἰσ τὴν αυλην . Kas παρεδωκαν πειλατω 
και ἐτηρωτήσεν avrov o πειλατοσ 

ov «t o βασιλευσ των Ἰουδαίων 

και ἀποκριθεισ avra Neyer συ λεγε ur 


. Καὶ ΚαΤηγορουσιν αὐτου 


ot apxuepeur πολλα.ο δε πειλατοσ 
ernpwrncey avroy παλιν λεγων 
OUK αποκρεινὴ ουδεν - 
id ποσα σου κατηγορουσιν 

O δε ine ovkert οὐδὲν απεκριθη 


wore θαυμαζειν rov πειλατον 


(Fol. 342 5.) 


70 


γι 


72 


XV. 1 


SECO MARCUM 
— Sy — 


aspiciens ait illi- et tu cum ihu 
nazoreno eras. ad ille negauit dicens 
neque scio neque noui quid dicis 

et exiit foras ante atrium 

et gallus cantauit 


iterum autem cum uidisset eum ancilla 


ad ille rursus negauit. et coepit dicere 
circumstantibus quoniam hic ex ipeis est 
et post pusillum iterum . qui stabant 
dicebant uere ex illis es 

etenim galilaeus es. ad ille coepit 
deuotare et dicere 

quia nescio hominem istum quem dicitis 
et statim secundo 

gallus cantauit 

et rememoratus est petrus 

uerborum quod dixerat illi ihs 

et coepit flere - et confestim mane 
consilium fecerunt.summi sacerdotes 
cum senioribus et scribis 

et uniuerso concilio 

et uinctum ihm duxerunt 

in atrium - et tradiderunt pilato 

et interrogauit eum pilatus 


tu es rex judaeorum 


et respondens dixit illi tu dicis 


et accusabant eum 

summi sacerdotes multa - pilatus autem 
interrogauit eum iterum dicens 

non respondis quid quam 


uides quanti te accusant 


ihs autem nih il amplius respondit 


ita ut miraretur pilatus 
(Fol. 343 a.) 


Carr, XIV. 67; —XV. 5. 


Sof 


“ 


/ 


[3f fas 


— — 
KAT MAPKON 
— — 


: kara δε Thy εορτὴν XV. 6 
απεανεν avrour 
eva δεσμειον ov ay ἥτουντο 

: ἣν δεολεγομενοσ βαραββασ 7 
pera των στασιαστων δεδεμενοσ 
οἰτινεσ ἐν Τὴ στασει: πεποιήκεισαν φονον 
καὶ avaBag ολοσ o oxXoc «ἤρξατο αιτεισθαι avro 8 
καθωσ a«t emout avrow 

O δεπειλατοσ asrokpeiÜewr Aeyet avrow 9 

θελετε απολυσω.-τον βασιλεα των Ἰουδαίων 

: ἥδιγαρ ort δια φθονον 10 
παρεδωκαν avroy ot apxuepeur 
ot de apxvepeur 11 
ἐπεισαν Tw οχλω iva μαλλον 


βαραββαν axoXva avrow 

: O δεπειλατοσ αποκριθεισ εἰπεν avrow 12 
τιουν θελεται ποιησω. βασιλει των Ἰουδαιω, 

: ot δὲ expa£ay παλιν λεγοντεσ' 13 

στρν GvTOV 
o δεπειλατοσ eXeyev avrowr 14 
TL yap kaxoy ἐποιησεν 
ot Se περισσωσ expaLov ory avroy 
o δεπειλατοσ aredvoev avrow roy βαραββαν 15 
τὸν δε ἣν φλαγελλωσασ παρεδωκεν 


Βὸ᾽ 39] 


— 
C 
e ony, 


[2 
EJ 


per diem autem festum 
dimittere solebat illis 
unum ex uinctis quemcum quae pet issent 
erat autem qui dicebatur barabbas 
et cum seditiosis uinctus 
qui in seditione ‘fecerat homicidium 
et ascendit tota turba - et coepit rogare eum 
sic ut sémper faciebat eis 
pilatus autem respondens ait illis 
uultis dimittam regem iudaeorum 
Sciebat enim quo d per inuidiam 
tradidissent eum summi sacerdotes 
principes uero sacerdotum 
suaserunt turbas ut magis 
barabbam dimitteret eis 
pilatus autem respondens ait illis 
quid ergo uultis faciam regem iudaeorum 
ad ill i clamauerunt iterum dicentes 
cruci adfige eum 
pilatus uero dicebat eis 
quid enim mali fecit 
ad illi magis clamabant cruci adfige eum 
pilatus autem dimisit ill is barabban - 
ihm autem flagellis caesum tradidit 
ut cruc i adfigeretur - milites autem 


va στή. : δι δεστρατιωται 16 
απηγαγον avrov cow εἰσ τὴν αὐλὴν duxerunt eum intus in atrium 
0 εστιν πραιτωριον quod est, praetorii 
Kat καλουσιν ολην τὴν σπειραν et conuocauerunt totam cohortem 
Kat ἐενδυδισκουσιν avrov πορφυραν 17 et induerunt eum purpuram 
και επιτιθεασιν avro οὐ inposuerunt ei 
axayÜov ore φανον coronam factam de spinis 
καὶ ηρξαντο ἀσπαζεσθαι avrov 18 et coeperunt sal utare eum 
χαιραι Bacirev των Ἰουδαιων habe rex iudaeorum 

(Fol. 343 5.) (Fol. 344 4.) 

Car. XV. 6—18. 


41 


SN SS 
KAT MAPK 


και €TUTTOY GUTOV καλαμω εἰσ τὴν κεφαλη. XY. 19 


και ἐνεπτυον auTw ‘Kaz ore εἐξεδυσαν avroy 
τὴν πορῴυραν 
και ἐενεδυσαν avrov Ta ἵματια 


και ἐξαγουσιν avrov ἵνα σταυρωσουσὶν 


και ἀνγαρενουσὶν TOV σιίιμωνα 
παραγοντα TOV κυρήνεον 
ἐρχομενον aro aypov 
Toy πατερα ἀλεξανδρον και ρονῴφον 
ἵψα apy TOV σταυρον αὐτου 
και ἀγουσιν αὐτὸν em τόπον γολγοθα 
o ἐστιν μεθερμηνενομενον 
κρανιου Tomog - καὶ εδιδουν avro πειν 
ἐσμυρνισμενον οινον - Kat ovk ehaBev 
και σταυρωσαντεσ αυτον 
διαμεριζονται τα ἵματια avrov 
βαλλοντεσ κληρον er avra. 
ἡνδεωρα y 
καὶ εφυλασσον avrov 

ἣν δε επιγραφὴ Tyo αιτιασ avrov 
επιγεγραμμενὴ οντοσ ἐστιν 


o βασιλεουσ των iovdacov 
καὶ συν αυτω στανυροννται . λησται 
eva ex δεξιων και eva. εξ εὐωνυμων 
και οἱ παραγοντεσ εβλασφημουν avrov 
κεινουντεσ τασ κεφαλασ και λεγοντεσ 
ova o καταλνων TOV VGoy 
και οἰκοδομων JY ἡμεραισ 
σωσον σεαυτον. καταβασ ἀποτου στρυ 
και οἱ apxtepeu - evreLovrer 
εἰσ ἀαλληλουσ pera των γραμματαιων ελεγον 
αλλουσ ἐσωσεν eavrov ov δυναται σωσαι 
ο Xp? o Bac evo ισραηλ 

(Fol. 344 5.) 


20 


at 


23 


24 


25 


27 


30 
31 


32 


SEC MARCUM 
— — — — 


et percutiebant eum harundine in caput 
et conspuebant eum ‘et posquam exuerunt 
eum purpuram 

et induerunt eum uestimentis suis 

et duxerunt eum ut crucifigerent 

et angariauerunt simonem 
transeuntem cyreneum 

ueniente de uilla 

patre alexandri et rufi 

ut tolleret crucem eius 

et perduxerunt eum in locum golgotha 
quo d est interpraetatum 

caluariae locus. et dabant ei bibere 
murram cum uino: et non accepit 

et cruci adfixerunt eum 

diuiserunt uestimenta eius 

mittentes sortem super ea 

erat autem hora tertia 

et custodiebant eum 


Erat autem causa criminis eius 


inscriptio hic est 

rex iudaeorum 

et cum eo crucifixerunt duo latrones 
unum ad dextram et unum ad sinistram 
et praetereuntes blasfemabant eum 
mouentes capita et dicentes 

qui distruit templum 

et aedificat illut in tribus diebus 
salbum te fac. et descende de cruce 

et summi sacerdotes . inridentes 
alterutrum cum scribis dicebant - alios salbos 
fecit seipsum non potes saluum facere 


xps rex istrahel 
(Fol 345a.) 


Cap. XV. 19—34. 


KAT MAPK 

“τις c -- 
xarafjaro νυν amo rov στρυ 
iva ἴδωμεν και πιστευσωμεν avro 
και οἱ συνεστανρωμενοι 
ὠνιδιζον avrov* καὶ γενομενησ ὡρασ. τὴ . 
σκοτοσ €ycvero 
e$ ολησ τησ γησ eo opaa “O° 
και TH €var epa. εφωνησεν φωνὴ μεγαλη 
λει λει λαμα ζαφθανει 
o ἐστιν μεθερμηνενομενον 
οϑσ pov o ὃσ μου εἰσ τι ὠνιδισασ με 
και τινεσ των παρεστωτων 
ακουσαντεσ ἐλεγον ἡλιαν φωνι ουτοσ 
και δραμων evo και πλησασ σφογγον 
οξουσ εἐπιθεισ καλαμω 
αφεσ ειἰδωμεν et epyerat ἡλίιασ καθελιν avro 
O δε ino αφεισ φωνὴν μεγαλην efervevocy 
και TO καταπετασμα TOV ναου 
ἐσχισθὴ εἰσ. B- μερη 
απανωθεν εωσ κατω 
Bey Se o κεντυριων o παρεστηκωσ ext 
ovroc avrov κραξαντα και εἐξεπνευσεν 


αληθωσ ovrog οανθρωποσ Ov ὕιοσ ἣν 


ἤσαν δε και γυναικεσ᾽ «απὸ μακροθεν θεωρουσαι 


εν aud jv -μαρια μαγδαληνὴ 
kat μαρια ἴακωβου τον μεικρου 
καὶ Gc ἡτοσ μητὴρ 
καὶ σαλωμὴ at καὶ ore YY εν Τὴ γαλιλαια 
ηκολουθησαν avro και αλλαι πολαι 
at cvvavaBacat avro er Ἱεροσολυμα 
και ἤδη οψιασ γενομενησ 
emt ἣν παρασκευὴ - 0 ἐστιν πριν σαβ βατον 
ἢλθὲεν Ἰωσηφ aro ap ιμαθιασ' 
εὐσχήμων βουλευτησ' 

(Fol. 3455.) 


XV. 


33 


34 


35 


36 


38 


39 


4: 


42 


43 


SEC MARG 523 
descendat nunc de cruce 


ut uideamus et credamus ei 

et qui simul.cum eo adfixi erant 
conuiciabantur. et facta est ora sexta 
tenebrae factae sunt 

per totam terram usque in horam nonam 
et hora nona. exclamauit uoce magna 
heli heli lama zapthani 

quod est interpretatum 

ds meus ds meus ut quid me dereliquisti 
et quidam de circumstantibus 
audientes dixerunt. heliam uocat iste 
et adcurrit unus - et plena spongia 
aceto et potum dabat ei dicens 


sine uideamus si uenit helias et deponit eum 


ihs autem missa uoce magna expirauit - 


et uelum templi scissum est 
in duas partes 
& summo usque deorsum 
uidens autem centurio: qui adstabat ib it 
sic eum exclamasse et expirasse 
uere hic ho mo di filius erat 
erant autem et mulieres. longe uidentes 
inter quas erat. maria magdalene 
et maria iacobi minoris 
et ioseph - mater 
et salome quae cum esset in galilaea 
sequebatur eum - et aliae multae 
quae simul ascenderant cum illo in hierosolyma 
et cum iam sero esset fact um 
quae erat parasceue ‘quod est ante sabbatum 
uenit ioseph . ab arimathia 
diues decurio 
(Fol. 346 a.) 


Car. XV. 32— 43. 


KAT MAPK 

——— — 
0c nV Kat αὐτοσ προσδεχομενοσ. 
τὴν βασιλειαν rov ὄν. τολμησασ ἡλθεν 
προσ πειλατον - καὶ ετήσατο TO πτωμα TOV ἕν 

O δεπειλατοσ εθαυμαζεν. εἰ 05 ειτεθνηκει 
και προσκαλεσαμενοσ TOV κεντυριωνα 
επηρωτήσεν avrov . εἰ δὴ τεθνηκει 
και γνουσ παρα του κεντουριωνοσ | 
ἐδωρησατο τοπτωμα avrov ro ἴἸωσηφ 
οδεϊωσηφ ayopacac σινδονα 
Aa Bwy avrov 
€ve UA ao ey εἰσ τήν σινδονα 
και εθηκεν avrov «v Tw μνημειω 
o wv λελατομημένον εκ THO πετρασ' 
kat προσκυλισασ λιθον 
ἐπι τὴν Üvpay του μνημιου και απηλθεν 
ἢ δεμαρια paydadyvy - και μαρια ἴακωβου 
εθεασαντο rov roov οπου τεθειται 
και πορενθεισαι ἤγορασαν αρωματα 
ἵνα avrov αλιψωσιν 
Kas ἐρχορται πρωι pua σαββατον 
ἐπὶ τὸ μνημίον - avareAXovrog του ἡλιου 
και ἐλεγον προσ εαυτουσ - TUT ἡμῖον αἀποκυλισει 
τον λιθον απο Tyo θυρασ του μνήμιον 
ν yop μεγὰσ σφοδρα 
και ἔρχονται και ευρισκουσιν 
αποκεκυλισμενον τον λιθον 
και εἰσελθουσαι εἰσ To μνημίον 
veayurkov εἰδον καθήμενον 
εν τοισ δεξιοισ 
περιβεβλημενον στολὴν λευκὴν 
και εθανβησαν 
και λέγει αυτοισ ο ἀαγγελοσ 
y φοβεισθαι rov uy ζητειται 
(Fol. 346 5.) 


XV. 


44 


45 


46 


47 


XVI 1 


ΕΣ] 


SEC MARG 
qui erat et ipse expectans 


regnum di constanter uenit 
ad pilatum . et petit corpus ihu 
pilatus autem admirabatur si iam obisset 
et uocans centurionem 
interrogauit eum ‘si iam mortuus esset 
et cum cognouisset a centurione 
donauit corpus eius ioseph 
ioseph -autem mercatus sindonem 
accipiens eum 
inuoluit in sindonem 
et posuit eum in monumento 
quod erat ex cis um in petra 
et aduol apidem 
ad osteum monumenti et abiit 
maria autem magdalene - et maria iacobi 
notauerunt locum ubi poneretur 
et abeuntes emerunt aromata 
ut eum ungerent 
et ueniunt mane. una sabbati 
ad monumentum - oriente sole 
et dicebant ad inuicem - quis nobis reuoluit 
lapidem ab osteo monumenti 
erat enim magnus ualde 
et ueniunt et inueniunt 
reuolutum lapidem 
et intrantes in monumentum 
uiderunt iubenem sedentem 
ad dexteram 
indutum s tol am candidam 
et expauerunt 
et dixit ill is angelus 
nolite timere ihm quaeritis 
(Fol. 347 o.) 


Carp. XV. 43—XVI. 6. 


KAT MAPK 

———— Ο, 
Toy «aTavpojueyov ἡγερθὴ ovk ἐστιν whe 
€iDere eet τόπον avrov - ozrov €Üykay avro 
αλλα ὕπαγεται και εἰπατε 
roto μαθηταισ avrov καὶ To πετρω 
ort ἴδου mpoayw ὕμασ εἰσ τὴν γαλιλαιαν 
exet pe οψεσθαι καθωσ εἰρηκα ὕμειν 
και ἐξελθουσαι ejvyov -αποτου μνημιουν 


«xev yap αντασ φοβοσ και ἐεκστασισ 


και ουδενι οὐδεν ἵπαν 

εφοβουντο γαρ 

avacrac δεπρωΐ por: σαββατον 
εφανερωσεν arporouwr - μαρια μαγδαληνὴ 
παρ no ἐεκβεβληκει ᾿ξεδαιμονεια 

exeun πορενθεισα. ἀπήγγειλεν avrow 
TOUT μετ αὐτου γενομενοισ' 

πενθουσι και κλαιουσι 

κακεινοι ακουσαντεσ or ι (yn 

και εθεαθη tr αυτησ΄. και ovk επιστευσαν αὐτω 
καὶ pera δεταντα | 

δυσιν εξ avrav περιπατουσιν 
«φανερωθὴ ev erepa μορφή 
πορενομενοισ εἰσ αγ ρον 

κακεινοι ἀπελθοντεσ 

απηγγειλαν row Xourow 

ovde €keiyour επιστευσαν 

ὕστερον δε αγακειμενοισ avrour 

Tour evdexa εφανερωθη - και ὠνιδισεν 
τὴν απιστιαν αντων. καὶ σκληροκαρδιαν 
ort Tour θεασαμενοισ avrov 
εγήγερμενον ovk ἐπιστευσαν 

και εἶπεν προσ GUTOUG 

πορενθεντεσ εἰσ Tov κοσμον 


Ka κηρυξατετο ευαγγελιον 
(Fol. 347 5.) 


Cap. XVI. 6—15. 


XVI. 


10 


TI 


12 


13 


14 


$25 


[Desunt folia septem et sexaginta, quaterntonis 
MA tria folia et quaterniones ME—NB totos 
eomplectentia. Quae a cap. XVI. 6 usque ad 
v. 15 Latinà, et av. 15 «usque ad Evangelii 
inem, Graecé et Latinà, a posteriore manu uno 
folio scribuntur, huic volumini Appendicis 
loco subjicientur.. | 


326 EPIST IOHANIS III 
— — ο»-. — --- 


11 |  quimalefacit non uidit dm 
14 | demetrio testimonium perhibetur ab omnibus 
et ab ipsa ueritate 
et nos uero testimonium perhibemus 
et scis testimonium nostrum uerum est 
13 |. plura habui scribere tibi 
sed nolo per atramentum 
et calamum scribere tibi 
14. spero enim protinus te uisurum 
15 et o8 ad os locuturum pax tecum 
salutant e amici tui 


saluta amicos nominatim 


Q000000000000000000000000022 


explicit 
incipit 
actus apostolorum 


(Fol. 415a.) 


Tov μεν zpwrov Xoyoy εποιησαμὴν 
wept avrov o Ó «o dire 

am, 
ov ἤρξατο ino ποιειν Té 


και διδασκειν axpc no ἡμερασ 


ανελημῴφθη εντειλαμενοσ row αποστολοισ 


δια πνσ αγιου ovo εξελεξατο και ἐεκελευσε 
κηρυσσειν TO ενυαγγελιον 


οισ καὶ παρεστήσεν eavroy ζωντα 


μετα τὸ παθειν avrov εν πολλοισ τεκμήριοισ 


τεσσεράκοντα ἡμέρων 


οπτανομενοισ αντοισ καὶ λεγων 

rac περι τησ βασιλειασ Tov θυ 

καὶ συναλισκομενοσ μετ αὐτων 
παρηνγειλεν αὐτοισ αποϊεροσολυμων 
μη χωριζεσθαι aXXa περιμένειν 

τὴν ἐπαγγελειαν του πατροσ 

ἣν ἤκουσα φησιν δια του στοματοσ pov 
οτιϊωανησ μεν ἐεβαπτισεν ὕδατι 
ὕμεισ δε εν Tu ayu» βαπτισθησεσθαι 
καὶ o μελλεται Aap Bavev 

ov μετα ToÀÀag ravra ἡμερασ 

εωσ THO πεντηκοστὴσ 

Οιμεν ovv συνελθοντεσ 

ernporov avrov λεγοντεσ 

«- 


KE εἰ ἐν TO χβόγνω TOUTO 


' αποκαταστανεισ εἰσ τὴν βασιλειαν Tov ἵσραηλ 


και εἶπεν προσ AVTOVT 

ουχ ὕμων ἐστιν "y VOVOL 

χρονουσ 1) καιρουσ 

ove o πατὴρ «Üero ev τὴ ἴδια εξζουσια 
αλλα λημψεσθαι δυναμιν. 
ereAÜovroc Tov αγιον VG ες ὕμασ 


και ever Ge pov μαρτυρεσ 
(Fol. 415 6.) 


I.1 


ACTUS" APOSTOLORUM 
— — --- — 


Primum quidem sermonem feci 


deo mnibus o theofile 
— 
quae incoauit ihs facere 


et docere usque in eum diem 


quem susceptus est quo praecepit apostolis 


per spm sanctum quos elegit et praecepit 


praedicare euangelium 


quibus et praesentiam se uiuum 


postquam passus est in multis argumentis 


post dies quadraginta 

apparens eis et narrans 

ea quae sunt de regno di 

et simul conuiuens cum eis 
praecepit eis ab hierosolymis 

non discedere sed expectare 
pollicitationem patris 

quam audistis de ore meo 

quia iohannes quidem baptizauit aqua 
uos aute m spo sancto baptizamini 
et eum accipere habetis 

non potest multos hos dies 

usque ad pentecosten 


hi ergo cum conuenissent 


interrogabant eum dicentes 
dno siin tempore hoc 


restituere regnum istrahel 


Et dixit ad eos 


non est uestrum scire 
te mpora ut momenta 
quae pater posuit in sua potestate 
sed accipietis uirtutem 
cum superuenerit santus spa super uos 
et eritis mei testes 
(Fol. 416 a.) 


Cap. I. 1—8. 


$27 


— WS ~& mH — 
328 TIPAZ. AIIOCTOAON 
— SS --ὄ.ς. — wo 
εν τεἱερουσαλημ Ε1. 


και πασὴ TH tov δαια Kat σαμ'αρια 
καὶ ew ἐσχατου THE "ya 


καυτα εἰποντοσ αὐτου 9 
νεφελη ὕπεβαλεν avrov 
καὶ απηρθὴ απὸ οφθαλμων avrov 
και wo ατενιζοντεσ σαν εἰσ TOV ουραγον to 
πορενομένου αὐτου | 
και ov ανδρεσ ὃν o rapeurrgkeuray avrour 
ev ἐεσθητι λευκὴ ot Kat euray II 
ανδρεσ γαλιλαιοι Tt εστήηκατε 
ενβλεποντεσ εἰσ τον ovpavoy 
ουτοσ O mo o avaAnpd Bee ad ὕμων 
οντωσ ελευσεται 
ov τροπὸν εθεασεσθε avrov mopev opevov 
εἰσ TOV ουρανον 
TOTE ὕπεστρεψαν eur εἰερουσαλήμ 12 
απὸ ορουσ του καλουμένου eXewvor 
0 ἐστιν ἐνγυσ Ἱερουσαλὴμ 
σαββατον exov οδον 
και ore εἰσηλθεν aveBnoay εἰ το ὕπερωον 13 
Ov σαν καταμεγοντεσ 
οτεπετροσ και wayne 
ειἰακωβοσ και ανδρεασ 
φιλιπποσ 
βαρθολομαιοσ και μαθθαιοσ 
o Tov αλῴφαιου 
σιμων o ζηλωτησ και tovdac taxwBov 
Ovrot vavrea ἡσαν προσκαρτερουντεσ' 14 
ομοθυμαδον Ty προσευχὴ 
συν ταισ γυναιξιν και τεκνοισ' 


και θωμασ 


taxwBoo 


-- 
και μαρια μητρι τον wu 
και τοισ αδελφοισ avrov 


(Fol. 416 δ.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL: 
— — — 


ad quae hierusalem 
et omni iudaeae et samaria 


et usque a d ultimum terrae 


Et cum haec dixisset 


nubes suscepit eum 

et leuatus est ab oculis eorum 

et ut aspicientes erant in caelo 
abe unte eo 

et ecce uiri duo adsistebant eis 
in ueste candida qui et dixerunt 


uiri galilaei qui statis 


aspicientes in caelum 

iste ihs qui adsumptus est a bobis 

sic enim ueniet 

quemadmod modum uidistis eum euntem 


in caelum 


tunc reuersi sunt hierusalem 


& monte qui uocatur oliueti 
qui est iuxta hierusalem 
sabbati habens iter 


Et cum introissent ascenderunt in superior 


ubi erant commorantes 
petrus et iohannis 
lacobus et andreas 
philippus et thomas 
bartholomeus et mattheus 
alphei 


et iudas 1acobi 


lacobus 


simon zelotes 


hi omnes erant perseberantes 


unanimes in oratione 
cum mulieribus et filiis 
. MM 
et maria matre ihu 
et fratribus eius 
(Fol. 417a.) 


Car. I. 8—14. 


-HiPABIC AIIOCTOA. 
—, — ο-. — 
e 
ἐν δεταισημεραισ ravraur ayagrac o r€rpoc  L 15 


εν μεσω των pabyrwy «urey 

Ἤν yap o oxXoc ovoparwy ert To avro wo. pe . 
avdper adeA dor Set πληρωθηναι 

τὴν γραφὴν ravrqv qv προειπεν TO TY To eyo 

δια στοματοσ Saved περι iovda 

TOV γενομένου ody ov 

τοισ συλλαβουσιν τον um 

ort κατηριθμημενοσ v ev ἡμιν 17 

og ehaxe rov κληρον τησ διακονιασ ταυτὴσ 


ό 


OVTOO' μεν OVY EKTNTATO χωριον EK Jo Gov 18 
Tho αδικιασ avrov 
καὶ πρηνὴσ γενομενοσ ἐλακηῆσεν μεσοσ 
καὶ ἐξεχυθὴη παντα ra. σπλανχνα avrov 
ο καὶ γνωστον eyevero πασιν 19 
τοισ κατοικουσιν Ἱερουσαλὴμ, 
wore κληθηναι To χωριον exewo 
Ty διαλεκτω avrov ακελδαιμαχ 
τουτεστιν χωριον αἱματοσ' 
Γέγραπται yap εν βιβλω ψαλμων 20 
γενηθητων eraviuc avrov ἐρημοσ 
καὶ μὴ ἡ O κατοίκων εν αυτή 
καὶ τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν avrov λαβέτω erepoo 
δὲ ovv των συνελθοντων qj.ew avdpov 21 
ἐν παντι TO χρονω 
wo εἰσηλθεν και εξηλθεν 
«fh pac o Ko - xpo apfapuevog 22 
aro rov βαπτισματοσ iwavov 
«oc THT ἡμερασ no ἀανελημφθη 
ad ἡμων μαρτυρα TH αναστασεωσ avrov 


συν ἡμεῖιν yever Gar eva rovrov 


ACTUS. APOSTOLOR: 329 


in diebus his cum surrexisset petrus 
in medio discipulorum dixit 
erat praeterea multitudo nonomnium quasi.cxX. 


uiri fratres oportet inpleri 


scripturam hanc quam praedixit spe sanctus 
peros dauid.deiuda 

qui factus est dux 

hiis qui adpraehenderunt ihm 

qui adnumeratus erat inter nos 

et sortitus fuit sortem ministerium huius 
hic ergo possidit praedium ex mercedem 
iniustitiae suae 

et pronus factus crepauit medius 

et effusa sunt omnia uiscera eius 

et notum factum est omnibus 

qui inhabitant hierusalem 

ita ut uocetur praedium illud 

lingua ipsorum 806] demach 

hoc est praedium sanguinis 


Scriptum est enim in libro psalmorum 


fiat habitatio eorum deserta 
et non sit qui inhabitet inea 
et episcopatum illius sumat alius 
oportet ergo eorum qui uenerunt nobiscum uiroru 
in omni tempore 
quoniam introibit et exiuit 
ad nos dna ihs xps incipiens 
& baptismate iohannen 
usquae in diem quo adsumptus est 
& nobis testem resurrectionis eius 


' nobiscum fieri unum istorum 


xarerrncey Óvo ἱωσηφ 23 | Etstatuitduos ioseph 
Tov kaXovj.evoy BapvaBay qui cognominatur barnabas 
(Fol. 4176.) (Fol. 418a.) 
Cap. I. 15—23. 


42 


330 


ΠΡΑΞ. AWOCTOA 
—S — υὦ.ἰς — 


oc ετεκληθη ἴουστοσ και μαθθιαν 

και προσευξαμενοι εἶπαν 

κε καρδιογνωστα παντων 

αναδειξον oy εξελεξω ex τουτων των δυο 
ayaXa ew τοπον τον rng διακονιασ ταυτὴσ 
καὶ αποστολησ 

ad no rape Ἰουδασ 

πορευθηναι εἰσ Tov τοπον τον ἴδιον 

καὶ ἐεδωκαν κληρουσ avrov 


και ἐπεσεν κληροσ ere μαθθιαν 


και συψηφισθη μετα των. ιβ.αποστολων 


και €y€V€rO EV ταισ ἡμεραισ εκεινρισ 


Tov συνπληρουσθαι τὴν ἡμεραν 
THO πεντηκοστησ' 


OVTOV αὐτῶὼν Ταντων €TTL TO αὐτὸ 


και εἰδον eyevero advw εκ του ουρανον ἤχοσ. 


worep φερομενησ βιαιασ πνοησ 

Kat ἐπλήρωσεν avro, TOV οἰκον 

ov σαν καθεζομενοι 

και ὠφθησαν αντοισ διαμεριζομεναι γλωσσαι 
ὠὡσειπυροσ καιεκαθισαν τε 


ες ev a ἑεκαστον avrov 


—, 
και ἐτλησθησαν παντεσ πνσ αγιον. 


᾿ και ἤρξατο Aadew ετεραισ γλωσσαισ 


καθωσ το πνὰ εδιδου αποφθεγγεσθαι αντοισ 
ev Ἱερουσαλήμ σαν κατο ἰκουντεσ ἴἸουδαιοι 
εὐλαβεισ ανδρεσ απο παντοσ εθνουσ 


τῶν ὕπο TOV ουρανον 


yevonerno Se rye φωνησ ταυτησ 


σννηλθετο πληθοσ και συνεχυθη, 
και ἤκουον εἰσ €kag Tog 
λαλουντασ rac γλωσσαισ avrov 
ἐξεισταντο δε καὶ εθαυμαζον 


(Fol. 418 δ.) 


25 


4 


ACTUS APOSTOL: 
= — — — 
. 
qui uocatur iustus et matthias 
et orantes dixerunt 
dne qui corda nosti omnium 
designa quem elegisti ex his duobus 
unum sumere locum ministerii huius 
et apostolatus 
& quo transgressus iudas 
abire in locum suum 
et dederunt sortes suas 
et ceeidit sors super matthian 
et dinumeratus est cum : xii. apostolos 
Et factum est in diebus illis 
et cum iuplerentur dies 
pentecostes 
erant simul omnes in unum 
Et factum est repente caelo echo 
tamquam ferretur uiolentus spiritus 
et inpleuit totam domum 
ubi erant sedentes 
et uisae sunt eius diuidi linguae 
tamquam ignis etsedit 
super unumquem quem eorum 
Et inpleti sunt uniuersi spu sancto 
et coiperunt loqui aliis linguis 
sic ut spe dabat eloqui eis 
in jerusalem erant habitantes iudaei 
timorati uiri ab omni gente 
quae sub caelo sunt 
Cumquae facta esset uox haec 
conuenit multitudo et consaesae sunt 
quiaudiebant unusquisque 
loquentes eos lingua sua 
obstupescebant autem et admirabantur 
(Fol. 419 a) 


Carp. I. 23— 1T. 7. 


— 0 A — 
ΠΡΑΞ. AIIOCTOA 
Se — 


ACTUS APOSTOL " 


λεγοντεσ προσ αλληλουσ 11. dicentes ad alterutrum 

ovy Sov ἀπαντεσ ovrot εἰσ LV nonne ecce uniuersi hi sunt 

ot λαλουντεσ yadsAazor - qui locuntur galilaei 

και TWO ἡμεισ GKOVOJAEV 8 et quomo do nos audimus 

exacroo τὴν διαλεκτον ἡμων unus quisque propria lingua nostra 

ev ἐγεννηθημεν in qua nati sumus 
παρθοι. καὶ μηδοι καὶ ἐλαμειται 9 | parthi  etmedi etaelamitae 

Ol κατοικουντεσ τὴν μεσοποταμιαν et qui inhabitant mesopotamiam 

tovdatay και καπ-παδοκιαν iudaeam et cappadociam 

TTOVTOV καὶ THY ἀσιαν φρυγιαν 10 pontum et asiam frygiam 

kat παμφυλιαν avyvirToy T€ et pamphyliam aegyptum 

καὶ τα pepn THO λιβονησ et partes lybiae 

THO Kara κυρηνὴν Kat οἱ επιδημουντεσ -qui est circa cyrenen et qui hic demorantur 
ρωμαιοιΐουδαιοι τε Kat προσηλυτοι romani iu daei et proselyti 

κρητὴσ καὶ apaBor τι cretenses  etarabi 

axovopey λαλουντων avrov eudiuimus loquentes eos 

TAL ἡμετεραισ γλωσσαισ To. μεγαλεια ToU ev nostris linguis magnalia di 

ἐξεισταντο δε παντεσ' 12 obstupescebant omnes 

και διηπορουν αλλοσ προσ αλλον et hesitabant alius ad alium 

ext Tw yeyovort καὶ λεγοντεσ' quod factum est et dicentes. 

τι θελει rovro εἰναι quid uult esse-hoc 

ετεροι δε διεχλεναζον Xeyovreo 13 alii uero deridebant dicentes 

ort γλευκουσ ovrot μεμεστωμενοι εἰσ Xy quia musto isti repleti sunt 
tore cTaDew Se o πετροσ' 14 | Cumastetisset autem petrus 

συν tow δεκα αποστολοισ cum decem apostolis 

ἐπῆρεν πρωτοσ τὴν φωνὴν avrov και εἰπε et elebabit primus uocem suam et dixit 
ανδρεσ ἵἴουδαιοι Kat παντεσ' uiri iudaei et omnes 

οι κατοικουντεσ ἱἹερουσαλημ. qui inhabitant hie rusalem 

TOVTO ἡμεῖν γνωστον COTW ho c uobis notum sit 

ενωτισατε τα ρήματα μον ausilate uerbis meis 

ov yap wo ὕμεισ' ὕπολαμβανεται 15 non enim sicut uos suspicamini 

ovrot μεθυουσιν ovens wpac THe ἡμερασ - hii hebrii sunt est enim hora tertia diei 

αλλα Tovro εστιν TO εἰρήμενον 16 sed hoc est quod dictum est 

(Fol. 419 5.) (Fol. 420a.) 
Car. II. 7— 16. A 


931 


932 TiPAR AIIOCTOAON 
— ο- SN — 
δια Tov προφητου II. 
Εσται ev ταισ ἐσχαταισ )j.epaug λεγεικσ 17 


-- 
€KX€0 απὸ TOV TVG μου ETL πασασ σαρκασ 
καὶ προφητευσουσν ot Viol αυτων 
καὶ θυγατερεσ αντων 
και OL νεανισκοι ορασει οψονται 
και ot πρεσβυτεροι ενὑπνιασθησονται 
Karey επιτουσ δουλουσ μου 18 
και ἐπι Tag δουλασ μου 
—À 
€KX€w απὸ του πνῪ μου 
και δωσω repara, εν τω ovpayo ayo 19 
και σήμεια επι THO YT kao 
ολιοσ μεταστρεφεται εἰσκοτοσ' 20 
και ἡ σεληνὴ εἰσ αιμα 
— 
πριν ελθειν ἡμεραν kv τὴν μεγαλην 
— 
και εσται TAT OO ανεπικαλεσηταιτοονοματοῦ KU 21 
σωθησεται COM 
ανδρεσ ἵσραηλειται ἀακουσατετουσ λογουστουτοὺσ 22 
a, my, 
env rov vaLopatov avopa απὸ Tov θυ 
ασμενον εἰσ ἡμασ 
δυναμεσει και τερασι καὶ σημιοισ 
— 
oca, €rovja€y δι avrov o Oc 
εν peow ὕμων καθωσ avrot οιδατε 
rovroy τὴ ὠὡρισμενὴ βονλη 23 
— 
και προγνωσεῖι rov θυ exdorov λαβοντεσ' 
δια χειροσ avopwv 
προσπηξαντεσ ανειλατε 
foam, 
ov o Üc ανεστησεν λυσασ tag wowace Tovaiov 24 
καθοτι ovk qv δυνατον 
κρατεισθαι avrov. Vr avrov 
Saved yap Xeyet εἰ avrov 25 
— 
προ ορωμὴν TOV kV μου 
ενωπίιον μου δια παντοσ 


(Fol. 420 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL” 


per prophetam 


Erit in nouissimis diebus dicit dns 


effundam spm meum super omnem carne 

et prophetabunt fili eorum 

et filias eorum 

et iubenes uisiones uidebunt 

et seniores somnia somniabunt 

et ego super seruos meos 

et super ancillas meas 

effundam spiritum meum 

et dabo prodigia in caelo susum 

et signa in terra deorsum 

sol conuertetur in tenebris 

et luna in sanguine | 
prius quam ueniat dies dni magnus 

et erit omnis quicumque inuocauerit nomen dai 


saluus erit 


uiri istrahelitae audite sermones hos 


ihm nazoreeum uirum a do 
probatum in nobis 

uirtutibus et pro digiis et signis 
quae fecit per eum ds 

in medio uestrum sicut ipsi scitis 
hunc destinato consilio 


et prouidentia di auditum accepistis 


. per manus iniquorum 


adfixum interfecistis 
quem ds suscitauit solutis amitibus inferiora 
quoniam possibile non esset 


detineri eum ab ipso 


dauid enim dicit in eum 


c 
prouidebam dnm meum 


in conspectu meo semper 
(Fol. 421 o.) 


Cap. II. 16—25. 


TPAR: AIOCTOA 
— — ὡς - 
; - 
ort € δεξιων μου ἐστιν ἵνα μη σαλευθω 
δια rovro ηυφρανθη ἡ καρδια μου 
και ἡηγαλλιασατο ἡ yAwooa μου 
er δε και ἡ caps μου 
κατασκηνωσει ed ελπιδει 
ort ουκ ενκαταλειψεισ 
τὴν ψυχὴν pov εἰσ adyy 
ovde δωσεισ rov ὁσιον σον 
Wey διαφθοραν 
γνωρισασ μοι οδουσ ζωησ 
πληρωσεισ με εὐφροσυνὴησ 
pera TOV προσωπου σου 
ανδρεσ' αδελφοι εξον ecrew 
μετα παρρησιασ προσ ὕμασ 
περιτον πατριαρχου δανειδ 
οτι καὶ ετελευτησεν καὶ era 
και TO [LVYJLLOV αντον ἐστιν παρ ἡμῖν 
αχρι THE ἡμερασ ταντὴσ 
προφητησ ovy ὕπαρχων και εἰδων 
OTL ορκω ὡμασεν αντω O óc 
εκ xaprrov THO καρδιασ avrov 
κατα σαρκα ἀναστῆσαι TOV χρν 
και καθισαι ert Tov θρονον avrov 
αναστασεωσ TOV χρὺ 
oret ουτεενκαταλειφθη εἰσ adov 
ovre ἡ σαρξαντον ede δια φθοραν 
TOVTOV OVV iy Qv€g T0 €V 0 óc 
ov TAYTED NLELT μαρτυρεσ ἐσμεν 
τὴ δεξια ovy Tov θυ ὑψωθεισ 
καὶ τὴν ἐπαγγελιαν rov αγιον πνσ λαβων 
παρα rov πατροσ ἐξέχεεν υμειν 
o και βλεπετε και axovere 


ov yap Saved ἀνεβὴ εἰσ τουσ ov ρανουσ 


(Fol. 421 5.) 


II. 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


AUCTUS APOSTOL' 333 


quia a dextra mea est ut non commouear 
propterea laetatum est cor meum 
et exultauit lingua mea 

adhuc autem et caro mea 
inhabitauit in spsem 

quia non derelinques 

animam meam aput inferos 
nequae dabis sanctum tuum 
uidere corruptionem 

notas fecisti mihi uias uitae 
inpleuis me iucunditate 


cum facie tua 


uiri fratres licet mihi dicere 


cum fiducia ad uos 

de patriaarcha dauid 

quia defunctus est et sepultus est 

et monumentum eius est aput nos 

usque in hunc diem 

cum esset autem propheta et sciret 

quia iureiurando iurauit ei ds 

de fructum de praecordia eius 

secundum carne suscitare xpm 

collocare super thronum eius 

resurrectione xpi 

quia neque derelictus est aput inferos 

neque caro eius uidit corruptionem 

hunc ergo ibn resuscitauit ds 

cuius nos omnes testes sumus 

dextera ergo di exaltatus 

et pollicitationem sps sancti accepta 

a patre effudit uobis 

quod et uidistis et audistis 

non enim daui d ascendit in caelos 
(Fol. 422 a.) 


Cap. II. 25—34. 


IPAE. AIIOCTOAON 


εἰρηκεν yap avrog 
— a, 

Aeyet Ko τω κω μου 

καθον εκ δεξιων μον 

eoc θωτου exÜpova σον 

ὕποποδιον των ποδων σου 
ασφαλωσ ovy γεινωσκετω TO 0 Οἰκοσ ἴσρα s 

--- -- 
ort καὶ Ky καὶ χρν οθσ εποιησεν 
M m 

TOVTOV τὴν ον ὕμεισ εἐσταυρωσατε 
Τοτεπαντεσ οἱ συνελθοντεσ 
καὶ ακουσαντεσ κατενυγ ἤσαν τὴ καρδια 
καιτινεσ €£ avTov ειἰπαν 
προσ TOV πετρον kat του αποστολουσ 
τι OVV ποιήσομεν ανδρεσ αδελφοι 
ὑποδειξατεημειν 
πετροσ δεπροσ αντουσ φησιν 
μετανοησατε 
και βαπτισθητω ἐκαστοσ ὕμων 


«v TO ovopaTt TOU KV tU Xp" 


εἰσ αφεσιν αμαρτιων 

και λήμψεσθαι την δωρεαν του αγιου re 
Nee yap ἐστιν ἡ ἐπαγγελια 

και TOU TEKVOUT μων 

και πασιτοι εἰσ μακραν 


οσουσ αν προσκαλεσητε Ko οϑσ μων 
erepour δελογοισ πλειοσιν 

διεμαρτυρατο και παρεκαλει αὐτουσ λεγων 
σωθητε απὸ THO γενεασ ravra THT σκολιασ 


οἱ μεν ovv πιστευσαντεσ τον λογον avrov 


εβαπτισθησαν 
και προσετεθησαν εν εἐκεινὴ TH ἡμερα 
ψυχαι wore τρισχειλειαι 
και σαν προσκαρτερουντεσ τὴ διδαχὴ 
TOV αποστολῶων ev Ἱερουσαλημ. 
(Fol. 422 6.) 'NT 


42 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM 
- τς ὡς - 
t 

dixit enim ipse 

dixit dns dno meo 

sede ad dexteram meam 

donec ponam inimicos tuos 

scamillum pedum tuorum 
pro certo ergo sciat omnis domus istrahel 
quia et dnm et xpm ds fecit 
hunc ihm quem uos crucifixistis 

Tunc omnes qui conuenerant 

exaudientes stimulati sunt corde 
et quidam ex ipsis dixerunt 
ad petrum et ad apostolos 
quid ergo faciemus uiri fratres 
ostendite nobis 
petrus autrus autem ad eos ait 
paenitentiam agite 
et baptizetur unus quisque uestrum 
in nomine dni ihu xpi 
in remissione peccatorum 
et accipite gratiam sanctum spm 
nobis enim est haec repromissio 
et filiis nostris 
et omnibus qui in longinquo 
quos aduocauerit dns ds noster 
aliis quoque sermonibus pluribus 
contestabatur et exortabatur eos dicens 
salui estote ex progenie hanc praua 
hi ergo credentes sermoni eius 
baptizati sunt 
'et adiectae sunt in ill o die 
animae quasi tria milia 
et erant perseuerantes in doctrina 


apostolorum in hierusalem 
(Fol. 423 4.) 


Cap. II. 34—43. 


TIPAHIC AHOCTOAQN ^ 
— — «-' wY — 


καὶ τὴ κοινωνια Tn κλασι του aprov- iI. 
καὶ TALE προσενχαισ 

eyewero 8e rao ψυχὴ φοβοσ 43 
πολλα repara kat σήμεια 

δια των αποστολων eyecvero 

παντεσ T€ OL πιστενοντεσ ἤσαν ἐπέτο AUTO 4 
καὶ εἰχον παντα κοιγα 

καὶ οσοι κτήματα εἰχον 45 
ἢ ὕπαρξεισ επίπρασκον 

και διεμεριζον avra, καθημεραν race 

TOUT ἂν TLC χρειαν εἰχεν 

TOVT€O T€ προσεκαρτέρουν εν τω ἵερω 46 
και κατοικουσαν €TTL TO AUTO κλωντεσ τε ἀρτὸ 

εν ἀγαλλιασει 

Kat αφελοτητι καρδιασ αἰνουντεσ Toy ὃν 47 


Kat ἐχοντεσ xapw προσ oXov τὸν κοσμον 


μετελαμβανον 7 


οδε xc προσετιθει τουσ σωζομενουσ 
καθημέραν ert To avro εν τὴ εκκλησια 
Ev de rato ἡμέραισ ταυταισ IIL 1 
Trpoc Kat iwayyno aveBatvov εἰσ To iepow 
τὸ δειλεινον ext τὴν ὡραν EVATy τη προσευχησ 
και ov τισ ανὴρ χωλοσ εκ κοιλιασ μήτροσ αὐτοῦ 2 
εβασταζετο ον ετιθουν καθημεραν 
poc τὴν θυραν τονΐἵερον 
τὴν λεγομενὴν wpatay 
TOV αἰτειν ἐλεημοσυνὴν παρ avruy 
εισπορενομενων avroy εἰσ τὸ ἵερον 
ovrog ατενισασ row οφθαλμοισ avrov 3 
και (Doy πετρον και iwarnv 
μελλοντασ εἰναι εἰσ To ἵερον 
npwra αὐτουσ ἐλεημοσυνὴν 
Εμβλεψασ δε οπετροσ εἰσ avrov 4 


συν WWAYYV καὶ εἰπεν ατενεισον εἰσ quac 


(Fol. 423 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM 335 


et in communicatione fractionis panis 

et orationibus 

nascebatur quoque omni animae timor 
multa etiam portenta et signa 
perapostolosfiebant — - 

omnes etiam credentes erant in unum 

et habebant omnia communia 

et qui possessiones habebant 

et facultates distrahebant 

et dispartiebantur ea cottidie omnibus 
secundum quod qui op us erat 

omnes quoque perseuerantes in templo 

et per domos id ipsum capiebant panes 
accipientes cibum in exultatione 

et simplicitate cordis laudem dicentes do 
et habentes gratiam aput totum mundu. 
dnà autem autem adiciebat eos qui salui fiebant 


cot tie in unum in ecclesia, 


in diebus autem ipsis 


petrus et iohanes ascendebant in templu 

ad uesperum ad horam nonam orationis 

et ecce qui dam uir clodus ex utero matris suae 
baiolabatur quem ponebant cot tidie 

ad ianuam templi 

eam quae dicitur pulchra 

ut peteret elemosynam ab his 


qui ingrediebantur in templum 


hic respiciens ocul is suis 
et uidit petrum et iohannen 
incipientes introire in templum 


rogabat eos elemosynam 


intuitus autem petrus in eum 


cum iohannen et dixit aspice ad nos 
(Fol. 424 a.) 


Carp. II. 41—III. 4. 


336 TIPAR AlIOCTOAON | 


o δεατενεισασ avrow 
προσδοκων τι Xa le παρ avrov 
Ειπεν de o πετροσ 
ἀργυριον και χρυσιον ovx ὕπαρχει μοι 
o δε exw rovro σοι διδωμι 
εν TO ονοματι - χρυ TOV ναζοραῖιον περιπατει 
και πιασασ αντον tho δεξιασ χειροσ ἤγειρεν 
Kat παραχρημα ἐσταθὴ 


Kat ἐσταῖρ εωθησαν avrov 


III. 5 


at βασεισ και ra. σφυρα και εξαλλομενοσ corn 8 


και περιεπατει χαιρομενοσ 
και εἰσηλθεν συν avrou εἰσ το ἵερον 
αινων τὸν Oy 
και εἰδεν rag ολαοσ avrov περιπατουντα 
καὶ αἰνουντα roy Oy 
εἐπεγεινωσκον ται αντὸν OTL OVTOG ἣν 
Ὁ προσ τὴν ἐλεημοσυνην καθεζομενοσ' 
ἐπὶ T1) wp € a πυλη τουΐερου 
καὶ ἐπλησθησαν Gap Bove και exraa eoo 
ἐπι TO 'yeyevnp.evo avro 
Exropevopevov 8e rov trerpov και ἴωανου 
συνεξεπορευετο κρατῶν avrove 
ot δεθαμβηθεντεσ ἐστησαν 
εν τὴ στοὰ ἡ καλουμενὴ σολομωνοσ᾽ ἐκθαμβοι 
αποκριθεισ δε o πετροσ eurev προσ avrova 
ανδρεσ ἴσραηλιται τι θαυμαζεται ἐπι Tovro 
ἡ New τι ατενιζετε 
wo ἡμῶν τὴ ἴδια δυναμι ἡ ευσεβ ια 
TOVTO πεποιήκοτων TOUTO περιπάτειν αντὸ 
οϑο σαβρααμ. και θσ ἴσακ. και G0 ἵακωβ 
o c. των TATEPWY ἡμὼν 
εδοξασεν rov maida avrov ay x 
ον ἡμεισ παρεδωκατε εἰσ κρισιν 


(Fol. 4246.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


ad ille adtendebat eos 
expectans aliquid accipere ab eis 
dixit autem petrus 
argentum et aurum non est mihi 
quod habeo hoc tib i do 
in nomine ihu xpi nazorei ambula 
et adpraehensum eum dextera manu suscitabit 
et confestim stetit 
et firmatae sunt eius 
uases et crura et cum exsiluisset stetit 
et ambulabat gaudens 
et introibit cum eis in templum 
laudem dans do 
Et uidit omnis populus eum ambulantem 
et laudantem dm 
cognoscebantque eum quia hic erat 
qui ad elemosynam sedebat 
in porta illa pulchra templi 
et repleti sunt terroris et stupefactionis 
in eo quod contegerat ei 
Exeunte autem petrum et iohannen 
cum eis ibat tenens eos 
stupentes autem stabant 
in porticum qui uocatur solomonis stupebant 
respondens autem petrus dixit ad eos 
uiri istrahelitae quid admiramini super bee 
aut nos quid intuemini 
quasi nos nostra propria uirtute aut pietate 
hoc fecerimus ut ambulet hic 
ds abraham et ds isac.et ds iacob 
ds patrum nostrorum 
clarificauit puerum suum ihm xpm 
quem tradidistis in iudicio 
(Fol. 425 a.) 


CAP. 111. 5—1 3: 


— SS τα — 
IIPAR  AHIOCTOA 
— — «-. — 


Kat ἀπηρνήσασθαι avroy Ii. 
κατὰ προσωπὸν πειλατου 

TOV κρειναντοσ εκεινου 

ἀπολυειν avrov θελοντοσ 


ὕμεισ δε Tov αγιον και δικαιον 14 


«Bapuvare και ητῆσατε ανδρα φονεια 


χαρισθηναι ὕμειν 

roy δε αρχήγον Tho {wyo ἀπεκτείνατε 15 
ov 060 NY €tpev ex vexpwv 

OV ὕμεισ μαρτυρεσ ἐσμεν 

και ἐπὶ TY πιστει του ονοματοσ αντου τό 


τοῦτον θεωρειτε και ovdare 
OTL ἐστερεωσεν TO ονομα αυτον 
και ἢ πιστισ ἡ δι avrov ἐδωκεν avro 
τὴν ολοκλήριαν ταυτὴν 
απεναντι παντων ὕμων 

καὶ γυν ανδρεσ aDeA oot ἐεπισταμεθα 17 
οτι ὕμεισ μεν κατα αγνοιαν ἐπραξατε πονηρο 
ὡσπερ καὶ οἱ ἀρχοντεσ ὕμων 
οδεϑο o προκατηγγειλεν 18 
δια στοματοσ παντων των προφητων 
παθειν τον χρν αντον ἐπληρωσεν ουτωσ 
μετανοησατε ovy Kat επιστρεψατε 19 
εἰσ ro εξαλειφθηναι rac apapriac ὕμων 
οπωσ av ἐπελθωσιν καιροι αναψυξεωσ 
απὸ προσωπου του κυ 
και ἀποστειλη TOV προκεχειρισμεένον ὕμιν xp" . op 20 
ov det ovpavov μεν Sef aoa. 21 
GXpt xXpovov αποκαταστασεωσ παντων 
wy eXadnoev o 6c δια GTOJATOO TOV αγιων αὐτου 
των προφητων 

μωῦσησ μεν eurey προσ τουσ πατερασ uo 22 
ort προφητὴν ὕμειν ἀναστήσει Ko 0 6G ὕμω 

(Fol. 425 5.) 


ACTUS ^ APOST 337 
— — oS — 


et negastis eum 

ante faciem pilati 

cum iudicasset ille 

dismittere eum uoluit 

uos autem ipsum sanctum et iustum 
grabastis et postulastis uirum homicida 
donari uobis 

principem uero uitae interfecistis 

quem ds suscitauit ἃ mortuis - 

quibus nos testes sumus 

etin fide nominis eius 

hunc quem uidistis et scitis 

consol dauit nomen eius 

et fides que per ipsum est dedit ei 
integritatem hanc 

coram omnibus uobis 

Et nunc uiri fratres. quia uos 

quidem per inorantiam egistis iniquitatem 
Sicut et principes uestri 

ds autem quae praenuntiauit 

per os omnium pro phetarum 

pati xpm suum inpleu it sic 
paenitentiam ergo agite et conuertimini 
ad hoc ut deleantur peccata uestra 

ut ueniant tempora re frigerii 

a facie dmi 

et mittat praedestinatum uobis ihm xpm 
quem oportet caelum quidem accipere 
usque ad tempora restitutionis omnium 
quae locutus est ds} per os sanctorum suoru 


prophetarum 


moyses quidem dixit ad patres nostros 


quia prophetam uobis suscitauit dus ds uester 
(Fol. 426 a.) 


Cap. 111. 13—22. 


΄ 


48 


338 PAZ: AIIOCTOAON- "ACTUS APOSTOL' 
— oA — — — SS — 


ex των adeAduy nw III. de fratribus uestris 
wo ἐμου avrov ακουσεσθαι tamquam meipsum audietis 
κατα παντα oca, ay λαλησὴ προσ ὕμασ secundum omnia quaecumq locutus fuerit ad uo 
eora: δεπασα ψ vxy ἡτισ ay μὴ ακουσὴ 23 erit autem omnis anima quaecumq *non audierit 
του προφητου exewov εξολεθρευθησεται prophetam illum disperibit 
εκ Tov Àaov καὶ TAYTET OL προφῆται axo σαμουηλ 24 de popul o et omnis prophetae a samuel 
και Toy κατεξησ οελαλησεν | et eorum qui ordine fuerunt quodquod locuti sunt 
και κατηνγεῖλαν rac ἡμερασ TAvTAT et adnuntiauerunt dies hos 
Yyeur erat ὕιοι των προφητῶν 25 | Uos estis filii prophetarum 
και tno διαθηκησ qv o Bg Su Üero et eius dispositionis quam ds disputauit 
προσ Tove πατεράσ μων λεγων προσ αβρααμ ad patres nostros dicens ad abraham 
και εν TW σπέρματι σον ενευλογηθησονται et in semine tuo benedicetur 
πασαι Al πατριαι THO γὴσ omnis patriae terrae 
ὕμειν qr porov o ὃσ αναστήησασ τον παιδα αὐτοῦ 16 uobis primum ds suscitauit puerum suum 
εξαπεστειλεν evAoyovyrao Üpag,. ev T ator misit benedicentem uos 
τρέφειν EKATTOT EK των πονηρὼν U μων" in eo cum abertatur unusquisque 8 nequitiis suis 
λαλουντων de avrwv wal loquentib us autem eis 
προσ τὸν λαον Ta ρήματα ravra. ad populum uerba haec 
ἐπεστησαν ot ELEPELT καὶ οἱ σαδδουκαιοε adsisterunt sacerdotes et sadducaei 
KO4Q T OVOVJA€VOL 2 dolore percussi 
δια ro διδασκειν avrove τὸν Aaoy eo quod docerent ipsi populum 
και avayyeAXev roy - et adnuntiarent ihm 
εν TH αναστασειῖ TOV νεκρων in resurrectione mortuorum 
και ἐπειβαλοντεσ avrow Tad χειρασ 3 et inmiserunt eis manus 
και eÜevro eur τήρησιν εἰσ THY ἐπαυριον et posuerunt in adsertionem in crastinu 
ἣν yap comepa non erant enim uespera iam 
πολλοι be rov ακουσαντων Toy Xoyov 4| multi uero eorum qui audierunt uerbum 
επιστευσαν crediderunt 
και αριθμοσ τε eyernOy ανδρων wo χιλιαδεσ e ' et factus est numerus uirorum ad quinq. mili 
Eyevero δε ext τὴν avpioy ἡμεραν 5| Contigit autem in crastinum diem 
συνήχθησαν ox ἀρχοντεσ και ot πρεσβυτεροι congregati sunt principes et seniores 
και γραμματεισ ev iepov σαλημ et scribae in hierusalem 
καὶ avvac o apxtepeva 6 et annas pontefex 
(Fol. 426 ὁ.) | | (Fol. 427 a.) 


i 


Carr. III. 22—IV. 6, 


— ss — — 
IIPA AIIOCTOAQN 
— ο. —À : --- 


και κα i ac - και ἵωναθασ και αλεξανδροσ 
και οσοι ἤσαν εκ γενουσ ἀαρχιερατικου 
καὶ στήσαντεσ αυτουσ εν μεσω 
ἐπυνθάνοντο ev ποία δυναμ c 
ἢ €v TOW ονοματι εποιήσατε τοντο ὕμεισ 
Tore πετροσ πλησθεισ re aytou 
€ur€y προσ avrove ἀρχοντεσ rov Aaov 
και pea Burepot rov tapa 
€t ἡμεισ σήμερον ανακρεινομεθα o. Ups 
er evepyyea eua. ανθρωπου ασθενουσ 
εν τινι ουτοσ σεσωσται 

στο we 
yvov ἐστω πασιν ὕμειν 
kat παντι TO Aaw icpanr 
OTL ἐν Tw OVOMATL - χρυ του ναζωραιου 
ον ὕμεισ ἐσταυρωσατε 
ov o c. ἤγειρεν εκ νεκρων 
εν τουτω ουτοσ παρεσ THKEV 
ενωπιον ὕμων vying 
ουτοσ ἐστιν ολιθοσ o εξουθενηθεισ ih ἡμῶ 
των οἰκοδομων 
ογενομένοσ εἰσ κεφαλὴν γωνιασ 
Kat οὐκ ἐστιν εν αλλω ovÓeyc 
OV Yap εστιν ετερον ονόμα ὕπο τον ουρᾶνο 
o δεδομε νον avOpwrow 
εν w det σωθῆναι ἡμασ 
Θεωρουντεσ Se τὴν rov πετρου παρρὴσ tay 
και ἴωανου και καταλαβομενοι 
ort αγθρωποι ἀγραμματοι εἰσιν «εθαυμαζον 
ἐπεγεινωσκον δεαντουσ ort συν τω tq ma 
Toy ανθρωπον βλεποντεσ 
συν auTwy εἐστωτα Tov τεθεραπευμενον 
᾿ οὔδεν εἰχον ποιῆσαι ἡ αντιπειν 


καιλευσαντεσ αντουσ εξω τον συνεδριου 
απ axOnvas 
(Fol. 427 5.) t 


IY. 


10 


12 


15 


ACTUS' APOSTOL 


et caifas et ioathas et alexander 

et quodquod erant ex genere pontificali 
cum statuisset eos in medio 
interrogabant in qua uirtute 


aut quo nomine fec istis hoc uos 


. — 
tunc petrus inpletus spo sancto 


dixit ad eos principes huius populi 
et seniores is trahel 

si nos hodie interrogamur a uobis 
super benefacio hominem infirmum 
in quo hic saluus factus est 

notum sit omnibus uobis 

et omni populo istrahel 

quia in nomine xpi ihu nazoraei 
quem uos crucifixistis 

quem ds gus citauit & mortuis 

in ist o hic adsistit 

in con spect u uestro sanum 

hic est lapis qui praeiectus est a uobis 
aedificatoribus 

qui factus est in capud angul i 

et non est in alio quondam 

nequae aliud est nomen suc caelo 
quod datum est hominibus 

in quo oportet salbos fie ri nos 


intuentes uero petri fiduciam 


et iohannis et adsec uti 

quia homines sine litteris sunt ad mirabantur 
cognoscebant autem eos quia cum ihu erant 
hominem quo que conspicientes 

cum ipsis stantem illum que curatum 


nihil habebant contradicere 


Cum iussissent autem eos extra consilium 


habire 
(Fol. 438a.) 


Car. IV, 6—15. 


339 


340 


t -- 0 --΄ 
ΠΡΑΞ | AIIOCTOAQON 
a i, 0 — 


συνεβαλον προσ αλληλουσ Aeyovreo 

τι ποιήσομεν τοισ ανθρωποισ τουτοισ 

OTL μεν yap γνωστον σημειον 

yeyovevas δι avrov 

πασιν TOU κατοικουσιν Ἱερουσαλήμ, 
φανεροτερον εστιν και ov δυναμεθα ἀρνισθαι 
ἵνα μὴ eme πλεον τι διανεμηθὴ εἰσ TOV λαον 
ἐπιλησομεθα ουν οντοισ 

μῆκετι λαλειν emt τω ονοματι TOVTO 
pnden ανθρωπων 

συνκατατιθεμενων δε avroy Τὴ γνωμη 
φωνησαντεσ αὐτουσ παρηγγειλαντο 


κατα τὸ μὴ φθεγγεσθαι 
— 
μῆδε ao kew emt ro ονοματι του uu 


αποκρείθεισ δε πετροσ και Ἰωανησ 


εἰπὸν προσ αὐτουσ 
εἰ δικαιον ἐστιν ενωπιον του θυ ὕμων ακοῦει 
μαλλον ἡ του ὃν Kpeware 
ov δυναμεθα yap new 

a, edapey και nrovoapev λαλειν 


ot δε προσαπειλησαμενοι αἀπελυσαν avTova 


IV. 16 


19 


20 


21 


p? EUPLOKOYTED auruxy TO TUT κολασωνται GUToUG 


δια τον Aaoy ort παντεσ 

εδοξαζον τον ὃν ert TO γεγονοτι 

eroy yap ἣν Àeuovay - uy o ανθρωποσ 
ε ov γεγονει TO σήμειον THT ειασεωσ' 
απολυθεντεσ δε λθον προσ τουσ ἴδιουσ' 
καὶ amny γειλαν οσα προσ αυτουσ 


οιαρχιερεισ και οἱπρεσβυτεροι εἰπαν 


ομοθυμαδον npav φωνὴν προσ τον ὃν 


καὶ €t7ray 


(Fol. 428 5.) 


22 


23 


t = 
O1 6e axovcayrea και ἐπίγνοντεσ THVToU Üvevepyeia 24 


— 
Δεσποτα av o Oo o rotnoac Tov ovpavoy Kay τὴν 


γὴν 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


conferebant ad inuicem dicentes 

quid faciamus hominibus istis 

quoniam quidem notum signum 

factum est per ipsos 

omnibus qui inhabitant hierusalem 
manifestum est et non possumus negare 
sed ut non amplius quid serpiat in pop ulum 
comminemur ergo eis 

iam non lo qui in nomine hoc 

cuiquam hominum 

consentientibus autem omnibus notitia , 
uocantes eos praeceperunt illis 

ne omnino loquerentur 


. e us 
neque docerent in nomine ihu 


respondens autem petrus et iohannes 


dixerunt ad eos 

si iustum est in conspectu di uestri audire 
magis quam dm iudicate 

non possumus enim nos 


quae uidimus et audiuimus loqui 


. ad illi etiam comminat dimiserunt eos 


nihil inuenientes causam qua punirent eos 
propter populum quoniam omnes 
clarificabant dm super quo d factum est 
annorum autem erat plurimum. x1- his homo 
super quem factum erat hoc signum sanitatis 
dismisai autem uenerunt ad suos 

et renuntiauerunt quanta ad eos 


pontifices et seniores dixerunt 


ad illi cum audissent et cognouissent di uirtuiz 


unanimiter autem uocem leuauerunt ad dm 
et dixerunt 


—Á — . Ld * 
Dne tu es ds qui fecisti caelum et terram 


(Fol. 429 a.) 


Car. IV. 15— 24. 


n T Nn —, — 
IIPAR8' AIIOCTOAQON 
— SY, eS — — 


και THY θαλασσαν και παντα τα εν αντοισ 
— 
οσ δια πνσ αγιου δια rov στοματοσ λαλησασ 


Savers παιδοσ σου 


ivart εφρνξαν εθνη 
και λαοι ἐμελετῆσαν καινα 


παρεστησαν οι βασιλεισ THT γὴσ 
Kat οἱαρχοντεσ συνήχθησαν emt To avro 
κατα TOV κυ και κατα TOV χρὺ GUTOV 
συνήχθησαν yap em αληθειασ ev τὴ πολει ταύτη 
ext TOV aytov σου παιδα ἣν ov €expeurag 
ἡρωδησ τε και ποντιοσ πιλατοσ 
συν εθνεσιν και λαοισ ἱσραηλ 
ποιῆσαι οσα χεὶρ σου και ἢ βουλὴ σου 
προωρισεν γενεσθαι 
και τα νυν κε ες de emt Tag aytag avrov 
και Soo τοισ δουλοισ σου 
pera πασὴσ παρρησιασ XaXew τὸν λογον cov 
εν TO Τὴν χείρα TOV εκτεινειν LT ἴασιν 
και σημεια και Tepara γενεσθαι 
δια Tov ονοματοσ TOV αγιου παιδοσ σον e 
και δεηθεντων avrov 
ἐσαλευθὴ o τοποσ Ev « σαν συνηγ μενοι 
καὶ ἐτλησθησαν amayrea Tov αγιου πνο 
Kat ἐλαλουν τον Xoyov του bu μετα παρρησιασ 
παντιτω θελοντι πιστευειν 
του δε πληθουσ των πιστευσαντων 
ἣν καρδια καὶ ψυχη μια 
και ovK ἣν διακρισισ ev αυτοισ ουδεμια 
και ουδεισ των ὕπαρχοντων αὐτου 
ἐλεγεν ἴδιον εἰναι 
αλλα jv avrow παντα κοινα 
καὶ δυναμει μεγαλη 
απεδιδουν To μαρτ νριον ot αποστολοι 
(Fol. 429 6.) 


IV. 


25 


26 


28 


29 


320 


22 


33 


ACTUS APOSTOL' 
— -— Ἐς - = 
et mare et omnia quae in eis sunt 
qui per spm sanctum per os locutus est 
dauid puero tuo 
quare fremuerunt gentes 
et popul i meditati sunt inania 
adsisterunt reges terrae 
et principes congregati sunt in unu 
aduersus dnm et aduersus xpm eius 
Collecti sunt enim reuera in ciuitate hac 
super sanctum puerum tuum ihm quem unxist 
herodes uero et pontius pilatus 


cum gentibus et populis istrahel 


᾿ facere quaecumq ‘manus tua et uoluntas t 


praedestinauit fieri 
et nunc sunt dne aspice super minacias eoru 
et da seruis tuis 
cum fiducia omni loqui uerbum tuum 
in eo cum manum extendas ad curatione 
et signa et por tenta fiant 
per nomen santi pueri tui ihu 
Et cum obse crassent ipsi 
commotus est locus in quo erant collecti 
et inpleti sunt omnes sancto Epo 
et loquebatur uerbum d.i cum fidu cia 
omni uolenti credere 
multitudinis autem eorum qui crediderunt 
erat cor et anima una 
et non erat accusatio in e is ulla 
et nemo quicquam ex eo quo d possidebant 
dicebant suum esse 
sed erant eis omnia com munia 
et uirtute magna 
reddebant testim apostoli 
(Fol. 430 a.) 


Cap. IV. 24— 33. 


941 


THT avagTQGg €o0 TOU KU τὴν Xp" IV. 


xapu T€ peyady jv erc παντασ avrovg 
ovde yap evdena τισ ὕπηρχεν ev avTOLT 34 
οσοι yap κτήτορεσ σαν χωριων 
ἢ οἰκείων υπηρχον πωλουντεσ 

at φεροντεσ τειμασ των TITPATKO ὧν 
και ετιθουν παρα τουσ ποδασ TOV αποστολῶ 35 
διεδιδετο Se ενι εκαστω 
καθοτι ay Tur χρειαν ειχεν 
ioc δεο επικληθεισ βαρναβασὕποτων ἀποστολω 36 
οεστιν μεθερμηνενομενον ὕιοσ' παρακλησεωσ 
κυπριοσ λενειτησ Tw γένει 
ὕπαρχοντοσ avro χωρίον 37 
qoe ag NVEYKE TO χρημα 
και εθηκεν παρα Tove ποδασ' των αποστολω 
ανὴρ Se rwr ονοματι avavtag Y.1 
συν σαφφυρα τὴ γυναικι avrov 
ETWANTEY κτημα καὶ ἐνοσφ aaro ἐκ THO TNT 2 
ovvedviag και THO γυναικαικοσ 


και EVEYKAT μεροσ τι 
παρα Tove ποδασ rov ἀποστόλων eÜero 


€urev δε πετροσ προσ avaviay 3 
Sua t ἐπληρωσεν o caravac τὴν καρδιαν cov 
ψευσασθαι a ro αγιον πνα 

και νοσφισασθαι σε απὸ THO τειμησ TOV χωριοῦ 
ουχι μεσον σοι ἐμενεν 4 
και πραθεν ev τὴ ἐξουσια ὕπηρχεν 

τι ort εθου εν τὴ καρδια σου 

ποίησαι πονήρον τουτο 

ovk ἐἡΨψευσου ανθρωποισ αλλα τω Qo 


axovcag de avaviag Tour Xoyovg TovTOVG 5 


παραχρημα πεσὼν εξεψυξεν 
καὶ eyevero φοβοσ μεγασ 
(Fol. 430 5.) NA 


"ACTUS APOSTOL: 
— — —, --. 


resurrectionem dni ihu xpi 


Gratia magna erat super eos omnes 


nec enim inosp quisquam erat in eis 

quod quod possessores erant praediorum 
aut domum uendentes 

et adferebant praetia quae ueniebant 

et ponebant ad pedes apostolorum 
distribuebantur uero singulis 

secundum cui que opus erat.ioseph autem 
qui cognominatus est barnabas ab apostolis 
quo d est interpraetatum filius exhorattonis 
cyprius leuita genere 

cum esset ei ager | 

uenundato eo adtulit hanc pecuniam 

et posuit iuxta pedes apostolorum 

quidam autem uir nomine ananias 

cum sapphire uxore sua 

uendidit possessione et subtraxit de praetio 
conscia uxore sua 

et cum adtulissent partem quandam 

iuxta pedes apostolorum posuit 


dixit autem petrus ad ananian 


ut quid adinpleuit satanas cor tuum 
mentiri te spiritui sancto 
et intercipere te ex praetium praedii 
nonne manens tibi manebat 
et destractum in tua potestate erat 
quid utique posuisti in corde tuo 
facere dolose rem istam 
non es mentitus hominibus sed do 
audies autem ananias sermones hos 
subito cum cecidisset obriguit 
et factus esf timor magnus 

(Fol. 431 a.) 


Carr. IV. 33—V. x. 


=| 


— 0 A — — 
IPAE. AIIOCTOAQON 
τ SS SS — — 


ἐπὶ παγτασ τουσ ἀκονοντασ 20v. 
ἀνασταντεσ δε οἱ vewrepot συνεστιλαν avro. 6 
καὶ eLeveyxavrec εθαψαν 

eyevero Se wo ρων vy διαστεμα 7 
Kat ἢ γυνὴ avrov py via 

TO γεγονοσ ειἰσηλθεν 


Curey δεπροσ αὐτὴν o πετροσ ἐπερωτήησω σε 8 


εἰ apa Τὸ χωριον τοσουτου ἀαπεδοσθε 
ἢ oy eurev ναι τοσουτου 
o δεπετροσ αὐτὴν τι ore 9 
συνεφωνησεν ὕμειν πειρασαι To TV ToU kV. 
ἴδου ot rodeo των θαψαντων τον avdpa cov 
ext τή θυρα και efourovaw σε 
και ἐπεσεν παραχρημα προσ τουσ ποδασ αὐτοῦ 10 
και ἐξεψυξεν 
Εισελθοντεσ δε ot νεαγισκοι 
€vpov αντὴν vexpay 
Kat συνστειλαντεσ εξηνεγκαν 
και εθαψαν προσ τον ανδρα αυτησ 
Kat eyevero φοβοσ μεγασ 11 

ed ολὴν Tv ἐκκλησιαν kat emi παντασ 
Tove GKOVOVT€G ταντα 

δια δε των χείρων των azocToXoV eyerero σημεια 12 
Kat τερατα πολλα εν τω Aaw 
και ἦσαν o μοθυ μαδον amavrea 
εν Tw iepo εν TH στοα τὴ συλομωνοσ 
και ουδεισ των λοιπων eroAua κολλασθαι αὐτοισ 13 
αλλ ἐμεγαλυνεν avrove o λαοσ 
μάλλον δεπροσετιθεντο πιστενοντεσ 1 
τω κω πληθι ανδρων τε και γυναικων 

wore κατα πλατειασ expepey Trove ασθενεισ αὐτῷ 15 
και τιθεναι emt κλιναρίων και κραβαττω 
ἵνα epxoj.€vov TETPOV Kay ἡ OKLA επισκιαση 


(Fol. 431 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOLOR 343 
-- --- a 

super omnes qui audiebant 

cum surrexissent autem iubenes inuoluerunt ea 

et cum extulissent sepelierunt 

factum est quasi horarum trium spatium 

et uxor eius nesciens 

quo d factum erat intro ibit 

Dixit autem ad eam petrus dic mihi 

si tanti praedium uendedistis 

ad illa dixit etiam tantum 

petrus uero ad eam quid utique 

conuenit uobis teptare spm dni 

ecce pedes eorum qui sepelierunt uirum tuu - 

ad ostium et efferente 

et ceciditque confestim ad pedes eius 


et perobriguit 


Cumque introissent iubenes 


inuenerunt eam mortuam 
et cum ext ulissent 


sepelierunt ad uirum suum 


Et factus est timor magnus 


super totam ecclesiam et super omnes 

qui audierunt haec 

per manus uero apostolorum fiebant signa 
et porte nta multa in populo 

et erant pariter uniuersi 

in tem in porticum solomonis 

nec quisquam ex ceteris curabat adherere eis 
sed magnificabat eos populos 

magisque adiciebantur credentes 

dno multitudo uirorumque et mulierum 
ita ut in plateis inferrent infirmos eorum 
et ponerent in lectulis et grabattis 

ut uenientis petri uel umbra inumbraret 


(Fol. 432 a.) 


CAP. V. &—I R. 


344 


IIPAR' AHOCTOAQN 

— Se — —- 
τινι Gv τῶν ἀπηλλασσοντο yap 
απο πασὴσ ασθενιασ 
wo εἰχεν ἐκαστοσ αὐτων 
σννήρχετο δεπληθοσ των περὶ πολεων 
εἰσ Ἱερουσαλὴμ φεροντεσ ασθενεισ 
και οχλουμενουσ απὸ πνευμάτων ακαθαρτῶ 


Και €LOVTO TAYTEST 


αναστασ δε οαρχιερευσ 


καὶ παντεσ οἱσὺυν αυτω 

ἢ ουσα αἱρεσισ των σαδδονυκαίων 

εἐπλησθησαν ζηλου 

και ἐπεβαλον rag χειρασ ἐπι τουσ ἀποστολοὺυσ 
και ἡθεντο avrova εν τηρήσει δημοσια 


καὶ επορευθὴ εἰσ ἑκαστοσ ew τα ἴδια 


. omy, 
rore δια νυκτοσ ἀγγελοσ kv 


ανεωξαν τασ θυρασ τησ φυλακησ 
εξαγαγων re αντουσ ειπεν πορευεσθε 

καὶ σταθεντεσ λαλειται ey τω ἵερω τω λαω 
παντὰ ra ρήματα THe Cuno ravra 
ακουσαντεσ δε εἰσηλθον ὕπο rov ορθρον 


εἰσ To ἵερον και εδιδασκον 


παραγενομενοσ δε o apxuepeva και οἱ συν Gre 


εἐγερθεντεσ το πρωΐ 
καὶ συνκαλεσαμενοι τὸ συνεδριον 


και πασαν τὴν YEPOVTLAY TOV ὕιων iapaxA 


και ἀπεστειλαν εἰσ TO δεσμωτήριον αχϑηναι aVrove 


ot δεὕπηρεται παραγενομενοι 
και ανυξαντεσ τὴν φυλακὴν 


OVK EUDOV avTOUT €7'0 

avaoTpey αντεσ kat ἀπηγγειλαν λεγοντεσ 
ort To δεσμωτήριον ευρομεν ἐνκλεκλεισμενο. 
εν πασηασφαλια - 

και rove φυλακασ εστωτασ ἐπὶ των ÜÉvpov 


(Fol. 432 6.) 


20 


21 


22 


23 


"ACTUS. APOSTOLO " 


quemcumque illorum et liuerabantur 

ab omnem ualetudinem 

quem habebant unusquisque eorum 
conueniebat uero multitudo finium undique 
in hierusalem ferentes infirmos 

et qui uexabantur ab spiritibus in mundis 


qui curabantur uniuersi 


Cum surrexisset autem pontifex 


et omnes qui cum ipso | 

quae est secta sadducaeorum 

inpleti sunt aepulationem 

et miserunt manus in apostolos 

et posuerunt eos in adseruatione publica 


et abierunt unusquisque in domic ilia 


per nocte uero angelus dni 


aperuit ianuas carceris 

cumque duxisset eos dixit ite 

et stantes lo quimini in templo populo 
omnis uerba uitae eius 

cum audissent autem introierunt sub ante luce 


in templum et docebant 


Cumque uenisset pontifex et qui cum ipso 


exurgentes ante lucem 
et conuocauerunt concihum 
et omnem senatum filiorum istrahel 
et miserunt ad carcerem adduci eos 
ministri uero cum uenissent 
et aperuissent carcerem 
non inuenerunt eos intus 
reuersi sunt et renuntiauerunt dicentes 
quia carcerem inuenimus clusum 
in omni dil i gentia 
et ugiles stantes ad ostium 

(Fol. 433 4.) 


CAP. V. 15— 423. 


TIPAH- AIIOCTOAON ' 
“ey — 


ACTUS' APOSTOLOR^ 346 
. on) — — 


ἀγοιξαντεσ Se ἐσω ovdeva ευρομεν v. aperientes intus neminem inuenimus 
wo Ó« yxoveay rove Xoyovg τουτουσ 24 ut uero audierunt sermones hos 
0 T€ στρατήγοσ TOV ἵερου kat ot apxuepeur praetorque templi et ipsi pontefices 
διηπόρουν wept avrov τι ay γενηται rovro haesitabant de eis quidnam fieret de hoc 
παραγενομενοσ δετισ ἀπήγγειλεν avrow 25 cum uenisset autem quidam adnuntuutt eis 
ori ἴδου ot ανδρεσ ova εθεσθε ev rn φυλακη quia ecce uiri quos posuistis in carc erem 
€LOtW εν τω ἵερω ἐστωτεσ sunt in templo stantes 
καὶ 55 ασκοντεσ roy Àaoy et docentes populum 
Tore arehOwy o otparnyor συν Tour ὕπηρετεισ 26 | tunccum abisset ipse praetor cum ministris 
ἤγαγον avrove pera Brac deducebant eos cum uim 
φοβουμενοι yap rov Agov μη λιθασθωσιν timebant enim populum ne lapidarentur 
ἀγαγοντεσ δε avrova ἐστῆσαν εν τω συνεδρω 7 cumque adduxissent eos statuerunt in concilio 
και ἐπτηρωτησεν avrovg o iepeve λεγων Et interrogauit eos pontefix dicens 
Ov παραγ γέλια παρηγ γειλαμεν pew 28 denuntiatione praecepimus uobis 
μὴ διδασκειν ext τω ovopart rovro non docere in nomine hoc 
ἴδου πεπληρωκατε τὴν Ἱερουσαλήμ ecce inplestis hierusalem 
rae διδαχησ ὕμων doctrina uestra 
και βουλεσθαι epayayew eb ἡμασ et uultis adducere super nos 
TO ata, TOV αγθρωπου εκεινου sanguinem hominis huius 
πειθαρχειν Se ϑω μαλλον ἡ ανθρωποισ 29 obtemperare do oportet magis quam honibus 
O δεπετροσ «urev προσ avrova petrus uero respondit ad eos 
o Uc των πατέρων ἡμῶν ἤγειρεν - 30 ds patrum nost rorum suscitauit ihn, 
ov ὕμεισ διεχειρισασθαι κρεμασαντεσ en ξυλοῦ quem uos interfecistis suspensum in ligno 
rovrov o 6a GpXTy ov Kat cwrnpa 31 hunc ds ducem et saluatorem 
ὕψωσεν τὴ δοξη avrov exaltauit caritate sua 
δουναι μετανοιαν τω opa dare paenitentiam istrahel 
και αφεσιν auaprvoy ev avro et remiss ionem peccatorum in ipso 
και ἡμεισ ἐσμεν μαρτυρεσ 32 et nos ipsi testes sumus 
πάντων TOV ρήματων TOUTOV omnium uerborum ho rum 
και TO πνὰ TO αγιον ov ἐδωκεν o óc et spm sanctum quem dedit ds 
Tou πιθαρχουσιν avro hiis qui obte mperat ei 
Ot 9e axovaarrec διεπρίοντο 3; | ad illi audientes discruciabantur 
καὶ εβονλενοντο ayeXew avrove et cogitabant interficere eos 
(Fol 4335.) (Fol. 434 a.) 
Car. V. 23—33. 


44 


comm —_ — tommy, A 
HPAS8 AIOCTOAON 
— A— 9 — oo, cy 


ἀναστασ 8 rur ex του συνεδριου φαρισαιοσ — V. 34 
ovopart γαμαλιὴλ .-νομοδιδασκαλοσ 

τιμιοσ Trayrt Te λαω 

ἐκέλευσεν τουσ αποστολουσ εζω βραχὺ ποιήσαι 
ειπεν T€ προσ Tove ἀρχοντασ και τουσ συνεδριουσ 35 
ανδρεσ Ἰσραηλειται προσεχεται eavrova 

ext Tour ανθρωποισ τουτοισ 

τι μελλεται πρασσειν 

προγαρ Tovro τῶν ἡμέρων 36 
aveo) θευδασ λεγων 

εἰναι τινα μεγαν εαυτον 

ὦ καὶ προσεκληθη api og ανδρων 

wo τετρακοσίων 

oo διελυθὴ αὐτοσ δι avrov 

καὶ παντεσ οσοι ἐπίθοντο avro 

και eyevovro εἰσ ουθεν 

μετα Tovrov averrn tovdac o γαλιλαιοσ 37 
εν Tag ἡμέραισ THO απογραφησ 

καὶ aT ea TO €v λαον πολυν οπισω αὐτου 

κακεινοσ ἀπώλετο καὶ οσοι ἐπίθοντο avro 
διεσκορπισθησαν 

καὶ τὰ νυν εἰσιν αδελῴοι λεγω ὕμειν 38 
arooTyre απὸ τῶν αγθρωπων rovrov 

Kat εασατε αυτουσ 

μὴ μιαναντεσ Tag. χειρασ' 

ort «ay ἡ εξ ανθρωπων ἡ βουλὴ αὐτὴ 

ἢ TO ἐργον rovro καταλυθησεται 

εἰ δε ex θυ ἐστιν ov δυνησεσθαι καλυσαι αυτοῦσ 39 
ovre ὕμεισ ovre βασιλεισ ovre τυραννοι 

ἀπέχεσθαι ovv aro των ανθρωπων Tovre 

μήποτε θεομαχοι ευρεθητε 


ἐπειστ εσδεαντω 40 


καὶ προσκαλεσαμενοι TOVE αποστολουσ 
(Fol. 434 δ.) 


honorabiles apud omnem populum 
iussit apostolos foras pusillum facere 
dixitque ad principes et concil ium 


uiri istrahelitae adtendite uobis 


super istis hominibus 

qui d nam incipiatis agere 

ante hos enim dies 

surrexit theudas dicens 

esse quendam magnum ipsorum 

cui adsensum est numeri uirorum 
quasi quagringentorum 

qui interfectus est 

et omnes quodquod obtemperabant ei 
facti sunt nihil 

post hunc surrexit iudas galilaeus 

in diebus professionis 

et alienauit populum post se 

et ille periit et qui credebant illi 
dispersi sunt 

et quae nunc fratres dico uobis 
discedite ab hominibus istis 

et dismittite eos 

non coinquinatas manus 

quia sic erit ab hominibus consilium istud 
aut hopushoc destruetur 

si autem a do est non poteritis destruere eos 
nec uos nec imperatores nec reges 
discedite ergo ab hominibus istis 

ne forte do repugnantes inueniamini 
consenserunt itaquae ei 


et cum uocasset apostolos. 
(Fol. 435 a.) 


Cap. V. 34—40. 


— — --.. —À — 
HPARIC ΑΠΟΓΤΌΔΩΝ 
— — .-΄ὖὸὸ .-. e 


om, 
μὴ λαλεῖν emet τω ovopart Tov equ 
καὶ ἀπελυσαν avrove 
Oc μεν ovy ἀπόστολοι ἐπορενοντο χαιροντεσ' 
ἀπὸ προσώπου rov συνεδριον 
ort ὕπερ rov ονοματοσ κατηξιωθησαν 
" ἀτιμασθηναι πασαν δε ἡμέραν ἐν τωΐϊερω 


καὶ KAT OLKOV οὐκ ExavovTo διδασκοντεσ 


Opevot TOY KY τὴν χρν 
Ev de ravrauo rau ἡμεραισ 
πληθύνοντων των μαθητων 
ἐγένετο γογγυσμοσ τῶν ελληνιστων 
προσ τουσ εβραιουσ 
ort παρεθεωρουντο ev τὴ διακονια 
καθημερινή at χήραι avres 
«v T διακονια των εβραιων 


και ἐνα 


προσκαλεσαμενοι.οὐ ig 
To πληθοσ των μαθητὼν εἰπὸν προσ avrove 
οὐκ ἀρεστον ἐστιν ney 
καταλειψαντασ τον λογον του ὃν 
διακονεῖν τραπεζαισ' 
TL OVV ἐστιν αδελφοι 
exi xe ψασθαι ef ὕμων avrev 
ἀνδρασ μαρτυρου μενουσ  ζ- 
πληρεισ TV καὶ σοφιασ 
OUT καταστήσομεν Ext THO χριασ αυτὴσ 
quw δε ἐσομεθα τὴ προσευχὴ και Ty διακονια 
TOV λογου προσκαρτερουντεσ 
Kat ἡρεσεν 0 λογοσ ουτοσ evwrioy παντοσ' 


του πληθουσ των μαθητῶν 


41 


και ἐξελεξαντο στεῴφανον avépa πληρησ πιστωσ 


και πγευματοσ ay Lov 
και φιλιππον καὶ προχορον 
(Fol. 435 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
— — — — 


caesis eis praeceperunt 
non loqui in nomine ihu 
et dismiserunt eos 
apostol i uero ibant gaudentes 
& conspectu concilii 
quia pro nomine digni habitati sunt 


contumeliam pat i omni autem die in templo 


et domi non cessabant docentes 
et euangelizantes dnm ihm xpm 
in diebus autem istis 
multiplicantibus discipulis 
facta est murmuratio quae ex grecis erant 
aduersus aebraeos 
quia discupiuntur in ministerio 
diurno uiduae ipsorum 
in ministerio hatbreorum 


Conuocantes itaque: xii 


multitudinem discipulorum dixerunt ad eos 


non enim placet nobis 
derelicto uerbo di 
ministrare mens is 
quid ergo est, fratres 
prospicite itaque ex uobis 
uiros testimonio bono- uii 
plenos spu et sapientia 
quos constituamus in negotio hoc 
nos autem sumus oratione et ministerio 
berbi perseueramus 
Et placuit sermo hic in conspectu omni 
multitudini dis cipulorum 
et elegerunt stephanum uirum plenum fide 
et spiritu sancti 
et prochorum 
(Fol. 436 a.) 


et philippum 


Carr. V. 40—VI. 5. 


947 


IIPAR. AIIOCTOA 


καὶ yucopa. 
και νικολαον 


αντιόχεα 


Kat παρμενα 
προσῆλντον 
ovrot ἐσταθησαν evwriov των ἀποστόλων ό 
otrtyeo προσευξαμενοι 

ereOyxay avrou rac χειρασ 

καὶ 0 λογοσ' του κυ ηὔξανεν καὶ επληθυνετο 7 
οαριθμοσ rov μαθητων 

εν Ἱερουσαλὴμ σφοδρα 

πολυσ T€ οχλοσ των ἵερεων ὕπηκουον α τη πιστι 
στεφανοσ δε πληρησ χαριτοσ καὶ δυναμεωσ 8 
ἐποίει Tepara καὶ σήμεια μεγαλα ev τω λαω 


δια τον ονοματοσ κυ wy χρυ 


ἀναστῆσαν δετινεσ Tov ex τὴσ συναγωγήσ me 9 
λεγομενησ λειβερτεινων 

καὶ κυρήνεων καὶ αλεξανδρεων 

καὶ TOV απὸ κιλικιασ 

συνζητουντεσ To στεφανω ᾿ 

οιτινεσ OUK ισχνον αντιστηναι TH σοφια 10 
T) ουσὴ εν avro καὶ To πνὶ Tw ays ὦ ελαλει 

δια το ελεγχεσθαι avrove er avrov 

μετα raga παρρησιασ 

μὴ 9vvap.€yot ov αντοφθαλμειν ry αληθεια 
τοτεὕπεβαλον ανδρασ λεγοντ o n 
oTt axynxoapev avrov λαλουντοσ 


ρήματα βλασφημιασ εἰσ μωῦσην Kat Toy ὃν 
σννεκεινῆσαν Te Toy Àaoy 12 


και Tove πρεσβυτερουσ Kat Tove γραμματεισ 

και ἐπισταντεσ συνήρπασαν avrov 

και ἤγαγον εἰσ ro συνεδριον 

Kat ἐστῆσαν μαρτυρασ ψευδεισ 13 
κατα αντου λεγοντασ 


O ανϑρωποσ ovroc ov zaverat ρηματα λαλω 
(Fol. 436 5.) 


και τειμωνα VI. 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM 
t — 0 — Ss --- 


et nicanorem et timonem 
etpermenan ὠ etnicholaum 
proselytum antiocensem 


quos statuerunt in conspectu apostolorum 
cumque orassent 

superposuerunt eis manus 

et uerbum dni crescebat et multiplicabatur 
numerus discipuloram 

in hierusalem nimis 

multaque turbe sacerdotum oboediebant dei 
Stephanus uero plenus gratia et uirtute 
faciebat portenta et signa magna in populo 


>... “-ὶ 
per nomen dni ihu xpi 


surrexerunt autem quidam qui erant de Synagoga 


quae dicitur liuertinorum 

et cyrenensium et alexandrinorum 

et eorum qui sunt a cilicia 

altercantes cum stephano 

qui non poterant resistere sapientiae 
quae erat in eo et spo sancto in quo loquebatur 
quoniam probatur illis ab illo 

cum omni fiducia 

non potentes autem resistere ueritati 
tunc summiserunt uiros qui dicerent 
quia audiuimus eum loquentem 

uerba blasphema in moysen et in dum 
commoueruntque populum 

et seniores et scribas 

et adgressi adrripuerunt eum 

et adduxerunt in concilium 

et statuerunt testes falsos 


aduersum eum dicentes 


homo hic non cessabit uerba loquens 


(Fol. 437 a.) 


Car. VI. $—13. 


— 0 — 
IIPAH. AIIOCTOA 
— ee, — 


κατα TOV τόπον TOU αγιου καὶ TOV νομου 
ακηκοαμεν yap avrov λεγοντοσ' 

οτι ine o ναζοραιοσ ovrog 

καταλυσει Toy τῦπον TOUTOV καὶ ἀλλαξει Ta «69 
a παρεδωκεν new μωῦσησ 

καὶ yreviLov Se avro παντεσ 

ot καθημενοι ev o συνεδριω 

καὶ εἰδον To προσωπον avrov 

ὡσει προσωπον ἀγγελου 

ἐστωτοσ εν μέσω GUTOV 

Ειπεν 0e o ἀρχιερευσ ro στεφανω 

εἰ apa. τοντὸ οντωσ €x€t- δε egy 
avópeo αδελφη και πατερεσ ἀκουσατε 
o ὅσ᾽ τησ δοξησ ὠφθὴ τω πατρι ἡμῶν 
αβρααμ' ovrt εν Ty μεσοποταμια 
πριν ἡ κατοικῆσαι GUTOV 

εν χαραν Kat εἰπεν προσ αὐτὸν 
ἐξηλθε απο rho γησ σου και THE συνγενιασ σοὺ 
και Sevpo εἰ εἰσ τὴν γὴν nv ay σοι δειξω 

rore αβρααμ᾽ εἐξελθων εκ γησ χαλδαιων 

καὶ κατωκῆσεν ἐν χαρραν 

κακει ἣν μετα ro ἀποθανεῖν τον πατερα avrov 


καὶ μετωκήσεν GUTOV εἰσ τὴν γὴν ταυτὴν 


€u NV ὕμεισ νυν κατοικειται 


καὶ οιἱπατερεσ ἡμῶν οἱ πρὸ Nay 
καὶ ovk ἐδωκεν avro) κληρονομίαν «v αὐτῇ 


ονδε βημα ποδοσ 

αλλ επηγγειλατο δουναι avro 

εἰσ κατασχεσὶν αντὴν καὶ Tw σπερματι GUTeU 

μετ αὐτὸν OUK OVTOG aUTW τέκνου 

ἐλαλησεν δε ουτωσ o ὃσ προσ avrov 

OT ἐσταῖτο σπερμααντου παροικον 

ἐν yn αλλοτρια και δουλωσουσιν avrovg 
(Fol. 437.) 


VII. 1 


ACTUS. APOSTOL' 
-- — —< — 


aduersus locum sanctum et legem 
audiuimus enim eum dicentem 

quia ihs nazoraeus hio 

dest ruet locum istum et mutauit iterum 
quos tradidit nobis moyses 

et intuiti in eum omnes 

qui sedebant in concilio 

et uiderunt faciem eius 

quasi faciem angeli 


stans in medio eorum 


ait autem pontifex stephano 


sic haec sic habent. ad ille dixit 


uiri fratres ot patres audite 


ds claritatis uisus est patri nostro 
abraham cum esset in mesopotamiam 
postea quam mortuus esset 

in charris et dixit ad eum 


exi de terra tua et a cognatione t ua 


et ueni in terra quamcumq ‘tibi monstrauero 
tunc abraham exibit de terra chaldeorum 


et habitauit in charra 
et ibi erat post mortem patris sui 
et intransmigrauit eum in terram hanc 


-in qua uos nunc habitatis 


et patres nostri qui ante nos 

et non dedit ei possess ionem heredetatis in ea 

nec quantum tenet gradus pedis 

sed promisit ei dare eam - 

in possessionem et semini eius 

post ipsum quando non esset ei filium 

locutus est autem sio ds ad eum 

quia erit semen eius peregrinum 

in terra aliens et in seruitute redigent eos 
(Fol. 438 a.) 


Carr. VI. 13— VII. 6. 


949 


350 


-. τ ὕὄὦἜ. — Ὁτὖὦ. 
IIPAR AIIOCTOAON 
— 0 — A — — 


και κακωσουσὶν ETN ve 

καὶ τὸ εθνοσ᾽ ὦ ay δουλευσουσιν 

Kptyo €yo eurey o óc 

kat pera ravra. εξελευσονται 

και λατρευσουσὶν μοι εν TW τόπω TOUTW 
«a4 ἐδωκεν avro διαθηκὴν περιτομὴησ 

καὶ OUTWO €y€VV)O€V τὸν ἵσακ 

και περιέτεμεν avrov Ty ἡμέρα τὴ ογδοη 

και οἵσακ τον ἴακωβ 

και taxwB rove - B - πατριαρχασ 

και οἱ πατριαρχαι ζηλωσαντεσ Toy ooo 
απεδοντο εἰσ αἰγΊὑπτον 

καιηνο óc per avrov 

καὶ eftAaro avroy ex πασων Toy θλειψεων avrov 
και ἐδωκεν χαριν avro καὶ συφιαν 

ἐναντιον φαραω βασιλεωσ αἰγυπτον 

καὶ κατεστησεν αὐτὸν ἤγουμενον EF αἰγυπτο 
Kat ολον TOV OLKOV GUTOU 

nrev Se λειμοσ e$ ολησ τησ acyvirr ov 

kat xavyaay . και θλειψεισ μεγαλη 

καὶ OUX €UpUTKOV χορτασ ματα οἱ πατερεσ «jm 


ακουσασ' ovy ἵακωβ - ovra. ceria ev αἰγυπτω 


εξαπεστειλεν Tove πατερασ ἡμων πρωτον 
καὶ ἐπὶ Tw δευτερω 

ανεγνωρισθη Ἰωσηφ Tow αδελῴφοισ avrov 
καὶ φανερον ἐγενηθὴ 

Tw φαραω To yevor του twond 
αποστειλασ δεϊωσηφ 

μετεκαλεσατο ἵακωβ - Tov πατερα avrov 
και πασὰαν THY συνγενειαν αὐτου 

cv" 07 και. ἐνὶ ψυχαισ 

κατεβὴ taxwB * εἰσ αἰγυπτον 

και ετελευτησεν AUTON τε καὶ οἱ πατέρεσ mye 


(Fol. 438 5.) 


VII. 


IO 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM" 


et male tractabunt annis- occ" 

et gentem cui seruierint 

iudicauo ego dicit dns 

et postea xibunt 

et deseruient mihi in loco hoc 

et dedit ei dispositionem circumcisionis 

et sic genuit 1580 

et circumcidit eum die octabo 

etisac ipsum iacob 

et iacob. xii. patriarchas 

et patriarchae hemulati -ioseph 
distraxerunt in aegyptum 

et erat ds cum illo 

et eripuit eum ex omnibus conflictationtbus eius 
et dedit ei gratiam et sapientiam 

coram farao regae aegypti 

et constituit eum in aegyptum 

et omnem domum suam 

uenit aute m famis super omnem terram aegypti 
etchanaam. et conflictatio magna 

et non inuefiiebant uteusilia patres nostri 


Cum audisset uero . iacob. esse frumenta in &egypto 


misit patres nostros primum 

et in secundo 

recognitus est ioseph . a fratribus suis 

et manifestum factum est 

ipsipharao genus ioseph 

cum misisset autem ioseph 

accersibit iacob patrem suum 

et o mnem cognationem eius 

in. lxx θὲ «Ὁ animabus 

descendit iacob. in aegyptum 

et defuctus est ipse que et patres nostri 
(Fol. 439 a.) 


Cap. VII. 6—15. 


— i οὕ. — — 
HPAR AIIOCTOAON 
— — & — — 


Kat μετήχθησαν «ur συχεν 

και ετεθησαν ev τω μνηματι 

ὦ ὠνήσατο αβρααμ τειμὴσ apyvpuov 

παρα τῶν ὕιων ἐμμὼρ του συχεμ 
καθωσ δεηγγιζεν οχρονοσ Tho επαγγελιασ 17 


VII. 16 


no ἐπηγγειλατο o ὃσ τω afjpa ap. 
ηυξησεν o λαοσ και ἐπληθυνθὴ «v εγυπτω 
αχρι ov ανεστὴ βασιλενσ ετεροσ 18 
og ovx εμνησθη τουϊωσηφ 
και κατασοφισαμενοσ τὸ γενοσ μων. 19 
εκακωσεν TOVT πατερασ 
τον ποιεῖν exÜera ra ped avrov 
εἰσ τὸ μὴ ζωογονεισθε 
εν € καιρω eyo μωῦσησ 20 
Kat ἣν αστιοσ Tw Ow 
oc ανετραφὴ μηνασ rpur 
εν TW OLKW TOU πατροσ αὐτου 
exreÜcvroa Se avrov παρα τον ποταμὸν 21 
ανείλατο avrov ἡ Ovyarnp φαραω 
ανεθραψατο αυτὴ εἰσ ὕιον 

και επεδευθη μωῦσησ πασαν THY σοφιαν αἰγνπτῷῶῷ 22 
qv τε δυνατοῦ ev Aoyou και ἐργοισ avrov 


wo δεεπληρουτο ne ergo avro xpovoc 23 
aveBy er. τὴν καρδιαν avrov 

επισκεψασθαι rove αδελῴφουσ avrov 

Tove Utovc ἵσραηλ 

και ἴδων τινα αδικου μενον εκ TOU yevove 24 


ἤμννετο και ἐεποιῆσεν ἐκδικησιν 
TW καταπονουμένω παταξασ τον GryvirTu 
και ἐεκρυψεν avroy εν τῆ à juo 
εἐνομιζον δε συνΐεναι rove αδελῴφουσ avrov 25 
orto ὃσ δια xeipoc avrov διδωσει σωτηριαν avrow 
ot δεσννηκαν 

(Fol. 439 δ.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 351 
— — -ο. — 

et translati sunt in sy chem 

et positi sunt in sepulchro 


quod mercatus est abraham praetio argent 


afiliis emmor et sychem 


ut uero adpropinquauit tempus promissionis 


quam pollicitus est da ipsi abraham 
autus est populus et multiplicatus est tn aegypto 
donec alius exurrexerit rex 

qui non meminisset ipsius ioseph 

cum iustitias coepisset cum genus nostru 
male tractauit patres 

ut faceret exponi infantes eorum 

ut non educarentur 

in quo tempore natus esset moyses 

et erat eligans do 

qui mensibus tribus educatus est 

in domo patris eius 

cum uero expositus esset secus flumen 
gustulit eum filia pharao | 


et uice fili educauit sibi 


Et eruditus est moyses omni sapientia aegyptiorn 


eratquae potens in sermonibus et operibus suis 
ad ubi inpletur ei. xl-annorum tempus 
ascendit in cor eius 
uisitare fratres suos 
filios istrahel 
et cum uidisset quendam iniuriari de genere suo 
uindicauit et praestitit uindictai ei 
qui uexauatur percusso aegy ptio 
et abscondit eum in harena 
arbitrabatur autem intellegere fratres suos 
quia ds permanus eius dat salutem ipeis 
ad ill i non intellexerunt 

(Fol. 4404.) 


Car. VII. 16— 25. 


352 


IIPAH. AILOCTOA 
— ay -- — 


και ειἰδεν αυτουσ αδικουντασ 


Kat συνηλλασσεν αντουσ εἰσ εἰρηνὴν εἰπὼ 


τι ποιειτε ανδρεσ adeAd ot 
, Ware αδεικειται εἰσ αλληλουσ 


o δε αδικων τον πλησίον 


QTWUQATO αντον €L7TO0 


TU σε KATEOTIO EV ἀρχοντα 


και δικαστην ες ἡμασ 
μὴ averew pa av θελεισ 


ον Tporoy ayeveo αἰχθεσ τον αἰγνπτιον 
ovrwo και εφυγαδευσεν μωῦσησ 

ev To Àoyo Tovro 

καὶ eyevero παροικοσ' ev yy μαδιαμ 

ov ἐγεννησεν ὕιουσ Suw 

καὶ pera ταυτα πλησθεντων avro erg. n. 
€ On avro «v Ty Epnpw Tov opov ceva 
ἀγγελοσ kv ev $Àoy t πυροσ Barov 

o Se μωῦσησ ειἰδων εθαυμαζεν To οραμα 


καὶ προσερχομεένου αὐτου αἱ κατανοῆσαι 


“-. 
O xo «urev avro λεγων 


cywo θσ των πατέρων σου 

o 6c aBpaap - και 00 εἴσακ- Kat Oo taxed 
evrpopoc δε γενομενοσ μωῦσησ 

OvK ετολμα κατανοησαι 


καὶ €yevero φωνὴ προσ avrov 


Ave v ro ὕποδημα των ποδων σου 
ογαρ TOTO OV εστήηκασ᾽ yy αγια ἐστιν 
και ἴδων γαρ ἴδον 

τὴν Kaxwoty TOU λαοῦ TOV εν εγυπτω 
και TOV στεναγμου αὐτου ἀκήκοα 

και κατεβην εξελεσθαι αντουσ 


και νυν δευρο αποστειλω oe er αἰγυπτον 


(Fol. 440 b.) 


Tore επιουσὴ ἡμέρα od09 avrow: μαχομενοσ VII. 26 


33 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


tunc sequenti die uisus est eis litigantibus 


et uidit eos iniquitantes 


et reconciliauit eos in pacem dicens 


quid facitis uiri fratres 


ut qui d iniuriam facitis inuicem 
qui autem iniuriam faciebat proximo 


repulit eum dicens 


quis te constituit principem 


et iudicem super nos 

num quid interficere me uis 

quem ad mo dum interfecisti externa die redd 
ad que ita profugit moyses 

in sermone hoc 

et fuit incola in terram madiam 
ubi genuit filios duos 

et post haec et inpletis annis xo 
uisus est ei in sol itudine in monte sina 
angelus dni in flamma ignis rubi 

moyses enim cum uidisset mirabatur uisum 


cumque ipse accederet et consideraret 


dns ait ad eum dicens 


ego sum ds patrum tuorum 
ds abraham etds isac.et ds iacob 
tremibundusque factus moyses 


non audiebat considerare 


Et facta est uox ad eum 


solue calciamentum pedum tuorum 

locus enim in quo stas terra santa est 

intuitus enim uidi 

mulcationem populi qui est in aegypto 

et gemitus eius audiui 

et degcendi eripere eos 

et nunc ueni mittam te in aegyptum 
(Fol. 441 a.) 


Car. VII. 26—34. 


(CU a — = 


OPA. AiOCTOA 
— — —- — 


TOVTOV TOV μωῦσην VII. 35 


ον ἡρνήσαντο εἰποντεσ 
τισσε κατεστῆσεν apxovra. και δικαστὴν eb nus 
rovrov o ὅσ. και apxovra 
kat λυτρωτὴν απεσταλκεν συν χειρι ayyerov 
Tov οφθεντοσ avro ev τὴ Baro 
OvTOG εξηγαγεν avrove 36 
0 ποιῆσασ τερατα Kat σημεια 
ἐν y αἰγυπτον και εν υρεθρα θαλασση 
και εν τῇ ερημωετῇὴ — «ge 
Ουτοσ ἐστιν μωῦσησ o εἰπασ tour vows ἵσραηλ 37 
προ φητην ὕμειν αναστήσειο p» 
«x των ἀαδελῴων ὕμων ὡσει ene 
avrov ακονεσθε 
OVTOG ἐστιν O γενομενοσ εν τὴ εἐκκλησια 38 
εν 77) ἐρημω pera Tov ayyeXov 
λαλουντοσ avro εν Tw ope σεινα 
και TOV πατέρων μων 
oc ἐδεξατο λογια (avra δουναι ny. v 
ort ovk ἤθελησαν ὕπηκοοι γενεσθε 39 
ot πατερεσ nuwy ἀλλα amocayro 
καιαπεστ ay ταισ' καρδιαισ εἰσ αἰγυπτὸ 
Εἰπαντεσ ro ἀαρων ποιήσον ἡμειν θεουσ 40 
οἱ προπορευσονται ἡμων 
oyeppeücyrowor ΄ 
oo εξηγαγεν ἡμασ εκ yno αἰγυπτου 
οὐκ οιδαμεν τι γεγονεν avro 
και ἐμοσχοποιησαν EV ταισ ἡμεραισ εκειναισ 41 
και ἀπήγοντο θυσιαν ro ειἰδωλω 
και ἣν φραινοντο 
ἐν τοισ ἐργοισ TOY χείρων αντων 
ἐστρεψεν Seo Oo και παρεδωκεν avrova 41 


λατρενειν Ty στρατ eva Tov ovpavov 


(Fol. 441 ὁ.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
huncipsum moysen 


quem negauerunt dicentes 


quis te constituit principem et iudicem super nos 


hunc ds-et principem 
et redemptorem misit in manu angeli 
qui uisus est ei in rubo 
hic e duxit eos | 
cum fecisset portenta et signa 
in aegypto et in rubro mari 
et in solitudine per annos. xl. 
hic est moyses qui dixit filiis istrahel 
prophetam uouis suscitauit ds 
de fratribus uestris tamquam me. 
ipsum audietis 
hic est qui fuit in ecclesia 
in solit udine c um angelo 
qui loquebatur ei in monte sina 
et patribus nostris 
qui accipit eloquia uiuentium dare nobis 
cui noluerunt oboedientes esse 
patres nostri sed rep ulerunt 
et conuersi 8 unt cordibus iu aegyptum 
Dicentes ad aaron fac nobis d eo 
qui praecedant nos 


moyses enim hic 


᾿ qui eduxit nos de terra aegypti 


nescimus quid contegerit ei 
et uitulum fecerunt in diebus illis 
et obtulerunt hostiám simulacro 
et iucundabantur 
in operibus manum suarum 
conuertit autem ds et tradidit eos 
deseruire exercitui caeli 

(Fol. 442 a.) 


Car. VII. 35—42. 


45 


354 


ΠΡΑΞ: AYIOCTOAGN’_ 
καθωσ γεγραπται ev βιβλω προφητων 
μὴ σφ για και θυσιασ 
προσηνεγκ are μοι er “μ᾿ . 
ἐν T) Epypw oukog iopanr 


και ayeAa flere τὴν σκηνήντου μολοχ᾽ 
καὶ TO αστρον TOV ϑυ pep. dq. 
τουσ TUTOVT OVO ETOLNTATE προσκυνεῖν GUTow 
καὶ μετοικιω ὕμασ emt pn βαβυλωνοσ 
ἢ σκηνὴ του μαρτυριου ἣν 

εν TOW πατερεσιν ἡμων εν τὴ ερήμω 
καθωσ διεταξατο λαλων τω μωῦσι 
ποιῆσαι αὐτὴν κατατοπα — VTTOV ον εορακεν 
ἣν και εἰσήγαγον διαδεξαμενοι 

οἱ πατερεσ μων μετα ἴησουν 

εν Tn κατασχέσει των εθνων 

ων εξωσεν o ὃσ 

απὸ προσωπου TOV πατερὼν ὕμων 

εωσ Toy ἤμερων Saved 

OC ευρε χαριν ενωπιον του θυ 

και ἡτήσατο σκήνωμα €vpeu 

Tw οἰκω ἴακωβ 

σολομων δε οικοδομησεν avro owov 

o δεύψυστοσ ov κατοικει ev χειροποιήτοισ 

wo o προφητὴσ λεγει 

o ovpayoc pov ἐστιν θρονοσ 
7 9 yn ὕποποδιον των ποδων μου 

ποῖον οἰκον οἰκοδομησεται μοιλεγει κσ 

7] ποιοστοποσ THO καταπαυσεωσ μου ἐστι 

OUXL ἢ χεὶρ μον ἐποιησεν πᾶντα ravra. 

σκληροτραχηλοι και ἀπεριτμητοι 


4 
καρδιαισ Kat τοισ ὡσιν 


a, . 
πυμεισ Q&€t TO 7TVL TO αγίω αντΤιπιπτεται 


καθωσ οἱ πατερεσ και ὕμων 


(Fol. 442 5.) 


VII. 


43 


45 


46 


47 
43 


49 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM 
— — i, — — 


sicut scriptum est in libro prophetarum 
num quid hostias et sacrificia 
obtulisti mihi annis . x1 
in solitudine domus istrahel 
et adsumpsistis tabernaculum ipsius moloch 
etastrum di rem pham 
figuras quas fecistis adorare eis 
et transmigrauo uos in illas partes babylonis 
tebernaculum testimonii erat 
penes patres nostros in solitudine 
sicut disposuit quiloquebatur moysi 
facere illud iuxta figuram quam yiderat 
quod etiam intro duxerant 
patres nostri cum iesum 
in possessionem gentium 
quas expulit ds 
a facie patrum nostrorum 
usque ad dies dauit 
qui referit gratiam in sconspectu di 
et petiit tabernaculum in uenire 
sedes domui iacob 
solomon autem aedificauit ei domum 
sed ipse altissimus inhabitauitim manutectis 
sicut profeta dixit 
caelum est meus thronus 
terra uero scamillum pedum meorum 
qualem do mum ae dificatis mihi dicit dns 
aut quis locus requens mea est 
nonne manus mea fecit haec omnia 
durae ceruices et incircumcisi 
cordib us et auribus 
uos semper apo sancto obstitistis 
sicut patres uestri et uos 


(Fol. 443 a.) 


Cap. VII. 42—51. 


"1^«— 


IHPAZIC' AILOCTOAQN 
— —- o — — — 


τινα των προφήτων ovk εδιωξαν exewot 


καὶ ἀπέκτειναν αὐτουσ 


ΥἹΙΙ, 52 


Tove προκαταγγελλοντασ' περι ἐλευσεωσ τοῦ δικαιου 


ov yvy ὕμεισ προδοται και φονεισ εἐγενεσθαι 


οἰτινεσ ἐλαβετε rov νομον 
εἰσ διαταγασ ἀγγελων και ovk εφυλαξατε 
ακουσαντεσ δὲ avrov διεπριοντο 
ταισ καρδιαισ avrov 
και εβρυχον re Tove οδοντασ ἐπ avrov 
.* — 
ὕπαρχων δε rAnpyo πνσ αγιον 
— 
ατενεισασ εἰσ Tov ovpayoy ede Sofay θυ 
— — — 
και τὴν TOV kv ex δεξιων του θυ εστωτα 
και εἰπεν ἴδου θεωρω τουσ ουρανουσ 
ηνεωγμενουσ καὶ TOV ὕιον Του ἀγθρωπου 
— 
ex δεξιων ἐστωτα rov θυ 
κραξαντεσ Se φωνὴ μεγαλη 
σννεσχαν TA WTA avrey 
kat ὡρμησαν opobv padov er avrov 
και εκβαλοντεσ efw THT πολεωσ 
ελιθοβολ ovv avrov 
kat ot μαρτυρεσ απεθ evro Ta εἰματια avrov 
παρα TOV σ TOOAT VEAYLOY TLVOT 
καλουμένου σαυλου 
και ελιθοβολουν rov στεῴφανον 
επικαλουμενον και λεγοντα 
---Ο.- ι-- --ὦἉ 
ke την δεξε ro va pov θεισ τα γονατα 


ἐκραξεν φωνὴν μεγαλὴν λεγων 
--- 


κε μὴ στήσεισ αὐυτοισ ταυτὴν τὴν apapria 


καὶ TOVTO εἰπὼν ἐκοιμὴ On 


N 


σανλοσ δεν συνευδοκων Ty avepaiot αὐτου VIII. 1 


ἔγενετο δε ev exeun τὴ ἡμερα 
διωγμοσ μεγασ και θλειψεισ 

ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τὴν εν ἱἹεροσολυμοισ 
(Fol. 443 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 355 


quem prophetarum non persecuti sunt illi 

et occiderunt eos 

qui praenuntiauerunt de aduentu iusti 

cuius nunc uos proditores et homicidae effecti 
qui accepistis legem 
in dispositiones angelorum et non custoditis 


audientes autem eum discruciabantur 


cordibus suis 

et stridebant dendibus super eum 
cumque esset plenus spu sancto 
intuitus in caelum uidit gloriam di 
et ihm dnm ad dexteram di stantem 
et dixit ecce uideo caelos 

apertos et filium hominis 

ad dexteram di stantem 


Et cum exclamasset uoce magna 


conpresserunt aures eorum 
et inpetum unanimiter fecerunt in eu 
et eiectum ex tra ciuitatem 


lapidabant eum 


adque ipsi testes deposuerunt uestimenta sua 


ad pedes adulescentes cuiusdam 

nomine sauli 

et lapidabant stephanum 

inuocantem et dicentem 

dne ihu accipe spm meum cumq - posuisset genua 
et clamauit uoce magna dicens 

dne ne statuas illis peccatum hoc 

et cum hoc dixisset dormibit 


saulus uero erat consentiens interfecti eius 


facta est itaque in illa die 


persecutio magna et tribulat io 
super ecclesiam quae est in hierosolymis 
(Fol. 444 a.) 


Capp, VII. £2 —VTIT. r. 


356 


— SS eS — —, 
IIPAR&- ANOCTOAQN 
— — υ.-. -..-.-. — 


παντεσ δε διεσπαρησαν 
κατα τασ χωρασ ἵουδαιασ Kat σαμαριασ 
πλὴν Tov αποστολων 


οἱ ἐμειναν ev ἸἹερουσαλημ 


VIII. 


συνκομισαντεσ roy στεῴφανον avoper εὐλαβεισ 2 


και ἐποίησαν KOTETOV μέγαν ἐπ avro 


O δεσαυλοσ ελυμενετο την ἐκκλησ Lav 


κατα τουσ οἰκουσ εἰσπορενομενοσ 


συρων τε ανδρασ' καὶ γυναικασ 
παρεδιδουσ εἰσ φυλακὴν 


Oi μεν ovy διασπαρεντεσ 


διηλθον ευαγγελιξομενοι rov λογον 

φιλιπποσ δεκαλελθων 

εἰσ πολιν ro σαμαριασ 

εκηρυσσεν αντοισ τον χρν 

wo δεήκουον παν ot oxAat 

προσειχον Tour λεγομενοισ ὕπο φιλιππον 
οντίο] ev τω axovew αντουσ 

και βλεπειν τα σημεια a, ἐποιει - 

πολλοισ yap των ἐχοντων 

πνευματα ακαθαρτα 

Bowvra φωνὴ μεγαλη εξηρχοντο 

πολλοι Se παραλελυμενοι χωλοι 


εθεραπενοντο 


χαρα τε μεγαλὴ eyevero ev TH πολει exeun 


ανὴρ Se rus ονοματι σιμων 


προὔπαρχων εν τὴ πολει μαγενων 
εξε το εθνοσ Tho σαμαριασ 
λεγων εἰναι τινα eavrov μεγαν 


ω TPOTELXOV παντεσ απὸ μεικρον 


«og μεγαλου λεγοντεσ 


Ovroc ἐστιν ἡ δυναμισ του Óv 


ἢ καλουμενὴ peyaAn προσειχον be avro 
(Fol. 444 5.) 


4 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
— — — — 


omnes enim dispersi sunt 

per regiones iudaeae et samariae 

praeter apostolos 

qui manserunt hierusalem 

conportauerunt quae stephanum uiri timorati 


et fecerunt planctum magnum super eum 


Saulus autem diuastabat ec cles ias 


per singulas quae domos ingrediens 
trahensque uiros et mulieres 


tradebat in carcerem 


ad illi quidem qui dispersi erant 


adnuntiabant euangelizantes uerbum 
philippus uero cum uenisset 

in ciuitate samariae 

praedicabat eis xpm 

intendebant autem omnis turbae 
his qui dicebantur a philippo 
unanimo in eo quo d audierint ipsi 
et uidebant signa quae faciebat 

a multis enim qui habebant 
spiritum in mundum 

clamantes uoce magna exiebant 
mu ltienim paralysin passi cl o di 
cu rabantur:gaudium magnum 
fac tum estin ciuitate ill a 


uiri autem qui dam nomine simon 


iampridem erat in ipsa ciuitate magixa faciens 
et mentem auferens gentibus samariae 

dicens esse quendam magnum 

cui intendebant omnes a pusill o 

usque ad magnum dicentes 


ω-- 
hic est uirtus di 


quae uocatur magna intendebant autem ei 


(Fol. 445 a.) 


Cap. VIII. r—11. 


— — Mo ee ~ . 


—— J 


— —_ — — ay, 
HPAR. AMOCTOAQN 
—, —_ = —, —, 


δια To ἵκανω xpovo ταῖσ μαγιαισ 
εξεστακεναι avrove 
Ore Se ἐπίστευσαν τω φιλιππω 
εναγγελιζομενω περι rgo. βασιλιασ του 6v 
Kat TOV ονοματοσ' op χρὺ 
εβαπτιζοντο ανδρεσ τε και γυναικεσ 
O δεσιμων καὶ αντοσ επιστευσεν 
και βαπτισθεισ qv 
καὶ προσκαρτερων τω φιλιππω 
θεωρων τε σήμεια και δυναμισ μεγαλασ 
γεινομενασ e£ewrravro 
ακουσαντεσ δε οι εν ἱερουσαλημ 
αποστολοι ort δεδε κται 
ἢ σαμαρια τον Xoyov του θυ 
απεστειλαν προσ αντουσ 
?rerpov και Ἰωανὴν > οἰτινεσ 
καταβαντεσ προσηνξαντο περι avrov 
οπωσ AaBw σιν va αγιον 
ovderw yap ἣν ἐπι ovdeva avrov 


e€mumremrTokKkog 


povoy δε βεβαπτισμενοι ὕπηρχον 
εἰσ TO OVOJ4, TOU Kv - - 

Tore ereriDovy rac xetpaa er avrove 
και ἐλαμβανον πνα αγιον 
ἴδων Se o σιμων οτι δια Tye erBerewo 
TOV χείρων των αποστολων 
διδοται ro va. To αγιον 
προσήνεγκαν avrour χρήματα 
παρακαλων καὶ λεγων 
Sore καμοι την ἐξουσιαν ταντὴν 
ἵνα ὦ αν ἐπιθω καγω rac χειρασ 
λαμβανη πνα αγιον 

πετροσ δε ειπεν προσ avroy 


(Fol. 445 5.) 


VIII. 


"ACTUS APOSTOL | 


propterea quod plurimo tempore magicis rebus 


mentem abstulisset eis 


Cum uero crederent philippo 


euangelizantem regnum di 
20 0NO πὶ 
et de nomine ihu xpi 


baptizabantur uiri ac mulieres 


simon quoque et ipse credidit 


et baptizatus est 

et adherebat philippo 

uidens signa et uirtutes magnas 
fieri obstupiscebat 


Cum ue ro audissent qui in hierusalem erant 


apostoli quia excepit 

samaria uerbum di 

miserunt ad eos 

petrum et iohannen ‘qui cum 
descendissent orauerunt super eos 

ut accipiant spm sanctum 

non dum enim erat super quemquam eoru 
inlapsus | 

tantum autem baptizati e rant 


* . —3À Pru 
in nomine dni ihu xpi 


tunc inponebant manus super eos 


et accipiebant spm sanctum 
cum uidisset simon quia per in positionem 
manum apostolorum 
datur spe sanctus 
obtulit eis paecunias 
rogando et dicendo 
date et mihi potestat em hanc 
ut culcumque inposuero et ego manus 
accipiat spm sanctum 
petrus autem dixit ad eum 
(Fol. 446 a.) 


Cap. VIII. 11—20. 


357 


— — Ss ----:ὀ -- 
908 ΠΡΑΞ ΑΠΟΓΟΤΌΛΩΝ 
--μ«.- = oS — — 


apyuploy avv σοι eu) ELT απωλειαν VIII. 
— 

or. τὴν Swpeay Tov θυ evopicag 

δια χρήματων κτασθαι 

ουκ ἐστινσοι μερεισ ουδὲ KANPOT EV Tw λογωτοῦτω 21 
— 

ἡ καρδια σου ovk ἐστιν evOera ἐναντι του θυ 

μετανοησον ovv απὸ THO κακιασ σουταυτσς͵ 22 


και δεηθητι του Kv εἰ apa αφηθησεται σου 


ἡ ἐπίνοια THE καρδιασ σον 


ἥν yap πικριασ χολὴ και συνδεσμω 23 
αδικιασ' θεωρω σε ovra 
αποκρειθεισ Se o σιμων ειἰπεν προσ αὐτουσ 24 


—Á 


mapaxadw δεηθητε ὕμεισ περι ἐμου προσ rov Oy 
οπωσ᾽ μηδεν ἐπελθη μοι 
TOUTWY των κακων OV εἰρήκατε μοι 


οσ πολλα κλαιων ov διελυμπανεν — 
[Desunt folia octo, quaternionem NZ complec- 


tentia. Hiat Codex Latina Capp. viri. 20—x. 
4; Graecà Capp. vri. 29—x. 14.] 


ot μεν ovv διαμαρτυραμενοι 26 

και λαλησαντεσ Toy Acyov TOV KU 

ὕπεστρεφον εἰσ εἰεροσολυμα 

πολλασ Se κκωμασ Tov σαμαρειτων 

ενηγγελιζοντο 
αγγελοσ δε κυ ἐλαλήσεν προσ φιλιππὸν λεγω 16 

αναστασ πορενθητι κατα μεσημβριαν 

em. τὴν οδον τὴν καταβαινουσαν 

αποϊερουσαλὴμ εἰσ ya ay avr ἐστιν ἐρημοσ 

και αναστασ επορευθη 27 
και ἴδον avnp αιθιοψ - εὐνουχοσ δυναστησ 

κανδακησ βασιλεισσησ τινοσ αἰθιοπων 

oc ἣν emt πασησ THE γαζησ avrov 

εἐληλυθει προσκυνησων Ἱερουσαλὴμ 

qv τεὔποστρεφων καθημενοσ 28 


επι τὸν ἀαρματοῦσ AVAYELVWOKWY 


Ce EEE 
re: 


τον προφητην ἵσαΐαν 
Εἰπεν Be ro πνὰ τω φιλιππω 19 
ι. 
(Fol 446 b.) NC 


Cap. VIII. 20—29. 


ACTUS APOSTOL 359 


24 et trepidus factus dixit quid est dne 
dixit autem ei orationis tuae 
et aelemosynae ascenderunt 
in recordatione coram deo 
5 et nunc mitte uiros in loppen 
et accersi simonem 
qui cognominatur petrus 
6 hic est ospitans aput simonem pellionem 
cuius est domus iuxta mare 
7 | utautem dissit angelus qui loquebatur ei 
uocatis duobus famulorum eius 
et militem fidelem 
ex his qui praesto erant 
8 enarrauit illis uisum 
et misit illos in ioppen 
9 | posteraautem die iter illis facientibus 
et adpropiantibus ciuitati 
ascendit petrus in cenaculum 
et horabit circa hora sexta 
10 factus est autem esuriens 
et bolebat gustare 
praeparantibus uero ipsis 
cecidit super eum mentis stupor 
11 et uidit caelum apertum 
ex quattuor principiis ligatum 
uas quo dam et linteum splendidum 
| quod differebatur de caelo in terram 
12 | et erant omnia quadripedia 
| et serpentia et uolatilia caeli 
13: Et facta est uox ad eum 
| petre surge immola et mandu ca 
4|  adillidixit non dne 
quoniam num quam manducaui 


(Fol. 455 a.) 


Cap. X. 4— 14. 


360 IPAR' AIIOCTOAQN" ACTUS" APOSTOL' 
-.  —— o — —— — 

παν kowoy ἢ akaÜaprov x. omne com mune et in mundum 
φωνησασ δε παλιν ex Ócvrepov προσ avrov 15 et uox rursum iterato ad eum 
acdc εκαθαρισεν σοι μὴ κοινου quae ds mundauit tu noli communicare 
Tovro δε eyevero eri τρισ 16 hoc enim factum est per ter 
και ανελημφθη παλιν To σκευοσ εἰσ TOV oUpayo et adsumptum est ipsum uas in caelum 

Oo de ev «avro eyevero διήπορει οπετροσ 17 | Et dum intra se factus est haesitabat petrus 
TL Gy €t TO οραμα o εἰδεν quae esset uiRio quam uiderat 
Kat εἰδου ot ayÓpea οἱ απεσταλμενοι ἀπο κορνηλιοῦ et ecce uiri qui missi erant a cornelio 
επερωτησαντεσ τὴν OLKLAY TOV σιμωνοσ inquirentes domum simonis 
ἐπεστησαν ert Toy πυλωνα adsisterunt ad ianuam 
και φωνήσαντεσ emvyÜavovro 18 et cum clamassent interrogabant 
ει σιμων 0 επικαλουμενοσ πετροσ' 8i simon qui cognominatur petrus 
evOade ξενιζεται hic ospitatur 

Tov δὲ rerpov διενθυ μουμενου 19 | petroautem cogitante 
περι TOV οραματοσ €LTT€V AUTW TO πνα de uisione dixit ei sps 
ἴδου avdper ζητουσιν σε ecce uiri quaerunt te 


adda avacra kara 990. και ropevov συν avTae 20 


μηδεν διακρινομενοσ 


OTL eyw απεσταλκα αντουσ 


Tore καταβασ o πετροσ προσ Tove ανδρασ eure 21 


Bed surge et descende et uade cum eis 
nihil dubitant 


quia ego mis i eos 


tunc descendens petrus ad ipsos uiros dixit 


iov eyo εἰμι ov (jrevre ecce ego sum quem queritis 
τι θελεται ἡ τισ ἡ αἰτια δι ἣν παρεστε quid uultis quae causa propter quam uenistis 
ot δε εἶπον poc avrov 22 ad illi dixerunt ad eum 
κορνηλιοσ Tur εκατονταρχησ᾽ cornelius centurio 
aynp δικαιοσ καὶ φοβουμενοσ τον θν uir iustus et timens dm 
μαρτυρουμενοσ τε testim onio quoque 
Ud» oXov rov «Üvova των tovdanwy & tota gente iudaeorum 
εχρηματισθη ὕπο ayyeXov aytov responsum accepit ab angel o sancto 
μεταπεμψασθαι σε εἰσ τον owoy avrov accersire te in domum suam 
και ακουσαι ρηματα παρα σου et audire uerba abs te 
Tore εἰσαγαγὼν o πετροσ εξενισεν avrove 23 tunc ergo ingressus petrus hospitio excepit eos 


τὴ δε eravpuoy αναστασ 
εἐξηλθεν συν αντοισ και τινεσ των αδελφω 


(Fol. 455 5.) 


ac postera die cum surrexisset 
exibit cum e is et quid am fratrum 
(Fol. 456 a.) 


CAP. X. 14—23. 


— SS ως — 
IIPAES. AIIOCTOA 
— — Ss --- 


aro tommy συνήλθαν avro 
τὴ δε ἐπαυριον εισηλθεν ew καισαριαν 


o δε κορνηλιοσ ἣν προσδεχομενοσ avrove 
και συνκαλεσαμενοσ TOVT συνγενεισ Q.UToV 
και τουσ ἀαναγκαιουσ φιλουσ περιεμεινεν 
προσεγγιζοντοσ δε του πετρον 

«ur THY καισαριαν 

προδραμων eo των δουλων 

διεσαφησεν παραγεγονεναι avrov 

Ο δε κορνηλιοσ ἐκπηδησασ 

καὶ συναντησασ αὐτω 

πεσων προσ τουσ ποδασ προσεκυνησεν αὐτὸ 
o δε πετροσ ἤγειρεν αυτον λεγων 


τι ποιεισ καγω αγνθρωποσ εἰμι wo Kat ov 


ACTUS APOSTOL 301 
— — eS — 

X. qui ab. ioppen simul uenerunt cum eo 

24 postero quoque die ingressus est caesaream 


cornelius uero erat expectans eos 

et conuocatis cognatis suis 

et necessariis amicis sustinuit 
25 cum adpropiaret autem petrus 

in caesaraeam 

praecurrens unus ex seruis 

nuntiauit uenisse eum 

Cornelius autem exiliens 

et obuius factus est ei 

procidens ad pedes eius adorauit eum 
26 uero petrus leuabit eum dicens 


quid facis et ego homo sum quomodo et tu 


και εἰσελθωντε και evpev cuveAnAVOoTAT πολλουσ 27 οὐ introibit et inuenit conuenisse multos 
εφη τεπροσ avrova ὕμεισ βελτιον εφιστασθαι 28 aitque ad eos uos melius scitis 


wo αθεμιστον ἐστιν ανδρι iovdaiw κολλασθαι 
ῃ προσερχεσθαι ανδρι αλλοφυλω 

καμοιο Oc. επεδιξεν μῆνα κοινον 

ἡ ακαθαρτον Xeyew ανθρωπον 

Sto καὶ αναντιρητωσ ἤλθον 

μεταπεμφθεισ d νμων 

πυνθανομαῖι ovy τινι λογω μετεπεμψασθαι με 
και 0 κορνηλιοσ Ey απο THO τριτησ ἡμερασ 
μέχρι THO αρτι ὡρασ ἡμὴν νηστευων 

τὴν EVATHY τε προσέυχομενοσ εν τω OLKW μου 
και ἴδον ανηρ ἐστὴ ενωπιον μου 

ev ἐσθητι λαμπρα και φησιν κορνηλιε 
ειἰσηκουσθη σου ἡ προσευχὴ 

και αἱ ἐεἐλεημοσυναι σον 


— 
ἐμνήσθησαν ενωπιον rov θυ 


ut nefas sit uiro iudaeo adherere 
aut accedere ad allophylum - 
Et mihi ds ostendit neminem communem 
aut immundum dicere hominem 
29 propter quod et sine cunctatione ueni 
transmissus a uobis 
interrogo erge qua ratione accersisti me 
30 Et cornelius ait a nustertiana die 
usque in hunc diem eram iaiunans 
et nona orauam in domo mea 
et ecce uir stetit in conspecto meo 
31 in ueste splendida et ait corneli 
exaudita est oratio tua 
et aelemosynae tuae 


in mente habitae sunt in conspectu di 


πεμψον ovv ew tommqv και μετακαλεσαι σιμωνα 32 mitte ergo in ioppen et accersi simonem 


0G ἐπικαλειται πετροσ 


(Fol. 456 5.) 


!  quicognominatur petrus 
(Fol. 457 a.) 


Cap. X. 233—312. 


46 


— SS SJ —_  - 
ΠΡΑΞ. ΠΟΟΤΟΛΩΝ 
— — 


— 0 0 


ovroc ξενιᾷεται εν oua σιμωνοσ x. 
βυρσεωσ παρα θαλασσαν. 

oc παραγενομενοσ λαλήσει σοι 

εξαυτησ ουἐπεμψα προσ σε 33 
vapoxaAoy ελθειν προσ ἡμασ 


ov de καλωσ εποιῆσασ ev ταχει παραγενομενοσ 
vvv δου παντεσ ἡμεισ 
ενωπίον σον ἀκουσαι BovAopevot παρα σον 


— 
τα προστεταγμενα σοὶ απο Tov Ov 


ανοιξασ Se ro στομα πετροσ eurev 34 


er αληθειασ καταλαμβανομενοσ 

OTL OVK EOTLY προσωπολημπτὴσ 0 θσ 

αλλ εν παντι εθνι o φοβουμενοσ avrov 35 
και ἐργαζομενοσ δικαιοσυνὴν 

δεκτοσ avro εστιν 

τον yap Xoyov ον απεστιλεν Tour ὕιοισ tapaynrA 36 
ευαγγελιξομενοσ ειρηνην δια ἣν χρυ 

OVTOG ἐστιν παντων κα 

ὕμεισ οιδατε T0 γενομενον καθ ολησ ἴουδαιασ 37 
αρξαμενοσ yap απὸ Tyo γαλιλαιασ 

pera To βαπτισμα o εκηρυξεν Ἰωανησ 

- rov aro valapeO * ov exper o P» 38 
αγιω πνὶ και δυναμει 

ovrog διηλθεν ev ἐργετων 

και εἰωμενασ παντασ 

Tove καταδυναστευθεντασ ὕπο του διαβολου 

ort οὖσ ἣν μετ avrov 

και ὕμεισ᾽ μαρτυρεσ αὐτου 39 
wy ἐποιήσεν εν re TH χωρα των Ἰουδαιων 

και Ἱερουσαλημ᾽ ov και ανειλαν 

κρεμασαντεσ ert ξυλου 

rovrov o 6a ἤγειρεν μετα THY τριτὴν ἡμερα 40 
και ἐδωκεν avro evpayn γενεσθαι 


(Fol. 457 5.) 


AOTUS' APOSTOL 


hic hospitatur in domum simonis 
pellionis iuxta mare 
qui cum uenerit loquatur tibi 
e uestigio ergo misi ad te 
rogando uenire te ad nos 
tu autem bene fecisti in bre ui aduenire 
nunc ergo nos omnes 
in conspectu tuo audire uolumus a te 
quae praecepta sunt tibi a do 
aperiens autem os petrus dixit 
in ueritate expedior 
quia non est personarum acceptor ds 
sed in omni gente qui timet eum 
et operatur iustitiam 
acceptus est ei 
uerbum suum misit filiis istrahel 
euangelizare pacem per ihm xpm 
hic est omnium dns 
uos scitis quid factum est per totam iudaea 
cum coepisset enim a galilaca 
post baptismum quod praedicauit iohannes 
ihm a nazareth quem unxit ds 
sancto spo et uirt ute 
hic pergressus est benefaciens 
et sanans omnes 
qui obtenebantur a diabolo 
quia ds erat cum illo 
et nos testes eius 
quae fecit in regione iudaeorum 
et hierusalem quem etiam interfecerunt 
suspensum in li gno 
hunc ds suscitauit post tertium dieum 


et dedit ei manifestum fieri 
(Fol. 458 a.) 


Cap. X. 32—40. 


— — -- — — 
HPAZIC  AIIOCTOAQN 
— — i, — — 


ov παντι Tw Aaw ἀλλα paprvgt Tow X. 41 
Tpokexeuporovnp.evour vTO TOU ὃυ p.e 

οἰτινεσ συνεῴ ayouev 

καὶ συνεπιομεν avro καὶ συνεστραφ ἡμεν 


μετα τὸ ἀαναστηναι εκ νεκρων ἡμερασ ἐμ. 


Και ενετειλατο yey κηρυξαι To λαω 42 
και διαμαρτυρασθαι 
οτι ουτοσ ἐστιν οὠρισμενοσ ὕποτον bv κριτησ - 
ζωντων καὶ vexpov 
TOUTW TAVTET οἱ προφηται μαρτυρουσιν 43 
αφεσιν ἀμαρτιων λαβειν 
δια Tov ονοματοσ avrov . 


παντα TOV πιστενοντα εἰσ αὐτὸν 
Ετι λαλουντοσ του πετρου ra ρήματα ravra 44 
 €meoev TO va TO aytoy ἐπι παντασ 
rove axovovrag τον Xoyov και ἐξεστησαν 45 
οἱ εκ περιτομησ πιστοι 
οσοι συνῆλθον τω πετρω 
ort και ἐπι τα εθνη 


—, 
ἢ Swpea rov πνσ' a-ytov ekkexvraa 


nxovoy yap avrov λαλουντων 46 
v roy Ov 
€urev 8€ o πετροσ 
μῆτι To ὕδωρ κωλαι τισ δυναται 47 
του μὴ βαπτισθηναι αὐτουσ 


nom, 

οἰτινεσ To πνα To a»ytoy exa. Boy 
WOTED και ἡμεισ 

Tore rpoceragey avrova βαπτισθηναι 48 
εν To ονοματι του κυ UYU χρυ 
TOT€ παρεκαλεσαν avrov προσ αντουσ διαμειναι 
ἡμερασ τινασ ακουστον δε eyevero XL 1 
TOW αποστολοισ Kat Tou αδελφοισ 


ot εν τὴ Ἰουδαια 
(Fol. 458 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 

— - — — — 
non om ni populo sed testibus 
praedestinatis a do nobis 


qui simul manducauimus 


et simul bibimus cum eo et conuersi sumus 


postquam surrexit a mortuis dies. x1: 
Et praecepit nobis praedicare populo 
et protestari 


quia ipse est qui praestitus est a do iudex 


uluorum et mortuorum 


hui c omnes prophetae testimonium peribent 


remissionem peccatorum accipere 
per nomen eius 
omnem qui credit in eum 

adhuc loquente petro berba haec 


. Φ — 
cecidit sps sanctus super omnes 


qui audiebant uerbum et obstupefacti sunt 


qui erant ex circumcisio fideles 
qui simul uenerunt cum petro 
quia et supergentes 

donum aps sancti effusum est 


audiebant enim eos loquentes 


praeuaricatis linguis et magnificantes dm 


dixit autem petrus 
numquid aliquis aquam prohibere potest 
ut baptizentur isti 
qui spm sanctum acceperunt 
sicut et nos 
tuno praecepit eos baptizari 
in nomine dni ihu xpi 
tunc rogauerunt eum ad eos demorari 
diesaliquos audito uero 
apostoli et fratres 
qui erant in iudaeam 
(Fol. 459 a.) 


Capp. X. 41—XI. 1. 


363 


TIPAH AHOCTOA 

— — c —- 
ort καὶ τα εθνη ἐδεξατο τον Xoyov Tov bv 
O μεν ovv πετροσ δια ικανου xpovou 
ηθελησαι πορευθηναι εἰσ Ἱεροσολυμα 
και πρόσφω νησασ τουσ αδελῴφουσ 
και ἐπιστηριξασ avrovg πολυν λογον 
qrotov μενοσ δια των χω ρων 
διδασκων avrove og kat κατηντησεν αντοισ 
και απηγγίλεν αυτοισ τὴν χαριν του θυ 
ot δε ex περιτομησ αδελφοι διεκρίνοντο 
προσ αντον λεγοντεσ 
ort εἰσηλθεσ προσ ανδρασ ἀκροβυστιαν εχοντασ 
και συνεφαγεσ συν αντοισ 
ἀαρξαμενοσ δε πετροσ εξετιθετο avrow 
τα κατεξησ λεγων 
eyo μὴν ev tom) πολει προσευχομενοσ 
καὶ εἰδον εκστασει οραμα 
καταβαινον σκενοσ τι 
wo οθονὴν μεγαλὴν τετρασιν apxaua- 
καθιεμενὴν εκ του ουρανου 
και λθεν «oc € μον 
ew nv αθενισασ κατενοουν 
και edoy τετραποδα THO γὴσ 
και τα θηρια καὶ eprrera. 
και πετεινὰ του ovpayov 
και ἤκουσα φωνὴν λέγουσαν μοι 
avacra πετρε θυ cov και φαγε 
«ura δε μηδαμω σ κε΄ 
ort κοινον ἢ axaÜaproy 
ovderrore εἰσηλθεν eur To στόμα μου 
€yevero φωνὴ εκ rov ουρανου προσ με 
αοϑσ εκαθαρισεν ov μὴ kowov 
τοῦτο δε eyevero ἐπὶ τρισ 


και ανεσπασθὴ παλιν aravra εἰσ Toy ovpayo 


(Fol. 459 5.) 


XI. 


ACTUS APOSTOL | 


quia et gentes exceperunt uerbum di 
quidem ergo petrus per multo tempore 
uoluit proficisci in hierosoly ma 
et conuocauit fratres 
et confirmauit eos multum uerbum 
faciens per ciuitates 
docens eos quia et obuiauit eis 
et enuntiauit eis gratia m di 
quia erant de circumcisione fratres tudicantes 
ad eum dicentes 
quia introisti ad uiros praeputia habentes 
et simul manducasti cum eis 
incipiens autem petrus exponebat eis 
per ordinem dic ens 
ego eram in ioppen ciuitate orans 
et uidi in mentis stupore uisum 
descendere uas quo dam 
uelut linteum magnum quattuor principibus 
dimittebatur de caelo 
et uenit usque ad me 
in quod intuitus considerabat 
et uidi qua dripedes terrae 
et uestias et repentia 
et uolatilia caeli 
Et audiui uocem dicentem mihi 
surgens petre immola et manduca 
dixit autem absit dne 
quia commune et in mun dum 
numquam introibit in os meum 
respondit uero uox de caelo ad me 
quae ds mun dauit tu noli communicare 
hoc autem factum est per ter 
et sublata sunt iterum omnia in caelo 


(Fol. 4604.) 


CaP. XI. 1— 10. 


ΠΡΑΞ. AlIOCTOA. 
.---- 


και ἴδον εἐξαυτησ" γ' ανδρεσ ΧΙ. 


ἐπέστησαν επὶ τὴν οἰκιαν 
εν ἢ ἡμεν απεσταλμενοι απὸ καισαραιασ' προσ με 
--- 
eurey δε To πνα μοι συνελθειν αντοισ 
ἤλθον συν εμοι και οι εξ αδελφοι οντοι 
και εἰσηλθομεν εἰσ τον οἰκον Tov ανδροσ 
απηγγειλεν δεημειν 
awo edev ayyeXov ev ro οἰκω avrov σταθεντα 
και εἰποντὰ αντω ἀποστειλον εἰσ ἵοππην 
και μεταπεμψΨ at σιμωνα 
TOV επικαλουμενον Terpoy 
oo λαλησει ρηματα προσ σε 
εν our σωθησὴ σὺν και Tac οοικοσ σου 
€ v8cro ἀαρξασθαι με XaXew αντοισ 
— 


€Tegev ΤΟ να TO αγιον €z αὐτοισ 


WO και Ed ἡμασ εν ἀρχὴ 
ἐμνησθην Se rov py ματοσ TOV KV wo eye 
Ἰωαννησ μεν εβαπτισεν ὕδατι 
ὕμεισ δε βαπτισθησεσθαι εν πνὰ αγιω 
εἰ ovy την ἴσην δωρεαν εδωκεν avrow 
WO και ἡμειν πιστευσασνι επι TOV KY uy xpv 
eyo Tur ἡμὴν δυνατοσ κωλυσαι Toy ὃν 
TOv μὴ δουναι αυτοισ πνα αγιον 
πιστευσασιν ET GVTO 
ακουσαντεσ δεταυτα ἡσυχασαν 
και εδοξαν τον ὃν λεγοντεσ 
apa. καιτοισ εθνεσιν o ὃσ 
μετανοῖαν evo ζωὴν ἐδωκεν 
οἱ μεν ovy διασπαρεντεσ απὸ ro: θλειψεωσ' 
THO γενομενὴσ aro Tov στεφανου 
διηλθον ewo φοινεικησ 
και κυπρου και αντιοχειασ 
μήδενι τον λογον XaXovyrea 
(Fol. 460 5.) 


1I 


12 


13 


14 


17 


19 


ACTUS APOSTOL 365 
— — - — 


et ecce statim tres uiri 

superuenerunt ad domum 

in qua erant.missi a caesarea a d me 

et dixit spa mihi simul uenire cum eis 
ueneruntque mecum etiam sex fratres isti 
et introibimus in domum ipsius uiri 
adnuntiauit autem nobis 

quomo do uidit angelum in domo sua stetisse 
et dixisse ei mitte in ioppen 

et accersi Simonem 

qui cognominatur petrus 

qui loquebatur uerba ad te 


in quibus saluus fias et omnis domus tua 


Et dum coepisset loqui eis 


[2 

cecidit sps sanctus super eos 

sicut super nos in principium 

recordatus sum uerbum dni sicut dicebat 

iohannes quidem baptizauit aqua 

uos autem baptizamini apo sancto 

si autem aequalem donum dedit eis 

sicut nobis credentibus in dnm ihm xpm 
*. e — 

ego quis eram qui possim prohibere dum 

ut non daret eis spm sanctum 


credentibus in eum 


Cum autem audissent haec siluerunt 


et clarificauerunt dm dicentes 
forsitam et gentibus ds 
paenitentiam in uitam dedit 

illi quidem dispersi a conflictatione 
quae facta est sub stephano 
transierunt usque pho enicen 

et cyprum et antio chiam 


nemini uerbum loquentes 
(Fol. 461 a.) 


Car. XI. 11—19. 


366 IiPAH" ATIOCTOAQN 
-- ο-.ὄ ὦ-. — — 
εἰ μη μονοισ Ἰουδαιοισ 
Hoay δετινεσ ef avrov ανδρεσ κυπριοι 
και κυρήναιοι 
οἰτινεσ ελθοντεσ εἰσ αντιοχειαν 
ἐλαλουν προσ rove ελληνασ' 
“τω c 
ευαγγελιζομενοι τον Ky την χρν 
nv óc χειρ κυ μετ αντων 
πολυσ τε αριθμοσ πιστευσασ' 


— 
ἐπέστρεψεν emt TOV KY 


XI. 


20 


ηκουσθὴη δε o Xoyoo eur Ta wra τὴσ εκκλησιασ 22 


THO εν Ἱερουσαλὴμ περι αυτων 
και εἐξαπεστειλαν βαρναβαν 
διελ Oey ewo THE αντιοχειασ 
0C καὶ παραγενομενοσ 

και ἴδων τὴν χαριν του bu exapn 


και παρεκαλει παντασ 


---- 
Ty προθεσει THE καρδιασ προσμενειν To κω 


ort ἣν ανηρ᾽ αγαθοσ 
καιπληρὴησ πνσ αγιου και πιστεωσ 
και προσετεθη οχλοσ' ἵκανοσ Tw ku 
ακουσασ de ort σαυλοσ ἐστιν εἰσ θαρσον 
εξηλθεν αναζητων avrov 
και WO συντυχὼν παρεκαλεσεν 
ελθειν eur αντιοχειαν 
OLTLV€O παραγενομενοι ἐνιαυτον ολον 
συνεχυθησαν οχλον ἵκανον 
καιτοτέπρωτον εχρηματισεν ey αντιοχεια 
οἱ μαθηται χρειστιανοι 
ἐν τανταισ Se rare ἡμεραισ 
κατῆλθον αποΐεροσολυμων 
προφῆται eur αντιοχειαν 
ἣν δε πολλὴ αγαλλιασισ 


συνεστραμμενων Be ἡμων 
(Fol. 461 5.) 


23 


24 


26 


27 


nisi solis iudaeis 
Erant autem quidam ex ipeis uiri cyprii 

et cyrinenses 

qui cum uenissent antiochiam 

loquebantur cum craecos 

euangelizare dnm ihm xpm 

et erat manus dni cum eis 

multisque numeris cum credidissent 

reuersi sunt ad dnm 

auditus est uero hic sermo in auribus ecclesiae 

qua e erat in hierusalem de eis 

et miserunt barnabant 

ut iret usque antiochiam 

qui cum uenisset 

et uidisset gratiam di gauisus est 

et ad orabantur o mnes 

ipso proposito cordis permanere a dnm 

quia erat uir uonus 

et plenus spo sancto et fidei 

et ad posita est turba copiosa ad dnm 
audiens autem quo d saulus est tharso 

exiit requirere eum 

et cum inuenissent depraecabantur 

uenire antiochiam 

contigit uero eis annum totum 

commiscere ecclesiam 

et tunc primum nuncupati sunt in antiochia 

discipuloschristianos | 
in istis autem diebus 

aduenerunt ab hierosoly mis 

prophe tae in antiochiam 

erant autem magna exultatio 

reuertentibus autem nobis 

(Fol. 462 a.) 


Car. XI. 19—27. 


= = — πῇ 


Ss HN OY — — 
IIPAS8 AILOCTOAQN 
— ey eS — — 


Φεφ ἡ εἰσ εξ avrov ονοματι ayaBoo 


a, 
onpevwy δια του yo 


λειμον peyay μελλειν ever Oat 

ed ολην την otxouperny 

NTO €yevero ert κλαυδιου 

ot δεμαθηται καθωσ evropouvro epuray 
ἐκαστοσ avrov eur διακονίαν πεμψαι 
TOUT κατοικοῦν σιν ἐν τὴ ἴουδαια adeA our 
ο Kat εποιῆσαν αποστειλαστεσ 

προσ Tove πρεσβντερουσ 


δια χειροσ βαρναβα και σαυλον 


κατ ἐκεῖνον δε Tov kaipoy 


ἐπέβαλεν rac χειρασ npwone 0 βασιλευσ 


κακωσαι τινασ 
TOY απὸ THO εκκλησιασ εν τὴ ἴουδαια 
και avet\ey ἵακωβον ; 


τον adeA por ἴωανου μαχαιρα 


Και ἴδων ort apearov ἐστιν rou tovd aoe 


ἢ επιχειρήσεισ avTOv ETL τουσ πιστουσ 


προσέθετο συνλαβειν και πετρον 


σαν δε at μεραι των αζυμων 


τοντον πιασασ εθετο ew φνλακην 


παραδουσ τεσσαρσιν τετραδιοισ στρατιωτων 


φυλασσιν βουλομενοσ 


pera. TO πασχα ἀναγαγεῖν GvTOV TO Àao 


O μεν ovv πετροσ ernpecro ev τὴ φυλακὴ 


πολλὴ Se προσευχὴ qv 
εν ἐκτενεία περὶ avTOV 


— 
απὸ THO ἐκκλησιασ προσ Tov Oy περι avrov 


XI. 28 


29 


30 


XII. 1 


Un 


ore δε ἐμελλεν προαγειν avrov 6 
npwono τὴ vvkret exeun 
ἣν o TETPOT κοιμουμενοσ 
μεταξὺυ vo στρατιωτων 
(Fol. 462 b.) 'NH 
Capp. XI. 


ACTUS" APOSTOLORUM 
--- orn ee ty —, — 


ait unus ex ipsis nomine agabus 
. . — 

significabat per spm 

famem magnam futuram esse 

in toto orbe terrae 

quae fuit sub claudio 


discipuli autem sicut prout copiam 


singuli autem ipsorum in ministerium mittere. 


hiis qui inhabitant in iudaea fratribus 
quo d etiam fecerunt cum misissent 
ad presbyteros 


per manum barnabae et sauli 


per illum uero temporis 


inmisit manus suas herodes rex 
maletractare quosdam 
quierant ab ecclesia in iu daea 
et interfecit iacobum 


fratrem iohannis gladio 


Et cum ui disset quo d placeret hoc iudaeis 


conpraehensio eius super credentes 
adiecit adpraehendere et petrum 

erant autem dies asy morum 

hunc adprehensum posuit in carcerem 
traditum quattuor quaternionibus militu 
custodire eum uolens 


post pascha producere eum populo 


Uero petrus custodiebatur in carcere 


multa uero oratio erat 
instantissime pro eo 
ab ecclesia ad dum super ipso 
ad uero cum incipiebat prodocere eum 
herodes nocte illa 
erat petrus dormiens 
inter duos milites 
(Fol. 463 a.) 


28—XII. 6. 


967 


368 IIPAR. " AHOCTOA ACTUS APOSTOL' 
δεδεμενοσ αλυσεσι δυσιν XII. ligatus catenis duabus * 
φυλακεσ Se Tpo ry θυρασ uigiles autem ante ostium 
ἐτήρουν την φυλακὴν adseruabant carcerem 

και ἴδου αγγελοσ κυ ἐπεστη τω TreT Qo) 7 | Etecceangelus dni adsistit petro 
Kat φωσ ἐπελαμψεν Tw οἰκηματι et lux refulgens in illo loco 
γυξασ Se ryv πλευραν Tov Terpov pungens autem latus petri 
ἤγειρεν avrov λεγων ἀναστα ev τάχει suscitauit eum dicens surge cilerius 
και ἐξεπεσαν αι αλυσεισ €x των χείρων αὐτοῦ οὐ ceciderunt eius catenae de manibus 
Ειπεν e o asyyeXoa προσ avroy 8 | dixitauteman gelus ad eum 
ζωσαι και ὕποδησαι τα σανδαλια σου praecinge te οὖ calciate calciamenta tua 
eroujo ey 0e ovroc |  fecitautem sic 
Kat Neyer avro περιβαλον ro ἵματιον σον et dicit ei operi te uestimentum tuum 
και axoAovier μοι et sequere me 
και εξελθων ἠκολουθει 9 et cum exisset sequebatur 
καὶ ovx noe. ort αληθεσ ἐστιν et non sciebat quia uerum est 
TO γεινομενον δια Tov ayyeAou quo d fiebat per angelum 
edoxet yap οραμα βλεπειν putabat enim uisum uidere 
δι ελθοντεσ Se mporqv 10 cum praeterissent primam 
και Sevrepav φυλακὴν et secundam custodiam 
1A8ov ἐπι τὴν πυλὴν τὴν σιδηραν uenerunt a d portam ferream 
τὴν φερουσαν ew THY πολιν quae ducit in ciuitatem 
ἡτισ avrog m nvvyy avroww quae sua sponte aperta est eis 
και ἐξελθοντεσ κατεβησαν rova t Babpove et cum exissent descen derunt septem grados 
καὶ προσηλθαν ρυμὴν paay et processerunt gradum unum 
και evdews ἀπεστὴ o ἀγγελοσ απ avrov et continuo discessit angelus ab eo 
Kat 0 TETPOT ἐν EAUTW yevop.evog ELT EV 11 et petrus in se conue rsus dixit 
νυν oda οτι αλήθωσ εξαπεστειλεν xo nunc scio quia ue re misit dns 
Tov ayyeAov avrov και εξειλατο με angelum suum et eripuit me 
εκ χειροσ ἡρωδου de manibus hero dis 
και πασησ THO προσδοκειασ ] et omni expectationi 
TOV Àaov των Ἰονδαιων populi iudaeorum 
και συνειδων ηλθεν ert τὴν οἰκειαν TNO μαριασ 12 et cum considerasset uenit ad domum mariae 
THT μήτροσ twavov matris iohannis 
(Fol. 463 5.) (Fol. 464 a.) 


Car. XII. 6—12. 


TIPAZ. AIOCTOAQN 
— — .. -- 


TOV ἐπικαλουμένου apkov * 
ov aav ἵκανοι συνηθροισμενοι 
και προσευχομενοι 


Κρουσαντεσ 8e avrov τὴν θυραν του 


XII. 


on 


3 


apoondGer παιδισκη ovopart poor ὕπακουσαι 


kat extyvovea THY φωνὴν του Terpov 
aro T0 xapac ovk nvuge Tov πυλωνα 


και εἰσδραμουσα δε απηγγειλεν 

ec raya πετρον Trpo Tov πυλωνοσ 
οδεε γον αντὴ pawy 

ἢ Se διεσχυριζετο οντωσ €X€LV 

ot δε eXeyov προσ avrqv 

τυχον 0 ἀγγελοσ avrov ἐστιν 

o δεεπεμεν εν κρονων 

εξανοιξαντεσ δε και ἴδοντεσ avrov 

και εξεστησαν κατασεισ ag δε αυτοισ 


τὴ χειριινα σειγα σιν 
εἰσηλθεν και διηγησατο avrour 


TUO 0 Ko GVTOV εξηγαγεν ex THe φνλακησ 

«urey δε απανγειλατεϊακωβω 

καὶ Tour adeA ows ravra 

και εξ ελθων eopevOy ew erepoy τοπον 
I'evouevgo δεημερασ 

ἣν ταραχοσ ev τοισ στρατιωταισ 

TLapa. 0 πετροσ €yevero 

ἡρωδὴσ Se επιζητησασ avrov και py evpo 


ανακρεινασ τουσ φυλακασ 

exeXevoey ar κ ανθηναι 

και κατελθων ao ry Ἰουδαιασ' 

evo καισαραιαν διετριβεν 

ἣν γαρ θυμομαχων τυριοισ και σιδωνιοισ 
ot δε ομοθυμαδον ef αμφοτερων 


των πολεων παρησαν προσ τον βασιλεα 


(Fol. 464 5.) 


14 


15 


τό 


17 


18 


20 


ACTUS APOSTOL " 369 


qui cognominatur marcus 
ubi erant copiosi coaceruati 


et orantes 


Cumque ipse pulsasset ianuam foris 


accessit puella nomine rhode :respondere 
et cum cognouisset uocem petri 

8 yaudio non aperuit ianuam 

et adcurrens autem adnuntiauit 

stare petrum ante ianuam 

ad illi ad eam dixerunt in sanis 

ad illa uero perseuerabat ita esso 

qui autem dixerunt ad eam 

forsitam angelus eius est 

ipse uero perseuerabat pulsans 

et cum aperuisset uiderunt eunt 

et obstupuerunt cum que significasset eis 
de manu ut silerent 

introiens eterrabit eis 

quemadmodum dns eum liuerauit de carcere 
dixit autem renuntiate iacobo 

et fratribus haec 


et egressus abiit in alium 


facto autem die 


erat turbatio in militibus 
quid petrus factus esset 
herodes uero cim irequisisset eum et non inuenisse 
interrogatione habita uigiles 
iussit obduci 
et cum descendisset a iudaea 
in caesaraeam demorabatur 
erat enim animus inpugnans tyrios et sidonios 
unanimiter autem ab inuice 
ciuitates uenerunt ad regem 
(Fol. 465 a.) 


Cap. XII. 12—20. 


47 


870 


ITPAH. AIIOCTOA 
— ey ---- — 


XII. 
KGL TEC AYTET βλαστον TOV E%'t TOU KOLTOVoc αὑτοῦ 


rovro εἰρηνὴν 
διατοτρεφεσθαιτασ χωρασ avrov exrqa βασιλικησ 
τακτὴ δεημερα 21 
o ἡρωδὴσ εἐνδυσαμενοσ αισθητα βασιλικὴν 
και καθισασ ert του βηματοσ 
εδημειγορει προσ αντουσ 
καταλλαγεντοσ 8e avrov row τυριοισ 
o δεδημοσ eredovet 22 
—, 
Qv φωναι και ovk ανθρωπου 

— 
wapaxpnpa Se avrov erara£ey ἀγγελοσ kv 23 
ανθ ov ovk εδωκεν Sofay τω ϑω 
και καταβασ aro rov βηματοσ 
γενομενοσ κωληκοβρωτοσ 


ert ζων καὶ ουτωσ εξεψυξεν 


Ο δελογοσ του 6v ευξανε και ἐπληθυνετο 24. 


βαρναβασ δε και σαυλοσ 25 
απεστρεψεν απὸ ἱερουσαλημ 
πληρωσαντεσ την διακονίαν 
συνπαραλαβοντεσ τὸν Ἰωανην 
Tov επικληθεντα μαρκον 
σαν δὲ ev αντιοχεια XIII 1 
κατα THY ουσαν εκκλήσιαν 

προφηται και διδασκαλοι 

ev our βαρναβασ και συμεων 

0 επικαλουμενοσ vvyep 

και λουκειοσ κυρηναιοσ μαναὴν τε npwoov 


καὶ rerpapxov συντροφοσ Kat σαυλοσ 


— 
λειτουργουντων δε avrov To κω 2 


και νηστευοντων €UT€V TO πνὰ τὸ αγιον 

αφορισατε δὴ pot tov βαρναβαν και σαυλον 

εἰσ TO ἐργον οπροσκεκλημαι αὐτουσ 
τοτενηστευσαντεσ 3 


(Fol. 465 δ) 


ACTUS APOSTOLOR 
i, — — — 


et cum suasissent blasto qui a cubiculo erat 
postulabant pacem 

propter ne alienarentur regiones eorum de regno 
constituto autem die 

herodes indutus habito regio 

et sedi pro tribunali 

contentionabatur ad eos 

cum ingratiasset cum tyrios 

populus uero adclamabant 

di uoces et non hominis 

et confestim eum percussit angelus dni 

pro eo quod non dedit claritatem do 

et cum descendisset de tribunal 

sed et a bermibus comestus 


adhuc uiuens et sic expirauit 


Uerbum autem di augebatur et multiplicabatar 


barnabas uero et saulus 
reuersi sunt ab hierusalem 
impleto ministerio 
adsupto iohannen 

qui cognominatur marcus 
erant autem in antiochia 
aput quem erat ecclesiam 
prophetae et doctores 

in quo barnabas et symeon 
qui uocatur niger 

et lucius cyrenensis manaenque herodis 


et tetrarchi conlactaneus et saulus 


— 
Deseruientibus autem eis dno 


et ieiunantibus dixit 8,8 sanctus 
secernite mihi barnaban et saulum 
&d opus uocaui eos 
tunc cum iaiunassent 

(Fol. 466 a.) 


Capp. XII. 20—XIII. 3. 


IIPAR. ADOCTOA 
— 


και προσευξαμενοι παντεσ XIII. 
και emÜevrea rac χειρασ avrour 
οἱ μεν ovy εκπεμφθεντεσ tro Tov TO αγιον 4 
καταβαντεσ δε εἰσ σελευκιαν 
εκειθεν απεπλευσαν eur κυπρον 
γένομενοι δε ev Ty σαλαμειψι 5 
κατηνγειλαν roy λον του KV 
εν ταισ G'vya-yoryato: των Ἰουδαίων 
eixov δε και ἴἵωαννην ὕπηρετουντα avTow - 
καὶ ριελθοντων de avrov ό 
ολην THY vua σὸν axpt παφου 

. evpoy avdpa τινα μαγον 
ψευδοπροφητὴν ἴονδαιον 
ovopart καλουμενον βαρΐησονα 
oc ἣν συν To ανθυπατω 7 
σεργιω πανλω ανδρι cuverw 
ovrog συνκαλεσαμενοσ βαρναβαν και σαυλο 
καὶ εζητησεν ἀκουσαι Tov λογον του Óv 
αγθειστατο δε avrow er ἱμασ o payor 8 
ovrec yap μεθερμήνευεται 
TO ovopa avrov ζητων διαστρεψαι 
Toy avOvrarov atro rng πιστεωσ 
eru ἡδιστα ἤκονεν avroy 

CavXoc δεο καὶ πανλοσ πληθεισ ve αγιου 9 
και ατενεισασ εἰσ αὐτὸν εἶπεν 10 
«€ πληρὴσ παντοσ δολου 
και ραδιουργιασ ὕιοι διαβολου 
exOpe aoo δικαιοσυνησ 
ov παυσὴ διαστρεφων rag οδουσ kv 
rac ουσασ ενθειασ 
kat νυν εἰδου ἢ χεὶρ κυ emi σε II 
Kat con τυφλοσ py βλέπων Tov NAELOV ewe καιροῦ 
και ενθεωσ ἐπεσεν er avrov axXva καὶ σκοτοσ 


(Fol. 466 5.) 


Car. XIII 


ACTUS APOSTOL' 371 
— 


et orassent omnes 

et inposuissent manus eis 

ipei uero dismissi ab spo sancto 
descenderunt seleuciam 

inde uero nauig auerunt in cyprum 
et cum fuissent salamina 
adnuntiabant uerbum di 

in synagogis iudaeorum 

habebant uero et iohannen ministrantem eis 
cum pergressi fuissent 

totam insulam usquae ad paphum 
inuenerunt uirum quendam magum 
pseudoprophetam iudaeum 

nomine qui uocatur bariesuam 

qui erat cum proconsule 

sergio paulo uiro prudenti 

hic cum uocasset barnaban et saulum 
et quaesire uoluit audire uerbum di 
resistabat autem eis etoemas magus 
sic enim interpraetabatur 

nome n eius quaerens uertere 
proconsolem a fidem 


quoniam liuenter audiebat eos 


Saulus uero qui et paulus iupletus spo sancto 


et intuitus in eum dixit 

o plenae omnis dolus 

et falsi fili diabole 

inimicae omnis iustitiae 

non cessas euertere uias domini 

quas sunt rectas 

et nuno ecce manus dni super te 

et eris caecus non uidens solem usq: ad tempus 


et confestim caecidit super eum caligo et tenebrae 
(Fol. 467 a.) 


. 3—11. 


.-- οὖω.-. . — 
TIPAE ATIOCTOA 


— o — ως — 
και περιαγων εζητει χειραγωγουσ 
Ἰδὼν 8c o ανθυπατοσ 
TO γεγονοσ εθαυμασεν 
Lom, 
και ero revo ey To Ow 


ἐκπλησσομενοσ em ty διδαχὴ Tov KU 
avaxÜevrea Sa aro rno παφου ot περι παυλο 
1ABov εἰσ περγὴν rho παμφυλιασ 

Ἰωανησ δε αποχωρησασ απαντων 
ὕπεστρεψεν ew ἱεροσολυμα 
avrot δε διελθοντεσ απο Tyo περγησ 
παρεγενοντο εἰσ αντειοχειαν THE πεισιδιασ 


καὶ εἰσελθοντεσ «ux τὴν συναγωγὴν 


τὴν ἡμέτερα ro ca) aro εκαθισαν 
pera δετὴν ἀαναγνωσιν τουνομοῦυ 


καὶ τῶν προφήητων 
απεστειλαν οἱ αρχισυναγωγοι 


προσ avrovg λεγοντεσ 

ανδρεσ αδελῴφοι ev Tur. ἐστιν λογου σοφιασ' 
εν pew παρακλησεωσ 
προσ rov λαον λεγεται 

αναστασ δεοπαυλοσ 


καὶ κατασεισασ TY) χέιρβει εἶπεν 


ανδρεσ ἵστραηλιται και οἱ φοβουμενοι Tov Ov 


ακουσατε 
O θσ rov Aaov rovrov Ἰσραηλ 
εἐξελεξατο rov σ πατερασ ἡμων 
δια τον λαον ὕψωσεν εν τὴ παροικια 
TN yq αἰγυπτω 
και μετα βραχειονοσ ὕψηλον 
εξηγαγεν avrova εξ αυτὴσ 
καὶ erg. pe erpomodQopnoey avrova ἐν Τὴ epnuw 
και καθελων εθνὴ erra. ev yn χανααμ. 
κατεκληρονομήσεν τὴν γὴν των αλλοῴφυλω 
(Fol. 467 5.) 


XIII. 


18 


19 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


et circumiens quaerebat ad manum deductores 


tunc cum uidisset pro consul 
quo d factum est miratus est 
et credidit in do 


c 
stupens super doctrina dni 


superuenientes - ἃ papho ‘qui erant circa paulo 


uenerunt in pergen pamphyliae 
iohannes uero cum discedisset ab eis 
reuersus est hierosoly mis 
isti autem cum transissent a pergen 
uenerunt antio chiam pisidiae 
et cum introissent in synagogam 
die sabbatorum sed erunt 
post lectionem uero legis 
et prophetarum 
miserunt archisynagogi 
ad eos dicentes 
uiri fratres si quis est sermo et intellectus 
in uobis exhort ationis 
ad populum dicite 
Cum surrex isset paulus 
et silentium manu postulasset dixit 
uiri istrahelitae et qui timetis dm 
audite 
Ds populi huius istrahel 


elegit patres nostros 


propter populum exaltatum in peregrinatione 


in terra aegypti 
et cum brachio alto 
eduxit eos - ex ipsa 


et annis. x1 ac si nutrix aluit eos in solitudine 


et sublatisq . gentibus septe in terra chanaam 


possidere eos fecit terram allophoelorum 
(Fol. 468 a.) 


Car. XIII. 11— 19. 


— 0 A — 
HPAR8 AHOCTOA 
— Ss —À — 


KaL ewe ετεσι.ν. ka. y - eSwxev κριτασ 
εωσ σαμονηλ᾽ Tov προφητον 
κακειθεν ἡτησαντο βασιλεα 
και ἐδωκεν αὐτοισ o Oa τον σαουλ toy. κεισ 
ανδρα εκ φυλησ βενιαμιν 
erg μ. και μεταστησασ αντον 
ἤγειρεν Saved avrow ew βασιλεα 
w καὶ εἰπεν μαρτυρησασ 
evpov δανειδ τον ὕιον ἵεσσαι 
ανδρα κατα την καρδιαν μον 
οσ ποιήσει παντα τα θεληματα μου 
O ὅσ ovv axro rov σπερματοσ avrov 
κατ ἐπαγγελειαν 
ἤγειρεν ro tapa σωτήρα rov up 
προκηρνυξαντοσ twavou 
προ Trpog'wrrov THE εἰσοδου avrov 
βαπτισμα μετανοιασ 
παντιτω Aaw ἵσραηλ 
wo δε ἐπληρουν Ἰωανησ τὸν Spopov ελεγε 
τινα μεὕπονοειται εἰναι. ουκ εἰμι ἐγω 
αλλα ἴδου ἐρχεται μεθ ej. ov ovk εἰμι αξιοσ 
το ὕποδημα των ποδων λυσαι 
ανδρεσ' αδελῴοι ὕιοι γενουσ αβρααμ 


— 
και oc ev ἡμειν φοβουμενοι τον Ov 


XIIL 20 


43 


npew o Àoyoc THe σωτηρειασ Ταντησ εξαπεσταλη 


οἱ yap κατοικουντεσ᾽ ev tepova axi. 
Kat Ol Gpxoyreg avr σ 


TAT TAT yp ac roy προφητων 


27 


Tac κατα παν σαββατον αναγεινωσκομενασ 


και κρεινγαντεσ ἐπληρωσαν 
και μηδεμίαν array θανατου 
ευροντεσ εν avro 


κρειναντεσ avrov παρεδωκαν πειλατω 


(Fol. 468 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL 973 


et quasi annis. cocc. et-1- dedit iudices 
usque ad samuel prophetam 

et exinde petierunt regem 

et dedit eis ds saul filium cis 

uirum ex tribu beniamin 

annis. xl et remoto eo 

excitauit dauit eis in regem 

cui etiam dixit testimonio 

inueni dauid filium iessae 

uirum secundum cor meum 


qui faciet omnes uoluntates meas 


— 
ds autem asemine huius 


secundum pollicitationem 

resurrexit ipsi istrahel salbatorem ihm 

cum prius praedicasset iohannes 

ante faciem ingressionis eius 

baptisma paenitentiae 

omni populo istrahel 

et dum inpleret cursum iohannes dicebat 
quem suspicamini me esse non sum ego 

sed ecce ueniet post me cuius non sum dignus 


calciamentum pedum soluere 


- uiri fratres fili generis abraham 


et qui in nobis timentes dm 

nobis uerbum salutis huius missum est 
qui enim habitabat in hierusalem 

et principes eius 

non intellegentes scripturas prophetaru 
quae per omnem sabbatum leguntur 

et cum iudicassent inplerunt 

et nullam causam mortis 

inuenta est in eo 

iudicantes autem eum tradiderunt pilato 


(Fol. 469 a.) 


Cap. XIII. 20— 28. 


374 


IPAR APOST 


iva, εἰσ avaipecty wo δε ετελουν XIII. 29 
παντα TO, περι αντου γεγραμμένα ELTLV 
YTOUVTO τον πειλατον TOVTOV μεν σταύρωσαι 
καὶ ἐπιτυχοντεσ παλιν 
και καθελοντεσ asro του ξυλου 
και εθηκαν eur μνημειον 

.--- 
ov οθσ ηγειρεν οντοσ why 30, 31 


Tow συναναβαινουσιν avro 


αποτησγαλιλαιασ εισϊερουσαλημ εφημερασ πλειονασ 


οἰτιγεσ αχρι γυν εἰσιν μαρτυρεσ αντοῦ προσ rov λαῦ 
Kat news ὕμασ εναγγελιζομεθα 32 
τὴν προσ Tove πατερασ ἡμῶν 

γένομενην ἐπαγγελιαν 

οτιταυτὴν Ο óc εκπεπληρωκεν 


TOUT τεκνοισ ἡμῶν 


αναστησασ TOV KV τὴν χρν 
οντωσ᾽ yap εν ro poro ψαλμω γεγραπται 33 
ϑιοσ μον εισν 
ἐγὼ σήμερον γεγεννήκα σε 
αἰτῆσαι παρ auo 
και δωσω σοι εθνη 
τὴν κληρονομίαν σου 
καὶ THY κατασχεσιν σον 
τὰ πέρατα THO "yc 
ore δε ἀανεστησεν avrov €x vexpav 34 
μῆκετι μελλοντα ὕποστρε φειν 
εἰσ διαφθοραν οντωσ ειρηκεν 
ort δωσω ὕ pe 
τὰ 00a. Saved τα πιστα 
καὶ erepwo λεγει 35 
ov δωσεισ TOV οσιον σὸν 
ἵδειν διαφ θοραν 
Dave yap ida y «vea. 36 
(Fol. 469 6.) 


ut interficeretur. et consummauerunt 
omnia quae de illo scripta sunt 
petierunt pilatum hunc crucifigi 
et inpetrauerunt iterum 
et deposuerunt de ligno 
et posuerunt in monumento 
quem ds uero excitauit hic qui uisus est 
his qui simul ascend erunt cum eo 
a galilaea in hierusalem in diebus pluribus 
qui usquae nuno sunt testes eius ad populu 
et nos uos euangelizamus 
eam quae patres ncstros 
factam pollicitationem 
quia hanc ds adimpl euit 
filiis nostris 
suscitauit dnm ihs xpm 
sicut enim in primo psalmo scriptum est 
filius meus es tu 
ego ho die genui te 
postula a me 
et dabo tibi gentes 
hereditatem tuam 
et possessionem tuam 
terminos terrae 
quando suscitauit eum a portuis 
iam non rediturum 
in interitum ita dicit 
quia dabo uobis 
sancta dauid fidelia 
ideoque et alia dicit 
non dabis sanctum tuum 
uidere corruptione m 
dauid enim sua progenie 
(Fol. 470a.) 


Car. XIII. 28— 36. 


= = 
HPAR ΑΠΟΓΤΌΛΩΝ 
— ay — — 
— 
ὕπηρετησασ τὴ Tov θυ βουλὴ εκοιμηθὴ XIII. 


Kat pocereÜ: προσ Tove πατερασ avTov 

και ἴδεν δια  Üopay 

οδεα óc ἤγειρεν ovx ειδεν Seva ᾧ θοραν 37 
γνωστον ovy ἐστω ὕμειν avdper αδελῴοι 38 

ott δια TovrOV ὕμειν 

αφεσεισ apapruov καταγγελλεται 

και μετανοια απὸ παντων 39 

wy οὐκ ἡδυνηθητε 

εν γομω μωσεωσ δικαιωθηναι 


εν TOUTW OVV Tac O πιστευων δικαιόντε παρα δὼ 
βλεπετε ovy μὴ ἐπελθη 40 
TO εἰρημένον εν τοισ προφηταισ 
ἴδετε οἱ καταφρονητε καὶ θαυμασατε 41 
και ab ανισθητε ort epyoy εργαζομαι eyw 
εν ταισ ἡμεραισ ὕμων 
. 0 OV μὴ πιστευσητε 
eay Tur ἐκδιηγήσεται ὕμειν 
καὶ ἐσειγησαν 
Εξιοντων δε avrov παρεκαλουν 42 
eu το €£yo σαββατον 
λαληθηναι αντοισ ρηματα ταυτα 
λυθεισησ δετησ συναγωγησ 43 
ἠκολουθησαν πολλοι των Ἰουδαίων 
και roy σεβομενων προσήλντων 
Tw πανλω kat βαρναβα 
οἰτιψεσ προσλαλουντεσ αντοισ 
επιθοντ avrovg προσμένειν Ty) χαριτι rov ev 
Eyevero δε καθ ολησ Tyo πολεωσ 44 
διελθειν rov Xoyov Tov by 
Tw 9€ epyopnerw ca aro 
σχεδον ody ἡ roÀur συνηχθὴ axoverat πανλου 


πολὺυν T€ Xoyov ποιήσαμενον περι του κυ 
(Fol 470 5.) NO 


ACTUS APOSTOL 3765 
— —- »- -- Á 


cum ministrasset do uoluntate dormiuit 
et adpositus est ad patres suos 


et uidit corruptionem 


4 


quem autem ds suscitauit non uidit corruptio / 


4 
f 


notum ergo sit uobis uiri fratres ; 


quia per hune uobis 

remissio peccatorum adnuntiatur 

et paenitentia ab omnibus 

quibus non potuistis 

in lege moysi iustificari 

in isto enim omnis qui credit. iustificatur ad 
uidete ergo ne superueniat 

quod dictum est in prophetis 

uidete contemptores et admiramini 

et exterminamini qua opus operor ego 
in diebus uestris 

quod non creditis 

si quis exposuerit uobis 

et tacnerunt 


progregientibus uero eis rogabant 


in sequente sabbato 
narrari sibi haec uerba 
Et dismissa synagoga 
saecuti sunt multi iudaeorum 
et colentium proselytorum 
paulum et barnabam 
qui loquentes cum illis 
persuadentes eis permanere in gratia di 


factum est autem per omnem ciuitatem 


transire uerbum dni 
sequenti autem sabbato 
paene tota ciuitas collecta est audire paulu 
multum uerbum faciens de dno 
(Fol. 471 4.) 


e 


Car. XIII. 36—44. 


376 


UPA  AIIOCTOA 
— 


και ἴδοντεσ ot tovOatot To πληθοσ 

ἐπλησθησαν ζηλου 

και ayreAeyoy τοισ λογοισ' 

ὕπο του παυλον λεγομενοι σ' 

αντιλεγοντεσ καὶ βλασφημουντεσ 

παρρησιαμενοσ τε οπαυλοσ και βαρναβασ 

εἰπαν προσ avrovg 

-- 

ὕμειν πρωτον ἣν λαληθηναι τὸν Xov του θυ 

eri απωθεισθαι avrov 

και ovk ἀξιουσ κρεινατε εαντουσ' 

Tyo αιωνιου Cuno 

Sou στρεφομεθα εἰσ τα εθνη 

— 

OVTUG yap evreradxev o ka 

ἴδον φωσ τεθεικα σε row εθνεσιν 

TOV εἰναι σε εἰσ σωτήριαν εωσ €G.XGTOV THO γησ 
και ἀκονοντα Ta εθνὴ exa«poy 

και edefavro Tov λογον του v 

και επισ TEVTOY OTOL NAY τεταγμένοι 

eo Conv auviov 
και διε pep ero o λογοσ rov KV 

δι ολησ Tyo χωρασ 

ot δεϊουδαιοι παρωτρυνον 

Tac σεβομενασ yvvawag τασ ευσχημονασ 

καὶ τουσ πρωτουσ THT πολεωσ 


και erry εἰραν θλειψειν μεγαλην 
και διωγμον ere παυλον και βαρναβαν 
και εξεβαλον avrov σ απὸ των opuoy αντω 
οι δε εκτινάξαμενοι Tov kovtoproy 
τῶν ποδὼν avrov em avrov 
KATHVTNOAY εἰσ ELK OVLOV 
ide μαθηται ἐπληρουντο χαρασ 
o) μαθηται ἐπλήρουντο xap 
και TVO αγιον 


Eyevero δε ev wovw kara τὸ avro 


(Fol. 471 δ.) 


XIII. 45 


46 


47 


48 


49 


50 


52 


XIV. 1 


"ACTUS APOSTOL 
— — — 
et cum uidissent iudaei turbam 
repleti sunt aemulatione 

et contradicebant sermonibus 


quae a paul o dicebantur 


. contra dicentes et blasphemantes 


adhibita uero fiducia paulus et barnabas 


dixerunt ad eos 


uobis oportebat primum loqui uerbum dni 


se d quia repulistis illud 

et non dignos iudicastis eos 

in aeternam uitam 

ecce conuertimur ad gentes 

ita enim mandatum dedit nobis dus 
ecce lumen posui te super gentibus 


ut sint in salutem usquae ad ul timum terrae 


Et cum audirent gentes gauisae sunt 


et exceperunt uerbum dui 
et crediderunt quodquo d erant 


1n uitam aeterna m 


Et prouulgabatur uerbum dni 


per omnem regionem 

iudaei autem instigauerunt 

caelicolas mulieres honestas 

et principes ciuitatis 

et suscitauerunt tribulationem magnam 
et persecutionem super paulum et barnaba 
et eiecerunt eos de finibus eorum 

ad ill i excusso puluere 

de pedibus suis super eos 

uenerunt in hiconio 

discipuli uero inplebantur gaudio 


a, 
et spu.sancto 


Contigit autem ut ichonio similiter 


(Fol 472a.) 


Carr. XIII. 45—XIV. 1. 


— — - — ᾿ 
HPAR AIIOCTOA 
— —— — 


ered Pay avrov XIV. 
εἰσ τὴν συναγωγὴν των Ἰουδαίων 
καὶ λαλησαι ουτωσ προσ AVTOVT WOTE πιστεύει 


τουδαιων τε καὶ ελληνων πολυ πληθοσ 
ot δε αρχισνναγωγοι των Ἰουδαίων 2 


καὶ οἱ αρχοντεσ THT συναγωγησ 
ἐπήγαγον avrow διωγμον κατα των δικαίων 


Kat exaxwoay τασ ψυχασ των εθνων 
κατα των adeAdwy 
o Sexo εδωκεν ταχὺ εἰρηνὴν 
ἵκανον μεν ovv xpovoy διατρειψαντεσ 3 
παρησιαμενοι ert To Ko 


τω μαρτυρουντι ro λογω THO χαριτοσ avrov 
διδοντι σημεια καὶ τερατα γεινεσθαι 


δια των χείρων avrov 
ἣν δε εσχισμενον το πληθοσ Tyo πολεωσ 4 
και Ot μεν σαν συν τοισ Ἰουδαιοισ 
αλλοι δε συν row αποστολοισ᾽ κολλωμενοι 
δια rov Xoyoy του θυ 
wo δε eyevero oppo) των εθνων 5 
και των Ἰουδαίων συν TOLD ἀρχουσιν GUTOV 
ὕβρισαι και λιθοβ ολησαι avrove 
συνΐδοντεσ και κατεφυγον ό 
«c τασ πολισ THE λνκαωνιασ 
εἰσ λυστραν και δερβην 
καὶ τὴν περίχωρον ολην 
κακει ευαγγελιζομενοι σαν 9 
και exeun oXov To πληθοσ ert τὴ διδαχὴ 
O de avAoc και βαρναβασ 
διετριβον ev λυστροισ 
και τισ ανὴρ ἐκαθητο αδυνατοσ τοισ ποσὶν 8 
€x κοιλιασ THO μητροσ avrov 
og ουδεποτε περειπεπατηκει 


(Fol. 472 5.) 


"ACTUS APOSTOL' 


introire eos 


in synagoga iudaeorum 


et loqui sic ad eos ita ut crederent 


iudaeorum et grecorum copiosa multitudo 


archisynagogae iudaeorum 
et principes synagogae 


incitauerunt persecutionem aduersus iustos 


et maletractauerunt animas gentium 
aduersus fratres 
dns autem dedit comfestim pacem 


plurimo ergo tempore commorati sunt 


habita fidueia in dno 


qui testimonium perhibuit uerbo gratiae ipsius 


dans signa et portenta fieri 

per manus eorum 

diuisa autem erat multitudo ciuitatis 

et alii quid em erant cum iudaeis 

alii uero cum apostolis adherentes 
propterter uerbum di 

ut autem factum est impetus gentilium 
et iudaeorum cum magistribus ipsorum 


et iniuriauerunt et lapidauerunt eos 


intellexerunt et fugerunt 


in ciuitates lycaoniae 
in lystra et derben 
et circum totam regionem 


et illic erant euangelizantes 


et commota est omnis multitudo in doctrinis 


paulus autem et barnabas 


moras faciebant in lystris 

et quidam uir sedebat adynatus a pedibus 
&b utero matris suae 

qui num quam ambulauerat 


(Fol. 473 a.) 


Cap. XIV. 1—8. 


& 


48 


377 


378 


[IPAE AHOCTOA' 
— — e 


ουτοσ ἤκουσεν Tov παυλου λαλουντοσ 
ὕπαρχων εν φοβω 
ατενισασ δεαντω o παυλοσ 


και ἴδων or. exer πιστιν του σωθηναι 


εἰπεν μεγαλη φωνὴ 


(οι λεγω ev τω ovopare TOV kv env Xpv 


αναστηθι ext rove ποδασ σον 


ορθοσ και περιπατει 


XIV. 9 


και εὐθεωσ παραχρημα ανηλατο Kat περιεπατει 


οἱ δεοχλοι ἴδοντεσ o ἐποίησεν παυλοσ 
ἐπῆραν φωνὴν avrov λυκαωνιστι λεγόντεσ 


ot θεοι ομοιωθεντεσ τοισ ανθρωποισ 


κατεβησαν προσ ἡμασ 
ἐκαλουν δε BapvaBay διαν 


τον δεπαυλον ἐρμην 

ez αντοσ ἣν ἡγουμενοσ Tov Xoyov 
οι δεΐερεισ του οντοσ διοσ προ πολεωσ 
ταυρουσ ανυτοισ Kat στεμματα 

ert τουσ πυλωνασ᾽ ἐενεγκαντεσ 


συν Tow οχλοισ ἤθελον επιθνειν 


ακουσασ Se βαρναβασ και παυλοσ 


διαρρηξαντεσ τα ἵματια avroy 


καὶ ἐξεπηδησαν ἐισ τον οχλον 


κραζοντεσ και φωνουντεσ 


ανδρεσ Tt ravra ποιειται 


ἡμεισ ομοιοιπαηθεισ ἐσμεν ὕμειν ανθρωποι 
εναγγελιζομενοι ὕμειν Tov ὃν 

OTWE απὸ TOVTOV των ματαίων 
επιστρεψηται ert Tov ὃν ζωντα 

TOV ποιήσαντα Toy ουρανον καὶ THY γὴν 

και τὴν θαλασσαν και παντα τα εν avTOLT 
οἐν TALC παρωχημεέναισ 


γεένεαισ evo e κατα τα εθνὴ 


(Fol. 4735.) 


II 


13 


14 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
— ---ο-.- --- ο.-. 


hic audiuit paulum loquentem 
possidens in timore 

intuitus autem eum paulum 

et uidens quia habet fidem ut saluus fiat 


dixit uoce magna 

tibi dico in nomine dni ihu xpi 
surge supra pedes tuos 
rectus et ambula 


et statim subito exiliuit et ambulabat 
turba autem uidens quod fecit paulus 
leuauerunt uocem suam lycaoni dicentes 
dii -adsimulati hominibus 
descenderunt ad nos 
uocabant barnaban iouem 
paulum uero mercurium 
quoniam ipse erat princeps sermonum 
sacerdotes autem qui erant iouis ante ciuitate 
tauros eis et coronas 
ad ianuas adferentes 
cum turba bolentes immolare 

Cum audisset autem barnabas et paulus 
consc i derunt uestimenta sua 
et exilierunt ad turbas 


clamantes et uociferantes . 


uiri quid haec facitis 


nos patientes sumus uobis hominibus 
euangelizamus uobis dm 
ut ab his uanis 
conuertamini ad dm uiuum 
qui fecit caelum et terram 
et mare et omnia quae in eis sunt 
qui in praeteritis 
saeculis sanauit omnes gentes 
(Fol. 4744.) 


Cap. XIV. 9— 16. 


— — 0 — 
IIPAR AIOCTOA 
— — ay —, 


ropevea Oat rato οδοισ αυτων 


καιγε OUK aj aprvpoy αφηκεν eavroy 
ayaÜomowv ουρανοθεν ὕμειν 

ὕετουσ διδουσ καὶ καιρουσ καρποφορουσ 
ἐνπιμπλων τροφησ και εὐφροσυνησ 
καρδιασ ὕμων και ravra. λεγοντεσ 
μογισ κατεπαυσαν τουσ οχλουσ 

του μὴ θυειν avrow 

διατριβοντων αντων και διδασκοντων 
ἐπῆλθον τινεσ ἴουδαιοι 

απο LKOVUOU και αγτιοχιασ' 

Kat επεισεισαντεσ τουσ οχλουσ 

και λιθασαντεσ τον παυλον 

ecvpay e£o Tyo πολεωσ 

νομίζοντεσ τεθναναι avrov 


κυκλωσαντεσ δετων μαθητων avrov 


αναστασ εἰσηλθεν ew τὴν λυστραν πολιν 


και τὴν ἐπαυριον εξηλθεν 
ro βαρναβα εἰσ pf 
Εναγγελιζομενοι δε rove ἐν τὴ πολει 
και μαθητευσαντεσ πολλουσ 
vreorpedov εἰσ λυστραν 


καὶ €LKOVLOV καὶ αντιοχείαν 


eru» ριζοντεσ raa ψυχασ rov μαθητων 


παρακαλουντεσ T€ ἐμμενεῖν τὴ πιστει 

και ort δια πολλων θλειψεων 

διημασ ελθειν εἰσ την βασιλειαν του ὃν 
χειροτονήσαντεσ δε avrow 

κατα ἐκκλησιαν πρεσβντερουσ 

προσευξαμενοι δε μετα νηστειων 

mapeÜcyro avrovo τω ko 

εἰσ Oy πεπιστευ κασιν 


διελθοντεσ δετην πισιδιαν 
(Fol. 4746.) 


17 


19 


20 


21 


22 


24 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
ambulate uias suas 


et quidem non sine testimonio reliquid se ipsu 
benefaciens de caelo uobis 
imbrens dans et tempora fructifera 
implens ciuo et iucunditate 
corda uestra et haec dicentes 
et conpescuerunt turbas 
ne sibi immolarent 
moras facientes eos et docentes 
superuenerunt autem iudaei 
ab iconio et antiochia 
et cum istigassent turbam 
et lapidassent paulum 
traxerunt extra ciuitatem 
existimantes mortuum esse eum 
circueuntes enim discipuli eius 
cum surrexisset introibit in lystram ciuitate 
et altera die exiuit 
cum barnaban derben 

Euangelizantes autem in illa ciuitate 
et discipulos fecissent plures 
reuersi sunt lystram 
et iconium et antiochiam 
confirmantes enim animas discipulorum 
exhortantes ut permanerent in fidem 
et quia per multas conflictationes 
oportet nos introire in regnum di 

Et cum ordinassent illis 
per ecclesias presbyteros 
orantes autem cum ieiunationibus 
conmen dauerunt eos do 
in quem crediderunt 
regressi autem pisidiam 

(Fol. 4750.) 


Cap. XIV. 16—24. 


380 


IIPAH. AOCTOAQN 
— 0 — ι. — — 


n\Oay ew παμφνλιαν XIV. 


καὶ λαλήσαντεσ ey περγὴ rov λογον 23 
κατεβησαν ew ἀτταλιαν 

εναγγελ Lopevot avrove 

κακειθεν ἀπεπλευσαν εἰσ αντιοχειαν 26 
o «v cav rapadedopevor Ty xaptrt Tov θυ 

€, TO ἐεργον o exAnpwoay 

wapayevoj.evot δε 27 
xat συναξαντεσ τὴν exkAgoeuay 

ανήηγγειλον oca. o 60 εἐποιήσεν BVTOW 

peta rov jvxov avrov 

και ore yvuge Tour εθνεσιν Üvpay πιστεωσ 
διετριβον δε xpovov 28 
ovK ολιγον συν row μαθηταισ 


καὶ τινεσ κατελθοντεσ 

απο THe ἵονδαιασ εδιδασκον rove αδελῴφουσ 
ort €ay μὴ περιτμηθητε 

καὶ Tw Jet μωσεωσ περιπατήτε 


ov δυνασθε σωθηναι 


XV.I1 


Γενομενησ 0e exracewr 2 


καὶ ξητησεωσ ov k ολιγὴσ 

τω παυλω καὶ βαρναβα συν avrow 

ἐλεγεν yap οπανλοσ μένειν ουτωσ 

καθ wo επιστευσαν διϊσχυριζομενοσ 

ot de eAnAvOorec απο ἱερουσαλημ 

wapry γειλαν avrow Tw παυλω και βαρναβα 
και τισιν ἀλλοισ avaBawew 

προσ Tove αποστολουσ Kat πρεσβντερουσ 
εἰσ ἱἹερουσαλημ οπωσ κριθωσιν ex αὐτοὺσ 


wept Tov ζητηματοσ τοντον 


Oc μὲν ovv προπεμφθιτεσ 3 


ὕπο Tyo exxAnovac διήρχοντο 
τὴν τε ᾧ οινικὴν και τὴν σὰ pap Lay 
(Fol. 475 5.) 


ACTUS APOBTOLORUM 


uenerunt in pamphyliam 
et locuti aput pergen uerbum 
descenderunt in attaliam 
euangelizantes eos 
et in de enauigarunt antio chiam 
unde erant traditi in cratia di 
ad opus quo d inpleuerunt 
cum a duenissent autem 
et collegissent ecclesiam 
renuntiauerunt quae ds fe cit illis 
cum animabus eorum 
et quia -aperuit gentibus osteum fidei 
demorabantur uero tempus 
non modic um c um discipulis 
et quida m c um aduenissent 
a iudaea docebant fratres 
quia non circumcisi fueritis 
et more moysi ambulaueritis 
non potestes salui fieri 

facta ergo seditione 
et questione non modica 
8 paulo et barnaba ad eos 
dicebat autem paulus manere sic 
sicut cre diderunt 
qui autem uenerunt ab hierusalem 
statuerunt eis paulo et barnabae 
et quos dam alios as cendere 
apostolos et presbyteros 
in hierusalem ut iudicent super eos 
de questione hanc 

illi qui dem praemissi 
ab ecclesia regrediebantur 
phoenicem et samariam 

(Fol. 476a.) 


Carr, XIV. a3—XV. 3. 


—_—— — 


TiPAR. AIIOCIOA 
SSA BONS 
ἐκδιηγουμένοι τὴν επιστροφὴν TOV ever 
και ἐποιουν xapay μεγαλην 
πασὶιν row αδελφοισ 
παραγενομενοι δε εἰσ Ἱερουσαλημ. 
παρεδοθησαν μεγωσ ὕπο Tye ἐκκλησιασ 
καὶ των ἀποστολων kat των πρεσβυτέρων " 
απηγγειλαντεσ ova εποιῆσεν o ὃσ peravro 
ot δεπαραγγειλαντεσ avrowr 
avaBatvew προσ rove peo Bvrepova 
εἐξανεστησαν λεγοντεσ Tweor 
απὸ TH ἐρεσεωσ των φαρισαιων 
πεπιστευκοτεσ ort Set περιτεμνειν avrove 
παραγγελλειν δε τηρεῖν Tov νομὸν μωσεωσ 
Ουνηχθησαν δε οἱ ἀποστολοι και πρεσβυτεροι 
ἴδειν περι Tov Xoyov rovrov 
πολλησ δε συνζητησεωσ γενομενησ 
ayeoT σεν εν πνὶ πετροσ ᾿ 
και εἶπεν προσ αυτουσ' 
aviper αδελῴφοι ὕμεισ ἐπιστασθαι 
ort a ἡμέρων apyauiy 
jew o Oo «£e taro δια στοματοσ μου 
axovca Ta. eOvy τον Xoyov Tov ἐεναγγελιου 
και πιστευσαι 0 δε καρδιογνωστησ o óc 
epaprvpyaey avrow 
Sou ex avrov ro πνὰ To αγιον 


καθωσ καιημειν 

και οὐδεν διεκρεινεν 

μεταξυ μων καὶ avrov 

τὴ πίστει καθαρισασ rac καρδιασ avrov 

γυν ουν τιπιραζετετον 6 

επιθειναι (vyov ert rov τραχηλον rov paDsre 
OV OUTE OL πατερεσ ἡμων 


ovr€ nue ισχυσαμεν βαστασαι 
(Fol. 476 5.) 


XV. 


ACTUS APOSTOL 381 


exponentes reuersionem gentium 

et efficiebat gaudium magnum 

omnibus fratribus 

cum peruenissent autem hierusalem 
excepti sunt mirae ab ecclesia 

et apostolis et presbyteris 
renuntiauerunt quanta fecit ds cum illis 
qui autem praeceperunt eis 

ascendere ad praesbyteros 

surrexerunt dicentes quidam 

de heresim pharisaeorum 

crediderunt quia oportet circumcidi eos 


praecipiendumquae serbari legem moysi 


Conuenerunt autem apostoli et praesbyteri 


uidere de sermone hoc 

et cum multa altercatio fieret 
Surrexit in spo petrus 

et dixit ad eos 


uiri fratres uos scitis 


qui a a diebus antiquis 

in nobis ds elegi per os meum 
audire gentes uerbum euangelii 

et credere - qui autem corda nobit ds 
testimonium perhibuit eis 

dedit super eos spm sanctum 

sicut et nobis 

et nihil discreuit 


. inter nos et ipsos 


fidei emundatis cordibus eorum 
nunc ergo quid temptatis dm 
inponere iugum super ceruices discipulorum 
quod ne patres nostri 
ne que nos potuimus baiolare 
(Fol. 477 a.) 


CAP. XV. 3— t0. 


382 


PAH. ATOCTOA 
SSS = 
αλλα δια rye χαριτοσ rov KU τῆν χρὺ 
πιστευσομεν σωθηναι 
καθ ον τροπον Kaxetvot 
συνκατατεθεμενων δετων πρεσβυτερω 
TOUT vTTO TOV πετρου εἰρημενοισ 
ἐσειγησεν παν ro πληθοσ 
καὶ ἤκουον βαρναβαν και παυλον 
εξηγουμενοι οσα εποιῆσεν o ὃσ 
σημεια καὶ repara, ev Tour εθνεσιν δι avrov 
μετα 8¢ ro σειγησαι avrove 
αναστασ ἵακωβοσ eurey 
ανδρεσ αδελῴοι ἀκουσατε μου 
Cupewy ἐξηγήσατο καθωσ᾽ πρωτον o óc 
επεσκεψατο λαβειν e£ εθνων Xaoy 


XV. 


11 


U2 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
— fom M — — 


sed per gratiam dni ihu xpi 


credimus salbi fieri 

quemadmod um et illi 
desponentes autem presbyteros 
quae a petro dicebantur 
sileuitque omnis multitudo 

et audiebant barnabam et paulum 
exponentes quanta fecerit ds 


signa et prodigia in gentibus per ipsos 


Postquam autem hii silerunt 


surgens iacobus dixit 
uiri fratres audite me 


Symeon exposuit quemad mo dum primum da^ 


prospexit accipere ex gentibus populum 


TO OVOMATL αὐτου και ουτωσ συνφωνησουσιν 15 nomini suo et sic consonat 
ot Aoyot Tov προφητων καθωσ γεγραπται sermones prophetarum sicut scriptum est 
pera Se Tavra επιστρεψω ο΄ 16 post haec auterh conuertar 
kat ανοικοδομήσω τὴν σκηνὴν Save et aedificabo tabernaculum dauid 
τὴν πεπτωκυιαν καὶ TO, KATE σκαμμενα a Urqo quod cecidit et quae dimolita sunt eius 
ayouxodo pyow καὶ ανορθωσω αὐτὴν rae aedificabo et erigam illud 
oTw0 αν ἐεκζητησωσιν ot karaAXourot 17 et ex quira m residui 
Tov ayÜporrov rov ὃν καὶ avra. τα εθνη hominum dm et omnes gentes 
ed ove επικεκληται To ονομα μον super quos inuocatum est nomen meum 
er avrovg Aeyet kc ποιήσει TATA super ipsos dicit dna faciens haec 
Τνωστον ar auoyoq ἐστιν ro ko Τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ 18 | Notumasaeculo est dno opus ipsius 
dto eyw kpewo μὴ ra pevoxAety 19 propter quod ego iudico non sumus molesti 
row απὸ τῶν € Gywy επιστρεφουσιν ert τον 8». his qui de gentibus conuertuntur ad dm 
αλλα επιστειλαι avrow rov απεχεσθαι 20 sed praecipere eis ut abstineant 
τῶν αλισγηματων roy εἰδωλων a contaminationibus simulacrorum 
καὶ THO πορνειασ καὶ TOU αιἱματοσ et stupris et sanguinem 
Kat ova. μὴ θελουσιν eavrowr γεινεσθαι et quae uolunt non fieri sibi 
erepou μὴ ποιειτε aliis ne faciatis 
Μωῦσησ yap εκ γενεων ἀρχαίων 21 | Moyses enim ex progeniebus ant iquis 
(Fol. 477 δι) (Fol. 478 a.) 
Car. XV. 11—21, 


PAE. AHOCTOA 

— M -— - 
κατα πολιν Exel TOUT κηρνυσσοντασ GVTOV 
€ ενταισ συναγωγαισ 
κατα παν σαββατον ἀαναγεινωσκομενοσ 
Tore εἐδοξασεν τοισ ἀποστολοισ 
Kat τοισ πρεσβυτεροισ συν ολὴ τὴ ἐκκλησια 
ἐκλεξαμενουσ ανδρασ εξ avrov πεμψαι 
εἰσ αντιοχειαν συν πανλω και βαρναβα 
tovday roy καλουμενον BapaBBav και cada 
ανδρασ ἡγουμενουσ ev row αδελῴφοισ 
γραψαντεσ επιστολην δια χειροσ avray 
περιέχουσαν ταδε 

Οιαποστολοι και οἱ πρεσβυτεροι αδελφοι 
TOU κα τὴν αντιοχειαν 
Kat συρειαν και κιλειαν 
rou e£ εθνων αδελφοισ χαιρειν 

Επιδη ἠκουσαμεν ort ceo εξ μων 
εἐξελθοντεσ εξεταραξαν vp λογοισ 
ανασκεναζοντεσ τασ ψυχασ ὕμων 
ow ov διεστειλομεθα 
εδοξεν npetv γενομενοισ opo θυμαδον 
exA«£a μενουσ ανδρασ πεμψαι προσ ὕμασ 
CV τοισ ἀγαπητοισ ὕμων 
βαρναβα και παυλω ανθρωποισ 
παραδεδωκασιν THY ψνχὴην avrov 

-- 


ὕπερ TOV ονοματοσ TOV κυ ἡμων eq xpv 

εἰσ TayTa πειρασμον 

απεσταλκαμεν ovy ἴουδαν καὶ σιλαν 

και avrovg δια Xoyov απαγγελουντασ ravra 
εδοξεν yap τω αγιω πνὶ καὶ nee 

pndev πλειον επιτιθεσθαι new βαροσ 
πλὴν rovrov ἐπαναγκεσ 

απεχεσθαι ειἰδωλοθυτων 


καὶ αἱματοῦσ Καὶ πορν aT 


(Fol. 478 5.) 


XV. 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM 
— — — ey 


^ perciuitates habet qui eum praedicant 


habent in synagogis 
per omne sabbatum ut legatur 
tunc uisum est apostolis 
et presbyteris cum tota ecclesia 
electos uiros ut ex eis mitterent 
in antiochiam c um paulo et barnaba 
iudas qui uocatur barabbas et silan 
uiros principales ad fratribus 
scripserunt epistulam per manu : suas 
continentem haeo 

apostoli et presbyteri fratres 
hiis qui sunt per antiochiam 
et syriam et ciliciam 
qui sunt ex gentibus fratribus salute: 


quoniam audiuimus quod quidam ex nobis 


exeuntes perturbaberunt uos uerbis 
destruentes animas uestras 
quibus non iniunximus 
uis um est nobis constitutis pariter 
electos uiros mittere ad uos 
cum dilectissimis nostris 
barnaba et paulo hominibus 
qui tradiderunt anim suam 
propter nomen dni nostri ihu xpi 
in omni temptation 
misimus ergo iudam et silan 
et ipsos uerbo adnuntiantes haec 
uisum est enim suncto spui et nobis 
nihil amplius ponere uobis honeris 
praeter haec quae necesse est 
abstinere sacrificatis 
et sanguine et stupris 

(Fol. 479 a.) 


Cap. XV. 21— 29. 


383 


384 


— «-ἰἰὐὶ ey — ey 
WPA AIIOCTOAQN 
— — — — 


καὶ oc a μὴ ÜeXere eavrow γεινεσθαι 
erepo μὴ ποιειν 


ad ὧν διατήρουντεσ eavrova 
ευπραξατε φερομενοι 
εν Tw αγιω my ἐρρωσθε 

Ou μεν ovv ἀπολυθεντεσ εν ἡμεραισ ολιγαισ' 
κατῆλθον εἰσ αντιοχειαν 
καὶ συναγοντεσ τὸ πληθοσ 
ἐπεδωκαν τὴν ἐπιστολὴν 
ἀναγνοντεσ δε ἐεχαρησαν em τὴ καρακλήσει 
tovdac δε και σειλασ καὶ avro, προφηται 
οντεσ πληρεισ ave αγιον 
δια Xoyov παρεκαλεσαν rove adeAhove 
Kat επεστηριξαν 
ποιήσαντεσ δε χρονον 
αἀπελυθησαν per € «va απὸ roy αδελῴων 
“προσ τουσ ἀποστειλαντασ αντουσ 
εδοξε δε rw σειλεα επιμειναι αὐτουσ 
μονοσ δεΐουδασ επορενθη 

O δεπαυλοσ και βαρναβασ 
διετρειβον ev αντιοχεια 
διδασκοντεσ καὶ εναγγελιζομενοι 
Kat μετα erepoy πολλων τον λογον rov 
μετα δετινασ ἡμερασ 
eurev οπαυλοσ προσ βαρναβαν 


επιστρεψαντεσ dy επισκεψωμεθα rove αδελφουσ 


τουσ κατα πασαν πολιν εν οἱσ κατηγγειλαμε 


TOV λογον TOV KV ToC εἐχουσὶν 
βαρναβασ δε εβουλευετο 
cuim εἰν ioayyy 

TOV επικαλουμενον μαρκον 

παυλοσ δε ovx e ουλετο λεγων 

TOY αποστήσαντα ar GvTOV aro παμφυλιασ 


(Fol. 419 5.) 


XV. 


31 
32 


33 


34 


36 


37 


38 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM ^ 


et quaecumque non uultis uobis fieri 
alii ne feceritis 

& quibus conuersantes uos ipsos 
bene agitis ferentes 

. a, 

in santospo  ualete 


illi quidem dismissi in diebus paucis 


peruenerunt antiochiam 

et cum collegissent multitudinem 
tradiderunt epis t ulam 

et cum legissent gauisi sunt super hanc oratione 
iudas quoque et silas etiam ipsi prophetae 
cum essent pleni spo sancto 

sermoni exhortati sunt fratres 

et perconfirmati sunt 

cum fecissent autem tempus 

dismissi sunt cum pace a fratribus 

ad ipsos qui miserant eos 

placuit autem sil exe ‘sustinere eos 

sol us autem iudas profectus est 


Paulus uero et barnabas 


demorabantur antiochia 

d ocentes et euangelizantes 

et cum aliis multis uerbum dni 

et post aliquos dies 

ait paulus ad barnaban 

reuersique uisite mus fratres 

per omnem ciuitatem penes quos adnuntiabimus 

uerbum dni quo mo do habeat 

barnabas uero uolebat 

adsumere iohannen 

qui cognominatur marcus 

paulus autem nolebat dicens hiis 

qui discesserunt ab eisa pamph ylia 
(Fol. 480 a.) 


Car. XV, 29— 38. 


HPAE. AIHOCTOA- ACTUS' APOSTOL 385 
— — — — 


Kat μὴ cvved Govra eur To epyov Xv. et nec simul uenerunt ad opus 


MER c-— ——————— — 


€ yevero δε παροξυσμοσ 


εἰσ οἐπεμῴφθησαν 


τουτον μή εἰναι συν αντοισ 


wore ἀποχωρισθηναι avrove απ αλλήλων 
rore βαρναβασ παραλαβὼν τον μαρκον 


ἐπλευσεν εἰσ κυπρον 


παυλοσ δε επιδεξαμενοσ σειλαν 40 


εξζηλθεν παραδοθεισ τη χαριτι κυ απὸ τῶν GB de. 


διήρχετο δε την συριαν και τὴν κιλικιαν 4ι 


επιστηριζων Tag ἐκκλησιασ 
παραδιδουσ rac «vroAac των πρεσβυτέρων 


διελθων δε τα εθνη ταντα ΧΥ͂Ι 1 


κατήντησεν eur δερβὴν και λυστραν 

και ἴδον μαθητησ Tur exec qv 

ονοματι τιμοθεοσ 

ὕιοσ γυναικοσ Ἰουδαιασ πιστησ 

πατροσ δε ελληνοσ oc ἐμαρτυρειτο 

ὕπο Toy ev λυστροισ᾽ Kat εἰκονιω αδελῴων 
rovrov 70 ελησεν οπαυλοσ συν avro esc 
και Aa. ov περιετεμεν avrov 

δια rove tovdarove rove ovrac’ 

εν TOLD τοποισ εκεινοισ 

ἡδεισαν yap παντεσ Tov πατερα avrov 


ort ἐελλην ὕπηρχεν 


Διερχομενοι δετασ πολεισ 


ἐκήρυσσον και παρεδιδοσαν αντοισ 
-- οὧὦὦὦ΄ὖὦὶ ee, 


μετα πασὴσ παρρήσιασ τον ky τὴν χρν 


αμαπαραδιδοντεσ 

και Tag ἐντολασ ἀποστόλων Kat πρεσβυτερω 

των εν Ἱεροσολυμοισ 

αι μεν ουν ἐεἐκκλήσιαι egTepeovyTo 

καὶ ἐπερισσενον ro αριθ pw καθημεραν 
(Fol. 480 5.) 


in quo missi erant 


hunc non adsumerent secum. 


facta est autem discertatio 


ita ut separarentur ab in uicem 
barnabas uero adsumpto marco 
nauigauerunt in cyprum 

paulus autem suscepit silan 

exibit traditus gratia dni a fratribus 
pergrediebatur autem syriam et cilicia. 
confirmans ecclesias 

tradens autem mandatum presbyterora 
pertransiens gentes istas 

debenit derben et lystram 

ecce discipulus quidam erat ibi 

nomine timotheus 

filius mulieris iudeae fidelis 

patre autem graeco cui testimonium perhibut 
&b hiis qui lystrae et iconio fratribus 
hunc uoluit paulus secum ex ire 

et accipiens circumcidit eum 

propter iud aeos qni erant 

in locis suis 

sciebant enim omnes patrem eius 


quod crecus esset 


Circ umeuntes autem ciuitates 


prae dicabant et tradebant eis 
cum omnem fiduciam dnm ihm xpm 
simul tradentes 
et mandata apostolorum et presbyterora 
his qui erant hierosolymis 
ecclesiae ergo consolidabantur 
et abundabant numero cottidie 
(Fol. 481 a.) 


Carr. XV. 38—XVI. 5. 


49 


386 


ΠΡᾺΞ ALOCTOA. 


fey eee ey —, 


διηλθον Se rqv > pvy ιαν 


kat γαλατικὴν xopay 
κωλνθεντεσ ὕπο rov αγιου πνσ 


pendent λαλησαι rov Xoyov του v εν Ty aca 


Γενομενὴν δε κατα την μυσιαν 


ηθελαν εἰσ βυθυνιαν πορευεσθαι 

-- i, 
καὶ ουκ εἰασεν αὐτουσ τοπνα ιηῦ 
διελθοντεσ Se την μυσιαν 
κατηντησαν εἰσ Tpwada 
και εν opa pare δια νυκτοσ' ὠφθη τω παυλω 
ὡσει avnp μακεδων τισ 


ἐστωσ᾽ KATA WPOT τον AUTOV 


παρακαλων και ey wv 


διαβασ ew μακεδονιαν βοηθησον new 
διεγερθεισ ovy διηγήσατο ro οραμα pav 


— 
και €y07)0 GJ.€V OTL TPOTKEKANTAL NUAC o ka 


ευαγγελισασθαι rove ev Ty μακεδονια 


Ty Se eravpuov axÜevreo απὸ τρωαδοσ 


ευὐθυδρομησαμεν eur capo Opaxny 

και τὴ ἐπι ουσὴ ἡμέρα εἰσ vea. πολιν 
κακειθεν εἰσ φιλιππουσ 

Tru. ἐστιν κεφαλὴ rgo: μακεδονιασ 
πολισ κολωνια ἡμὴν δε ev ταυτὴ Ty πολει 


διατρειβοντεσ ἡμερασ τινασ 


T» δεημερατων σαββατων 


εξηλθομεν εξω Tyo πυλησ 

παρα TOY TOTALOV 

ov ἐδοκει προσευχὴ evar 

και καθισαντεσ ἐλαλουμεν 

Tao συνεληλυθνιαισ γυναιξιν 

και τισ γυνὴ ονοματι λυδια 

opo υροπωλισ THe πολεωσ θυατειρων 
σεβομενὴ Tov ὃν ἡκουσεν 


(Fol. 481 5.) 


XYl 6 


AUTUS APOST 
--- — — — 
pertransiebant autem phygiam 
et galatiam regionem 


. — 
prohibiti a sancto spo 


Lm, . 
nemini loqui uerbum di in asia 


Cum uenissent autem circa mysiam 


uolebant bithyniam abire 

et uetuit illos spe ihu 

cum transissent autem mysiam 
descenderunt troada 

et uisum per noctem apparuit paulo 
quasi uir macedo quidam 

stans anti faciem eius 

et rogans dicens 

transi in macedonia auxiliari nobis 
exurgens ergo enarrabit uisum nobis 
et intellegimus quoniam prouocauit nos dns 


euangelizare qui in macedonia sunt 


alia die perducti a troa dae 


cursum direximus in samotrachiam 
et sequenti die neapolim 

indie autem ph ilippis 

quae est capud macedoniae 

ciuitas colonia fuimus in ista ciuitate 


demorantes dies aliquos 


Die autem sabbati 


exib imus extra portam 
secun dum flumen 
ubi oratio esset bi debatur 
et cum sedissemus loquebatur 
quae cum uenerant mulieres 
et quaedam mulier nomine lydia 
purpuraria thyatirum ciuiuitatis 
colens dm andiebat 

(Fol. 482 a.) 


Cap. XVI. 6 —14. 


IPAE  AHOCTOAON . Actus’ APOSTOL 387 
9c 0 Ko διηνυξεν τὴν καρδιαν ^ XVL cuius dns. aperuit cor 
προσεχεῖν Tour λαλουμενοισ ὕπο πανλου intendere eis quae dicebantur ἃ paulo 
wo δε εβαπτισθη και rac 0 owoc avro 15 ut autem baptizata est et omnis domus eius 
παρεκαλεσελεγουσα rogauit dicens 
ει KEKPLKGTE [LE MOT HV TO ϑὼ εἰναι εἰ iudicastis me fidelem dno esse - 
εισελοντεσ' eur TOV OLKOV μου μένετε ingressi in domum meam manete 
και παρεβειασατο ἡμασ et extorsuit nobis 
Cy«vero δε ropevopevay ἡμων 16 | Contigitquae euntibus nobis 
eur προσευχὴν παιδισκην τινα &d orationem puella quendam 
exova'ay sva. πυθωνα habentem spm phytonem 
aravrncat nev obuiam fieri nobis * 
ἡτισ ἐργασιαν πολλὴν Tapetxe TOUT Koptowr quae reditum multum praestabat dominis suis 
δια rovrov. μαντενομενὴ per hoc diuinando 
avry karakoXov θουσα ro παυλω Kat ἡμει 17 haec persecuta est paulum et nos 
και ἐκραζον λεγουσα et clamabat dicens 
ovrot οἱ δουλοι rov θυ rov ὕψιστον εἰσιν hi serui di excelsi sunt 
οἰτινεσ ἐεναγγελιζοντεσ ὕμειν otov σωτηριασ qui euangelizant uobis uiam salutis 
Tovro δε ποιεῖ ἐπὶ πολλασ ἡμερασ 18 hoc autem faciebat per multos dies 
Exorpapac δε παυλοσ τω πνι | Conuersus autem paulus in spu 
κα ιδιαπονηθεισ εἰπεν et cum in doluisset dixit 
παραγγ ελλω cot ey τω ovopat qo χρυ praecipio tibi in nomine ihu xpi 
iva ἐξελθησ ax αυτησ και ευθεωσ εξηλθεν αὖ exeas ab eam et eadem hora exiit 
wo δε ειδαν οἱ kvptot τησ πεδισκησ 19 cum uidissent domini eius pu ell es 
or. ἀπεστερησθαι Tyo ἐργασιασ avrov quoniam ispes et reditus eorum 
no «xav διαυτησ ^ quem habebant per ipsam 
ema Bopevot Toy παυλον και σιλαν adpraehenderunt paulum et silam 
ειἰλκυσαν εἰσ τὴν ayopay Ext Tovg apxovraa traxerunt in forum ad magistratos 
καὶ προσαγαγοντασ avrovg τοιστρατήγοισ 20 et cum optulissent eos praetoribus 
€uroy ovrot οἱ ανθρωποι dixerunt isti homines 
EX ταρασσουσιν ἡμῶν THY πολιν perturbam nostram ciuitatem 
tovd azote ὕπαρχοντεσ iu dae i cum sint 
και καταγγελλουσιν τα eÜvy 21 et praedicantes gentes 
a ovx ἐξεστιν ἡμασ παραδεξασθαι ovre π-ιειν quam non licet nobis recipere nec facere 
(Fol. 482 5.) | (Fol. 483 a.) 


Car. XVI. 14—21. i 


388 PAH AMOCTOAQN ACTUS APOSTOL 
eS — — 


ρωμαιοισ trapxovew ^O XVI romani cum simus 
Kat πολυσ οχλοσ συνεπεστῆσαν 22 et multa turba superuenerunt 
«ar avrov κραζοντεσ &duersus eos clamantes 
Tore ot στρατήγοι περιρηξαντεσ avrov τα ἵματεια tunc magistrati discissis uestiment is 
exeAevoy ραβδειζειν jusserunt uirgis caedi 
πολλασ τε ἐπιθεντεσ avrow πληγασ 23 multisque inpositis eis plagis 
efjaXov eur φυλακὴν |  miseruntin carcerem 
παραγγειλαντεσ τω δεσμοφυλακει . praecepto dato optioni carceris 
ac $oaXoc τηρεισθαι avrove diligenter seruari eos 
o δεπαραγγελειαν rouivrqv λαβων 24 qui mandato tali accepto 
εβαλεν avfovo eo τὴν «awrepay φυλακὴν misit eos in imam carceris 
Kat rova ποδασ avrov ἡσφαλισαντο ev Te ξυλω et pe des eorum conclusit in ligno 
κατα δε μεσον Tho νυκτοσ 25 | Circa med iam uero nocte 
οπανλοσ Kat σιλασ προσενχομενοι | paulus et silas orantes 
ὕμνουν TOV ov ymnum dicebant do 
emqkpoovro 8€ avrov ot δεσμοι audiebant autem eos ipsi uincti 
αφνω δε σεισμοσ eyevero peyar 26 | ^ repenteautem terrae motus factus est magnus 
wore σαλευθηναι ra θεμελια Tov δεσμωτήριον ita ut commouerentur fundamenta carceris 
ηνεωχθησαν δε rapaypype. at θυραι πασαι apertequae sunt statim ianuae omnes 
και παντων ra Seopa ανελυθη et omniun uincula relaxata sunt 
και εξυπνοσ γενομενοσ o δεσμοφυλαξ 27 | Etexomnis factus est optio carceris 
και ἴδων aveury μενασ rad Üvpog Tyo φυλακησ et uidit apertas ianuas carceris 
καὶ σπασαμενοσ τὴν paxoupay e uaginato gla dio 
ἐμελλεν eovrov ayaipeuy coeperat se interficere 
νομιζων exirepevyevat rovg Seo juovo existi mans effugisset custodias 
ep ὠνησεν Se φωνὴ μεγαλὴ οπαυλοσ Acywv — 28 clamauit autem magna uoce paulus dicens 
μῆδεν πραξησ ceav Tw TC κακον nihil feceris tib i malum 
amayreo yap ἐσμεν evOade omnes enim sumus hic 
dura δεετησασ εισεπηδησεν 29 lumen uero petens accucurrit 
και ἐντρομοσ ὕπαρχων et tremibundus factus 
προσέπεσεν προσ Tove ποδασ Tw TAVAW Kat σιλα procidit ad pedes paulo et silae 
Kat προηγαγεν avrovg ew 30 et cum produxisset eos foras 
rove λοιπουσ ἀσφαλισαμενοσ ceteros custodiuit 
(Fol. 483 5.) (Fol. 484a.) 


Cap. XVI. 21—30. 


καὶ εἰπεν GUTOUT XVI. 
κυριοι τι με Set ποιειν ἵνα σωθω 
οι δε εἰπαν πιστευσον ἐπὶ TOV KY U]v. χρν 31 
και σωθησὴ σὺ και o ouog σου 
— 
kat €A αλησαν avro Toy Xoyoy kv 32 


συν Tacty TOL ἐν Τῇ OLKLA αὐτου 


και παραλαβὼν avrovo 33 


εν €keur TY opa, THO vVUKTOG 


ἐλυσεν απὸ Toy πληγων 
και avrog εβαπτισθη 
και ot αὐτου παντεσ' παραχρημα 
αναγαγων τεαυτουσ εἰσ TOV οἰκοναυτοῦ 34 
παρεθηκεν τραπεζαν 
και ἡγαλλιατο συν TO OLKO QUTOV 
πεπιστευκωσ ext τὸν ὃν 
ἡμερασ δεγενομενησ συνηλθὸον ow orparyyn 35 
ἐπὶ TO αὐτὸ εἰσ τὴν ayopay 
και αναμνησθεντεσ 
Tov σεισμον Tov γεγονοτα εφοβηθησαν 
και ἀαπεστειλαν Tove ραβδουχουσ λεγοντασ' 
ἀπολυσον τουσ ανθρῳπουσ εκεινουσ 
ove εχθεσ παρελαβεσ 
και εἰσελθων o δεσμοῴφ νλαξ 36 
amryy εἰλεν τουσ λογουσ προσ Toy παυλον 
oTt ἀπεσταλ κασιν οἱ στρατήγοι 
ἵνα ἀπολνθητενυν ovy 
εξελθοντεσ πορενεσθαι 
O δεπαυλοσ edn προσ avrove 37 
αναιτειουσ δειραντεσ ἡμασ δημοσια 


axara κριτουσ ανθρωπουσ 


ρωμαιουσ ὕπαρχοντασ' εβαλαν eur φυλακὴν 

καὶ νυν λαθραημασ εκβαλλουσιν 

ov yap αλλα ελθοντεσ αντοι ἡμασ' ἐξαγαγετωσα 
(Fol. 484 5.) 


AOTUB' APOSTOL 


et dixit illis 
Domini quid me oportet facere ut saluus fiam 
ad illi dixerunt crede in dno ihu xpo 
et saluus fies tu et domus tua 
et locuti sunt ei uerbum dni 
cum omnibus qui erant in domum eius 
et adpraehendit eos 
in illa hora noctis 
soluit plagas 
et ipse baptizatus est 
et eius omnes confestim 
et perduxit eos in domum suam 
et posuit mensam 
et exultabat cum tota domu sua 
credens in dno 
Die autem facta conuenerunt magistrati 
id ipsud in foro 
et rememorati sunt 
terrae motum qui factus est timuerunt 
et trans miserunt lectores dicentes 
dimitte homines illos 
quos externa die suscepisti 
et ingressus optio carceris 
renuntiauit hos sermones ad paulum 
quoniam miserunt praetores 
ut dimittamini nunc ergo 
ex euntes ambulate 
paulus autem ait ad ipsos 
anetios caesos nos publice 
in demnatos homines 
romanos ciues miserunt in carcerem 
et nunc occultae nos eiciunt 
non ita sed ueniant ipsi nos producant 
(Fol. 485 a.) 


Cap. XVI. 30— 37. 


389 


390 


— AA -- 
ΠΡΑΞ.  AIIOCTOA 
— — SS omy 


απήγγειλαν 8€ avrowot στρατηγοισ' XVI. 38 


ot ραβδουχοι ταρηματα ravra. 

τα ρηθεντα προσ Tove στρατήγουσ 

ot δε ακουσαντεσ ort ρωμαιοι εἰσὶν 

εφοβηθησαν και παραγενομενοι 39 
pera φιλων πολλων ev τὴν φυλακὴν 


παρεκαλεσαν avrove εξελθειν εἰποντεσ 


ηγνοησαμεν 7a καθ υμασ 
oTt eorat ανδρεσ δικαιοι 


και ἐξαγαγοντεσ 
«ταρεκαλεσαν avrovg λεγοντεσ 
εκ THO πολεωσ ταυτὴσ εἐξελθατε 


μήποτε παλιν συν στραφωσιν ne 
επικραζοντεσ καθν μων 


Εξελθοντεσ δε ex τησ φυλακ no 40 


nAOov προσ τὴν λυδιαν 
και ἵδοντεσ Tove αδελφουσ 
δι) σαντο ova ἐποιησεν Ko αντοισ 
παρακαλεσαντεσ αντουσ kat εξηλθαν 
διοδευσαντεσ δε τὴν a μφιπολιν XVIL 1 
καὶ κατῆλθον «ur απολλωνιδα 
κακειθεν εἰσ θεσσαλονικὴν 
οπον ἣν συναγωγὴ των Ἰουδαίων 
και κατα τὸ εἰσωθοσ 2 
o παυλοσ' εἰσηλθεν προσ αντουσ 
ext σαββατατρια διελεχθη αντοισ ex των γραφῶ 
διανοιγὼν και παρατιθεμενοσ 3 
οτι χρν der παθειν 
καὶ ἀαγαστηναι εκ νεκρων 
KQL οτι οντοσ ἐστιν χρο - 
ov eyw καταγγελλω ὕμειν 
καὶ τινεσ εξ avrov επισθησαν 4 
καὶ προσεκληρωθησαν 

(Fol. 485 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL: 


renuntiauerunt autem praetoribus 
lectores uerba haec 

quae dicta sunt a praetores 

cum autem audierunt quia romani sunt 
timuerunt et cum uenissent 

cum amicis multis in carcerem 
rogauerunt eos exire dicentes 
ignoramus aduersum uos 


quoniam estis uiri iusti 


. etcum produxissent 


rogauerunt eos dicentes 
de ciuitate ista exite 
ne forte iterum conuertantur ad nos 


clamantes aduersum uos 


Et cum exissent de carcere 


uenerunt ad lydiam 

et cum uidissent fratres 

narrauerunt quanta fecit dns cum eis 
exhorti sunt eos et exierunt 

cum ambulassent autem amphipolim 
et descenderunt a polloniam 

et inde thessalonicam 

ubi erat synagoga iudaeorum 

et secundum consuetudinem 


paulus introibit ad eos 


per sabbata tria disputabit eis de scrjp turis 


adaperiens et confirmans 
quia xpm oportet pati 
et resurgere a mortuis 


Φ ΓῚ — uM 
et quia hic est xps ihs 


. quem ego adnuntio uobis 


et quidam ex eis persuasum est 
et consortes facti s unt 
(Fol. 486 a.) 


Capp. XVI. 38—XVII. 4. 


Tw πανλω καὶ Tw σιλα ια Ty διδαχὴ 
ποόλλοι των σεβομενων 

και ελληνων πληθοσ πολυ 

και γυναικεσ τῶν πρωτων οὐκ ολιγαι 
ot δε απειθουντεσ Ἰουδαιοι 
συνστρεψαντεσ τινασ ανδρασ 

TOV ἀγοραιων πονηρουσ᾽ 
εθορνβουσαν rqv πολιν 

και ἐπιστ ἀαντεσ τὴ οἰκια Ἰασωνοσ' 
εζητουν avrovg εξαγαγειν εἰσ Tov δημον 
μὴ ευροντεσ δε αντουσ ἐσυραν ἴσωναν 

και τινεσ αδελῴφουσ emt Tove πολειταρχασ' 
βοωντεσ και λεγοντεσ 

OTt οἱ τὴν οἰκουμένην αναστατωσαντεσ' 
ovrot εἰσιν kat εν θαδεπαρεισιν 

ove ὕποδεδεκται ἴασων Kat ουτοὶ παντεσ' 
ἀπεναντι roy δογματων 

καισαροσ πρασσουσιν 

βασιλεα λεγοντεσ ετερον εἰναι iv 

καὶ erapafey Tove πολιταρχασ 

kat TOV οχλον akovcayreg ravra 

xat λαβοντεσ To ikavoy παρα rov ἴασωνοσ 
καὶ των λοιπὼν ἀπέλυσαν avrove 


Or δεαδελῴοι ευθεωσ δια νυκτοσ 


ἐξεπεμψαν τον παυλον καὶ Tov σειλαν εἰ βεροια 


οιτινεσ παραγενομενοι 

εἰσ THY συναγωγὴν των Ἰουδαίων απηεσα 
Οντοι 9e σαν evyevew rov ev Ty θεσσαλονικὴ 

οἰτινεσ ἐδεξαντο roy Aoyov 

μετα πασὴσ προθυμειασ 

καθημεραν ανακρεινοντεσ τασ γραφασ 

ει €Xet ταυντα ουτωσ 

τινεσ μεν OVV GVTOV επιστευσαν 


(Fol. 486 5.) "EA 


“XVII. 


11 


12 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


paulo et silae doctrinae 

multi caelicolarum 

et graecorum multitudo magna 

et mulieres quae morum non pauce 
adsuptis uero iudaeis 

conuertentes quosdam uiros 
forenses sub doles 

turbabant ciuitatem 

et circumstantes ad domum iasonis 


quaerebant eos producere ad populum 


cum uero non inuenissent eos traxerunt iasone 


et quosdam fratres ad principes ciuitatis 
clamantes et dicentes 

quia qui orbem terrae inquitauerunt 
hi sunt et hoc uenerunt 

quos suscepit jason et isti omnes 
contra consulta 

caesaris agunt 

regem dicentes alium esse ihm 

et concitauerunt principes 

et turbam audientes haec 

et accipientes satis hb iasonem 


et ceteris dismiserunt eos 


Uero fratres statim per noctem 


dismiserunt paulum et silan beroean 
qui cum ad uenissent 


in synagogam iudaeorum ibant 


hi autem sunt nobiliores qui thessalonicse sunt 


qui exceperunt uerbum 

cum omni animatione be 
cotti diae exanimantes scripturas 
si habeant haec ita 

multi ergo ex his crediderunt 


(Fol. 487 a.) 


Cap. XVII. 4—132. 


391 


392 


TOV μεν ovy παυλον 


HPAH. AIHOCTOA 
— — NN 


τινεσ δεηπιστησαν XVII. 
Kat των ελληνων Kat TOV Evo XN OVW 

ανδρεσ και γνυναικεσ 

(Kayot επιστευσαν 

wo 0€ eyvocay οἱ απὸ θεσσαλονικὴσ 13 
ἴουδαιοι ort λογοσ θυ κατηγγελη 

evr βεροιαν kat επιστευσαν 


και λθον εἰσ αὐτὴν κακει σαλενοντεσ 


καὶ τασσοντεσ τουσ οχλουσ ov διελιμπανο 


+ 


ot adeA or e£ απεστειλαν 

απελθειν em τὴν θαλ ασσαν 

ὕπεμεινεν δε ο σειλασ και οτιμοθεοσ εκει 
οἱ δε καταστανοντεσ τον παυλον I5 
ἤγαγον ewe αθηνων 

παρηλθεν δετὴην θεσσαλιαν 

εκωλυθη yap eu avrove 

κηρνξαι roy Noy ov 

λαβοντεσ δε evroAny παρα παυλον 

προσ τον σειλαν καιτιμοθε ον 

οπωσ ev ταχει ἐελθωσιν 


προσ avrov εξ ἡεσαν 


Ev Se rare αθηναισ ἐκδεχομενου avrov rov καυλοῦ τό 


παρωξύνετο ya avrov εν avro 


θεωρουντι κατειδωλον ουσαν τὴν πολιν 
διελέγετο μεν ovv ev τὴ συγαγωγη row ἴουδαιισ 17 
και rou σεβομενοισ 
καὶ τοισ εν TH αγορα κατα πασαν ἡμέραν 
προσ Tove παρατυχοντασ 
τινεσ δε καὶ των επικουρίων 18 
Kat των στοΐκων φιλο cod wy 
συνελαβον avro και τινεσ eXeyov 
τι αν θελη οσπερμολογο σ ovrog λεγειν 
(Fol. 487 b.) 


ACTUS APOSTOLORUM — 
— — — — 


quidam uero credere noluerunt 
et grecorum et non placentium 
et uiri et mulieris 
pleres crediderunt 
ut autem cognouerunt qui a thessalonica 
iudaei quia uerbum di adnuntiatum est 
in beroean et credederunt 
et uenerunt in eam et illic commouentes 
et turbantes multitudinem non cessabant 
statimquae paulum 
fratres dismiserunt 
abire ad mare uersus 
substinuit autem silas et timotheus ibi 
qui autem ducebant paulum 
perduxerunt us que athenis 
iransiit uero thessaliam 
uetatus est enim super eos 
praedicare sermonem 
ut accepissent man datum a paulo 
ad silam et timotheum 
ut quam cileriter ueniant 
ad eum proficiscebantur 
Uero athenis expectante eo paulum 
incitabatur ape eius in eo 
uidenti simul acris esse ciuitatem 
disputabat ergo in synagoga iu daeis 
et hiis qui colunt 
et bis qui forte aderant 
et hiis qui in foro per omnem diem 
qui dam autem et epicuriorum 
et st o icorum philosoporum 
conferebant cum eo et qui dam dicebant 
qui d nunc uellit spermologus hic dicere 
(Fol. 488 a.) 


Carp. XVII. 12— 18. 


IIPAH.. AIIOCTOA- 
— — — 


obey ξενων δαιμονίων XVIL 


δοκεῖ καταγγελευσ εἰναι 

pera δεημερασ τινασ emAaBopevot avrov 
ἤγαγον avrov ert ἀριον παγον 
πυνθανομενοι καὶ λεγοντεσ 
δυναμεθα γνωναι Tur 7) καινὴ αντὴ ὕπο σου 
καταγγελλομενὴ διδαχὴ 
ξηνιζοντα yop τινα pepeur ρηματα 
εἰσ rag axoag ἡμων BovXo μεθα ovv γνωναι 
τι αν θελοι ravra evat 
αθηναιοι δεπαντεσ 
καὶ ot επιδ ἡμουντεσ εἰσ αντουσ ξενοι 
eur ουδεν erepov ἡνκαιρουν 
ἢ Aeyew τι ἡ ἀκουεῖιν καινοτερον 

Cradeu Se o παυλοσ v μεσω rov aptov παγοῦ εφη 
ανδρεσ αθηναιοι κατα Tavra. 
wo δεισιδαιμονεστερουσ ὕμασ θεωρω 
διερχομενοσ᾽ yap kat διιστο ρων 
τα σεβασματα ὕμων ευρον και βωμον 
ἐν ὦ ἢ γεγραμμενον αγνωστω bo 
0 ovy ay voovyrec ευσεβειτε 
TOVTO eyw καταγγελλω ὕμειν 
o 6c o T 00) σασ TOV κοσμον 
καὶ TAYTO TO, εν αυτω 
OVTOG ουρανον και yno Ko ὕπαρχων 
OVK εν χειροποιητοισ ναοισ κατοικοι 
οδε ὕπο χειρων ανθρωπινων θεραπενεται 
προσδεομενοσ 
ort ουτοσ οδουσ Tag (wv και πνοὴν 
Ko Ta. παντα εποιῆσεν εἶ EVOT αἱματοσ 
παν εθνοσ ανθρωπου 
κατοικεῖν ἐπὶ παντοσ προσωπου THE No 
ορισασ προτεταγμενουσ καιρουσ 


(Fol. 488 à.) 


19 


22 


ACTUS. APOSTOL 393 


alii noborum daemoniorum 
uidetur adnuntiator esse 


post dies aliquos adpraehensum que eum 


ad duxerunt ad arium pagum 

cogitantes et dicentes 

possumus scire que est nouitas haec a te 
narratio doctrinae 

noua enim quaedam adferens inter locutiones 
aduersus nostras uolumus ergo scire . 

qui d nunc sibi uellint haec esse 
athenenses uero omnes 

et qui aduene erant hospitiis 

&d nihil aliut uacabant 


quam dicere aliquid aut audire nouius 


Cum stetisset autem paulus in medio arii pagt- ait 


uiri athenenses per omnia 
superstitiosos uos uideo esse 
circumambulans enim et perspicien s 
ea quae colitis inueni etiam et aram 

in qua scriptum erat ignoto do 

quod ergo ignorantes colit is 

hoc ego adnuntio uobis 

ds qui fecit mun dum 

et omnia quae in eo sunt 

hic cum sit caeli et terrae dna qui est 
non in manufactis templis inhabitat 
neque manibus humanis curatur 
tamquam egeat 

quo d ipse de der it omnibus uitam et spiramenta 
et omnia fecit ex uno sanguine 
omnem nationem hominum 
inbabitere super omnem faciem terrae 


cum definisset imperata tempora 


(Fol. 489 a.) 


Car. XVII. 18—26. 


50 


394 . 


m — = toy tommy 
JIPAR. AIOCTOA 


— — ES OS 


kara οροθεσιαν Tyo κατοικιασ avrov 


paura ζητειν ro θειον eoi 
«t apaye ij ἡλαφησαισαν avro 
ἢ €upouray καιτε ov μακραν 
ον ad «voc εκαστον ἡμων 
εν αυτή yap ζωμεν και κεινουμεθα 
και ἐσμεν ro καθημεραν 
ὡσπερ καὶ των καθ υμασ τινεσ εἰρηκασιν 
TOVTOV γαρ και γοσ ἐσμεν 
yevoc ovv ὕπαρχοντεσ του ϑυ 
ovk odo μεν νομίζειν 
OUTE χρυσὼ ἢ apyupw 
9 λιθω χαραγματι τεχνησ 
ἢ ενθυμησεωσ ανθρωπου 
το θειον ewa« ομοιον 
τουσ μεν OUV χρονουσ THE αγνοιασ ταντὴσ 
παριδὼν o ὃσ τα νυν παραγγελλει Tow ανθρωποισ 
ἵνα παντεσ πανταχου μετανγοειν 
καθοτι ἐστησαν ἡμέραν κρειναι τὴν οικουμενῆ 
ev δικαιοσυνὴ ανδρι - 
€ ὡρισεν πιστιν παρεσχειν 


Trag αναστησασ QVUTOV EK VeKpov 


akovcavreg δε αναστασιν νεκρων 


οἱ μεν εχλευαζον 
ot Se evrov ἀκουσομεθα σου 
περι TOVTOU παλιν οντωσ οπαυλοσ 


εξ ηλθεν εκ μεσον avrov 


- twee δὲ ανδρεσ ἐκολληθησαν 


GVTO επιστευσαν 

εν o Kat διονυσιοσ τισ ἀρεοπαγειτησ 
εὐσχημων Kat ετέροι συν αντοισ 
αναχωρησασ δεαποτων αθηνων 
ἤλθεν εἰσ Kop ινθον 


(Fol. 489 5.) 


XVII. 


28 


XVIIL 1 


"ACTUS APOSTOL 


et determinationes inhabitationes eorum 

quaerere quod diuinum est 

si forte tractent illud 

inueniant quidem non longe 

ab uno quo que nostrorum 

in ipso enim uiuimus et mo uemur 

et simus in diurnum 

Sicut qui secundum uos sunt quidam dixerunt 

huius enim et genus sumus 

genus ergo cum simus di 

non debe mus existimare 

neque auro aut argento 

&ut lapidi sculptioni artis 

et cupiditat is humanae 

quo d diuinum est esse simile 

itaquae temporibus ignorantiae hu ius 

despiciens dsiam nunc adnuntiat hominibus 

ut omnes ubique paenitentiam agant 

quoniam statuit diem iudicare orbem terrae 

in iustitia in uiro ihu 

cuius constituit fidem ex ibere 

omnibus resuscitauit eum a mortuis 
audientes autem resurrectione mortuorum 

aliqui d eridebant 

alii uero dixerunt audimus te 

de hoc iterum sic paulus 

exibit de medio illorum 

quidam autem uiri cum esitassent 

ei cre di derunt 

in quibus et dionysius quis areopagita 

conplacens et alii cum eis 

regressus uero ab athenis 


uenit in cor inthum 


(Fol. 490 a.) 


Capp. XVII. 26—XVIII. 1. 


— 0 οὄ-΄ἰὺὔ-.. — 
TIPAS AIIOCTOA 


καὶ evpwy τινα LovOatoy XVIIL a 
ovopart axvAay ποντικον Tw γενει 

poc oaroc εληλυθα απο ro ira ua 

και πρισκιλλαν γυναικα GUTOU 

δια το τεταχεναι κλαυδιοσ 

Χχωριζεσθαι παντασ Ἰουδαιουσ aro THe ρωμὴσ 

οἱ κε KATWKNT EV εἰσ τὴν αχαΐαν 

προσῆλθεν avro o πανλοσ 

kat δια To ομοτεχνον 3 
ἐμενεν προσ αυτουσ και ἡἠργαζετο 

εἰσπορενομενοσ δε εἰσ τὴν συναγωγὴν 4 
κατα παν σαββατον διελεγετο 

καὶ evriÜew To ονομα τοὺ Kv - 

και ἐπιθεν δε ov μονον Ἰουδαιουσ 

αλλα και ελληνασ 

παρεγενοντο δε απο THO μακεδονιασ 5 
Tore σιλασ και τιμοθεοσ συνείχετο ro λόγω 
παυλοσ διαμαρτυρουμέενοσ Tour ἵουδαιοισ 


εἐιναι TOV XPV KV ἰὴν 


πολλοῦ de Xoyov γεινομένον 6 
και γραφ ov διερμηνενομενων 
τι τασσομενων δε avra 
και βλασφημονντων 
εἐκτιναξαμενοσ οπανλοσ τα ειματια αὐτου 
εἰπεν προσ αυτουσ' 
TO αιμα ὕμων ἐπι τὴν κεφαλὴν ὕμων 
καθαροσ eyo a ν 
γυν εἰσ τα εθνη πορενομαι 
μεταβασ λα 7 
nr\Oev εἰσ TOV &. ντινγοσ' 

ονοματ c ιουστου σεβομενου τον ὃν 
OV 7 οἰκια ἣν συνομοροουσα τὴ συναγωγὴ 

O δε ρχισυναγωγοσ κρισποσ 8 

(Fol. 490 6.) 


ACT US APOSTOL 995 


et cum inuenissent quemdam iudaeum 
nomine acylam pontium nomine 
recens uenisse ab italia 
et prisc illam uxorem eius 
eo quod praecepisset claudius 
discedere omnes iudaeos ex urbem 
qui et demorati sunt in achaiam 
accessit ad eos paulus . 
et propter artificium 
manebat apud eos et operabatur 
ingressus autem in synagogam 
per omne sabbatum disputabat 
et interponens nomen dui ihu 
et persuadebat non solos iudae os 
sed et graecos 
ut uero aduenerunt in macedonia 
silas et timotheus instabant sermoni 
paulus testificabatur iudaeis 
esse xpm dnm ihm 

multoque uerbo facto 
et scripturis disputantibus 
resistentibus autem eis 
et blasphemantibus 
excutiens paulus uestimenta sua 
dixit ad eos 
sanguinem uestrum super caput uestrum 
mundus ego & b obis 
nunc ad gentes uado 
et cum recessisset ab acyla 
introibit in domum cuiusdam 
nomine iusti colentis dm 


cuius domus erat confinis synagogae 


Uero archisynagogus crispus 


(Fol. 491 a.) 


CaP, XVIII. 2—8. 


CT 


396 


Aa Sy sum V Aene 
IIPAR. AIIOCTOA 
— i way — — 


ςς. 
€TLOTCUO€V εἰσ TOV kV * XVIII. 


συν ολω TO OLK( αὐτου 


- Kat πολλοι των KoptyÜuov 


ακονοντεσ ἐπιστευον 
και εβαπτιζοντο πιστενοντεσ TW 6o 
δια Tov ονοματοσ Tov Kv μων ἣν χρν 

Εἰπεν Sexo δι οραματοσ Tw παυλω εν νυκτι 9 
μὴ φοβου αλλαλαλει και μη σειωσὴσ 
διοτι eyw εἰμι μετα σου 1ο 
καὶ ov deco ἐεπιθησεταε τον κακωσαι σε 
Score λαοσ ἐστι μοι πολυσ᾽ ev τὴ πολι TAUTH 
και ἐκαθισεν εν κορινθω 11 
evavroy και μηνασ εξ 
διδασκων av Tove Toy λογον Tov θυ 

Ταλλιωνοσ τε ανθυπατου οντοσ Tyo αχαΐασ 12 
κατεπεστησαν ομοθν μαδον 
ot tovd auo. συνλαλησαντεσ 
μεθ εαντων emt tov παυλον 
καὶ επιθεντεσ Tag χειρασ 
ἤγαγον avrov erc To βημα 
xataBo ὠντεσ Kat λεγοντεσ' 13 
ort παρα Toy νομὸν ovroc αναπειθει 


rove ανθρωπουσ σεβεσθαι Toy ὃν 


Μελλοντοσ δετου παυλον ay ovyew To ατομα 14 


eurey o γαλλιων προσ τουσ Ἰουδαιουσ 

εἰ μεν nv αὃ ικηματι 

ἢ ραδιουργημα πονηρον 

ὦ ανδρεσ ἴουδαιοι κατα λογον αν 

ηνεσχομὴν ὕμων 

εἰ δε ζητημα exere wept Xoyov kot ονοματω 16 
καὶ γομου του καθ υμασ oer Gar axrot 

Kpirno eyw Tovrov ov θελω εἰναι 

Kat απελυσεν avrovg avro Tov βηματοσ 16 


(Fol. 491 5.) 


ACTUS A POBTOL 
— — 


oredidit in dno 
cum tota domo sua 
et multi corinthiorum 
audientes credebant 
et baptizabantur credentes in do 
per nomen dni nostri ihu xpi 

Dixit autem dns per uisum paulo per noctem 
ne timeas sed loquere et ne tacueris 
quoniam ego sum tecum 
et nemo ad greditur te ut malefaciat tibi 
quoniam populus est mihi multus in ciuitate hac 
et consedit in corintho 
anno et mensibus sex 


docens penes ipsos ueruum di 


Cumque gallio proconsol essed achaie 


inruerunt unani miter 

iudaei conlo quentes 

inter semetipsos de paulo 

et inponentes manum 

ad duxerunt eum ad tribunal 
clamantes et dic entes 

qui & contra legem hic persuadet 


C 
hominibus colere dm 


Incipiente autem paulo aperire os 


dixit gallio ad iudaeos 

si quidem esset iniuria 

aut falsum sub dolum 

o uiri iu daei cum ratione 

forsitam paterer uos 

si autem questio est de uerbo et nomintbus 
et legem quae secundum uos est uideritis ipsi 
iudex horum ego nolo esse 


et abiecit eos a tribunal 
(Fol 4924.) - 


Car. XVIII. 8—16. 


IIPAH. AIIOCTOA 
- ——— .- 
πολαβομενοι δὲπαντεσ οἱ ελληνεσ 
σωσθενὴν rov αρχεισυναγωγον 
ετυπτον ἐγπροσθεν του βηματοσ 
τ € γαλλιω εν 
O δεπαυλοσ ert προσμινασ ἡμερασ εικανασ' 
Tow αδελφ ow αποταξαμενοσ | 
επλεὺ σεν ew THY συριαν 
καὶ συν αντω πρισκιλλα και ακυλασ 
κειραμενοσ τὴν κεφ αλὴν εν κενχρειαισ 
aixev yap p. σευχὴν 
καταντήσασ de eur εφεσον 
καὶ Tw ἐπιοντι σαββατω exewova κατελιπεν exes 
avroc δε ειἰσελθων εἰσ τὴν συναγωγὴν 
διελέγετο ro, Ἰουδαιοισ 
ἐρωτωντων T€ avTwy ert πλ Lov χρονον 


μειναι παρ αντοισ OVK ἐπενευσεν 

αλλα αποταξαμενοσ και εἰπὼν 

da δεπαντωσ τὴν eopryy ἡμέραν ἐρχομενὴ 
ποιησαι εἰσ ἵεροσολυμαανα ὠπροσ ὕμασ 
του Ov θελοντοσ ανήχθη απο τον εφεσου 

και κατελθων eur καισαριαν 

και αναβασ και ασπασαμενοσ την ἐκκλησια 
κατεβὴ εἰσ a ντιοχειαν 

καὶ TOLNTAT χρονον τινα 

ἐξηλθεν διερχομενοσ κατεξησ 

τὴν γαλατικὴν χωραν καὶ φρυγιαν 

και επιστηριζων παντασ τουσ μαθητασ 

tovd atog Se rio ονοματι ἀαπολλ ὠνιοσ 

γένει αλεξ avdpevo ἀνὴρ Noy toe 
κατήντησεν eur εφεσὸν 

δυνατοσ ov ev raus ypad aio 

oo ἣν κατηχήμενοσ ἐν τὴ πατριδι TOV λογον Tous 
και Lewy τω avi ἀπελαλει και εἐδιδασκεν 


(Fol. 492 5.) 


XVIIL 15 


25 


ACTUS' APOSTOL' 397 
— — .-- — 
adpraehendentes eum omnes graeci 


cum sosthenen archisynagogum 
caedebant ante tribunal 


tunc gallio fingebat eum non uidere 


Uero paulus adhuc memoratus dies pl urimos 


fratribus ualefecit 

nauigauit in syriam 

et cum ipso prisc ill ἃ et ἃ quil a 

tonso capite in cenchris 

habebebat enim orationem 

deuenerunt ephesum 

et sequenti sabbato illos reliquerunt ibi 
ipse uero ingressus in synagogam 
disputabat iudaeis 

rogantibusque eis longiore tempore 


manere cum els non a dnuit 


 ged cum salutasset eos et dixit 


oportet me sollemnem diem aduenientem 
facere hierosolymis iter et reuerti ad uos 
do uolente redie ab epheso 

et descendit caesaream 

et cum ascedisset et salutasset ecclesiam 
descendit in ant iochiam 

et cum fecissent tempus quo dam 

pexiuit pergrediens ex ordine 

galatiam regionem et phrygiam 
confirmans omnes discipulos 

iudaeus autem qui dam nomine apollonius 
natione alexandrinus uir disertus 

de uenit e phesum 


potens in scripturis 


- hic erat doctus in patria uerbum dni 


et ferbens spü eloquebatur et docebat 
(Fol. 493 a.) 


Car. XVIII. 17—25. 


— — 0 — καὶ — 
IIPAR AIIOCTOA 


C 
axptBwo τα περι vv XVIII 
εἐπισταμενοσ povoy To βαπτισμα wavov 
yroc ἤρξατο παρησιαζεσθαι ev συναγωγὴ 26 


και ἀκουσαντοσ GUTOV ακυλασ καὶ πρισκιλλα 
προσελαβοντο avrov 
και ἀακριβεστερον avro εξεθοντο τὴν οδον 
ev δε τὴ εφεσω exi ἡμουντεσ 
τινεσ κοριψθιοι καὶ ακουσαντεσ avrov 
παρεκαλουν διελθειν συν avrow 
εισ τὴν πατριδα αὐτων 
συνκαταγευσαντοσ Se avrov 27 
ot ἐεφεσιοι eypay av Tour ev κορινθω μαθηταισ 
οπωσ' αποδεξωνται Tov ανδρα 
og επιδημησασ εἰσ τὴν axaiay 


πολυν συνεβαλλετο ev ταισ εκκλησιαισ 


εὐυτονωσ yap τοισ Ἰουδαιοισ διακατηλεγχετο 28 
δημοσια διαλεγο μενοσ 
. —» — 
και επιδικνυσ δια των ypapwy τον LAV εἰναι χρν 
Θελοντοσ be rov παυλου XIX. 1 
κατα την ἴδιαν βουλην 


πορενεσθαι εἰσ ἵεροσ ολυμα 
- am, -~ 
e«urey avro TO TVA ὕποστρεφειν εἰσ τὴν acta 
διελθων Se ra avwrepixa pepy 
ἐρχεται εἰσ eo eaovy 
Kat evpov τινασ μαθητασ eurey προσ avTove 2 
ta, 
εἰ Ta, αγιον ἐλαβετε πιστευσαντεσ 
ce --- 
ot δεπροσ avroy αλλ ουδεπνα αγιον λαμβανουσι 
τινεσ ἠκουσαμεν 
εἰπεν δε εἰσ τι ουν eBar τισθητε 3 
ot Oe eXeyor εἰσ τοἴωανον βαπτισμα 
Ειπεν δε o παυλοσ iwayno εβαπτισεν᾽ 4 
βαπτισμα peravo tag τω Xa λεγων 


εἰσ τον ἐρχόμενον jer avrov 


(Fol. 493 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL' 
— — .«--. — 
diligenter de ihu 
sciens solum baptis ma iohannis 


adque hic coepit cum fiducia loqui in synagoga 


Et cum audissent eum aquilas et priscilla 


&dprehenderunt eum 

et diligentius ei exposuerunt uiam 

in aephesum autem exeuntes 

qui dam corinthii et audierunt eum 
hortantes transire cum ipsis 

in patria ipsorum 

rede unte autem eo 

ephesi scripserunt qui sunt in corintho disdpu 
quo modo exciperent hunc uirum " 
qui cum exibit in achaiam 

multum contulit in ecclesias 

fortiter enim iu daeos conuincebat 

publicae disputante 


- — — 
et ostendens per scripturas ihm esse xpm 


Uolente uero paulo 


secundum suum consilium 
exire in hierosolyma 
dixit ei spe reuertere in asiam 
perambulantes superioris partibus 
uenit in ephesum 
et cum inuenisset quosdam discipulos dixit ad eos 
Bi spm sanctum accepistis cum credidissetis 
illi uero ad eum sed neque spm sanctum accipiunt 
quidam audiuimus 
dixitque quid ergo baptizati estis 
ad illi dixerunt in iohannis baptisma 
Dixit autem paulus iohannes baptizauit 
baptis ma paenitentiae populo dicens 
in eum qui uenerit post ipsum 
(Fol. 494 a-) 


Capp. XVIII. 25—XIX. 4. 


— 


THPAR AIOCTOA 


-. 
ἐνα πιστευσωσιψ τουτέστιν εἰσ XPV 


ακουσαντεσ de rovro εβαπτισθησαν 
εἰσ TO ονομα κυ ιην χρυ 
€ur αφεσιν αμαρτιων 
και ἐπιθεντο αυτοισ χειρα του παυλου 
— 
evÜeuc ἐπεπεσεν TO va, ro αγιον ET avrowr 
λαλουν δεγλωσσαισ και ἐεπροφητενον 
ἤσαν δε οι παντεσ ανδρεσ woe δωδεκα 
Εισελθων 8e o av λοσ εἰσ τὴν συναγωγὴν 
ev δυναμει μεγαλη επαρρησιαζετο 
— 
ert pyvac - y - διαλεγομενοσ 
— 
και πειθων περι τησ βασιλειασ Tov θυ 
τινεσ μεν OV V αυτων ἐσκλήρυ νοντο 
και ἡπιθουν κακολογουντεσ 
τὴν οδον ἐνωπιον του πληθουσ rov εθνω 
Τοτεαποστασ οπαυλοσ aT avrov 
αφωρισεν τουσ μαθητασ 
τὸ καθημέραν διαλεγομενοσ ev TH σχολη 
— 
Tupavviou τινοσ azo wpac’- €- ews Sexaryo 
rouro δε eyevero emt ern vo 
€ σπαντεσ οι KOTOLKOVVTEO THY ασιαν 
— 
κουσαν Tove Àoyovc TOU κυ 
ἴουδαιοι kat ελληνεσ. 

— 
δυναμεισ Se ov rag TvXov σ ag o Oo εποιει 
δια των xetpov παυλον 
wore kat eri Tove ἀσθενουντασ 
επιφερεσθαι απο Tov χρωτοσ avrov 
σονδαρια ἡ και σιμικινθια 
και απαλλασσεσθαι ar avroy rag νοσουσ 

Comm, 
Ta TE TVG, TG, πονήρα exrropevea Oar 
Exrexepyoay be τινεσ ex rov περιέρχομενω 
tovdarwy efop κιστων ονομαζειν 


— 
ἐπὶ TOUT EXOVTAT Ta πνὰ Τὰ TOV Pa 


(Fol. 494 6.) 


oo 


1ο 


II 


13 


=< 
zB 


ut crederent hoc est in xpm 

cum audissent hoc baptizati sunt 

In nomine dni ihu xpi 

in remissione peccatorum 

et cum inposuisset eis manum paulus 
statim cecidit spe sanctus super eos 
lo quebatur linguis et profetabant 


erant autem uniuersi uiri quasi duodecim 


Cum introisset autem paulus in synagoga. 


cum fiducia magna pal am loquebatur 
per trens menses disputans 

et persuadens de regno di 

ut uero quidam eorum cum indurarent 
et non crederent maledicentes 


uiam in conspectu multitudinis gentiu 


Tunc recessit paulus ab eis 


segre gauit discipulos 


cottidie disputans in scola 


— 
tyranni cuiusdam ab hora. u- usque decima 


hoc autem factum est in annos duos 

ita ut omnes qui habitant asiam 
audirent uerba dni 

iudaeique et craeci 

uirtutes etiam non quasilibet ds faciebat 
per manus pauli 

ita ut et super infirmantes 

inferentur a corpore eius 

su daria aut simicintia 

et recedent ab eis infirmitatis 


M . . 
utsps malignus exiret 


adgressi sunt quidam ex cireumuenientibus 


iudaeis exorcistarum nominare 


. — Φ 
super eos qui haberent sps malignos 


(Fol. 495 a.) 


CAP. XIX. 4— 13. 


999 


400 


— — — —— —- 
HPAR. AIIOCTOA 
— ο A A — 
---- 
TO ovopa Kv. jv. λεγοντεσ 
oo, 

OpxiLw ὕμασ Tov vy ov παυλοσ κηρυσσει 
εν OW και ULOL σκενα τινοσ ἵερεωσ 
ἤθελησαν τὸ avro ποιῆσαι 
€Üoc εἰχαν rov σ Totovrove εξορκ ιζειν 
και εἰσελθοντεσ προσ τον δαιμονιζομενο 
ἡρξαντο επικα λεισθα t τὸ ονομα λεγοντεσ 

my, 

παραγγελλο μεν σοι εν την 
ov παυλοσ εἐξελθειν κηρυσσει 

— 
ore απεκριθὴ To πνα TO πονηρον εἰπεν avrov 
TOV ἣν γεινωσκω Kat τὸν παυλον επισταμαι 
ὕμεισ δετινεσ εσται 
καὶ ἐεναλλομενο o εἰσ avrove οανθρωποσ 

— 

εν ὦ NV τοπνα TO Tovnpoy 
KUPLE vrac ἀμφοτέρων ELT xvoey KAT αὐτῷ 
WOTE YU μνουσ καὶ τετραν ματισ μενουσ 
EXPVYELY EK του OLKOV EKELYOU 

Tovro δε eyevero γνωστον act ἴουδαιοισ 
Kat €AX nov Tour κατοικουσὶιν τὴν εφεσο 
καὶ φοβοσ ἐπεσεν ert παντασ avrovg 


A S — | 


και ἐμεγαλννετὸ TO ονομα κυ Up 


πολλοι Se rav rurT€v οντων 

ἤρχοντο «£o joXo γουμενοι 

kat aya yyeAXovrea tac πραξεισ avrov 

ixavot των περι Ta. epya πραξαντων 

συνενεγκαντεσ kat tag βιβλουσ 

KOTOLKEOY ἐνωπιον παντων 

καὶ συνεψηφισον Tac τιμασ avrov 

€vpov apyuptou μυριδασ πεντε 

OUTWO KATA κρατοσ ενΐσχυσεν 

και ἡ πιστισ του 6v ηὔξανε kat ἐπληθυνε 
τοτεπαυλοσ eÜero εν τω πνὶ 


διελθειν την μακεδονιαν 
(Fol. 495 δ.) 


XIX. 


14 


15 


16 


19 


Pie 


ACTUS APOSTOL — 
Sy — — -- 


nomen dni ihu dicentes 

Adiuro uos per ihm quem paulus praedicat 
in quo et fili sceuge cuiusdam sacerdotis 
uoluerunt similiter facere 
consuetudinem hab ebant apud eos exorcizare 
et introierunt adimplentes 
coeperunt inuo care nomen dicentes 
praecipimus tibi ihu 
quem paulus praedicat exire 
tunc respondens aps malignus dixit ad eos 
ihm ad gnosco et paulum scio 
uos autem qui estis 
et insilien in eos homo 
in quo erat spa nequa 
dominatus utrisque ualuit aduersus eos 
ita ut nudi et uulnerati 
effugerent de domo illa 


Hoc autem factum est notum omnibus iudaeis 


et grecis his qui habitant in ephesum 
et incidit timor super omnes eos 
et magnificabatur nomen dni ihu 
multique credentium 
ueniebant confitentes 
et nuntiantes actos suos 
multi autem ex his qui curiosa gesserunt 
adtulerunt et libros 
commurebant coram omnibus 
et conputatis praetiis illorum 
inuenerunt denariorum sestertia docente 
sic potens conualescebat 
et fides di cres cebat et conualescebat 
tunc paulus ad posuit in apo 
transire per mace doniam 
(Fol. 496 a.) 


Cap. XIX. 13—21. 


— —_—_ sa — 
IIPAR  AIIOCTOA 
00 — ἐε,. 2 — 


καὶ τὴν axatay XIX. 
Kat πορενεσθαι εἰσ cepomoXvaovpa. 
εἰπὼν ort μετα ro yever Oat με exet 
δει μαι καὶ ρωμὴν εἰ Sew 
και αποστειλασ εἰσ τὴν μακεδονιαν 22 
Svo των διακογου ντων avro 
τιμοθεον καὶ ἐραστον 
GVTOG ἐπέσχεν Xpo νον ολιγον εν τή agua, 
Cyevero δε κατα rov καιρον exetvoy 23 
Tapaxoc ovx ολιγοσ πέρι THO odo” 
Δημητριοσ yap rur ἣν αργυρο κοποσ 24 
ποίων ναουσ᾽ Gy v povc apre μιδοσ' 
OC παρειχετοισ τεχνειταισ 
ονκ ολιγὴν ἐργασιαν 
ov τοσ συναθροισασ τουσ περιτα τοιαυτα 25 
τεχνέταισ εφὴ προσ αντουσ 
ανδρεσ συντεχν εἰται ἐεπίστασται OTL EK ταυτησ 
THO ἐργασιασ ἡ ευπορια ἡμειν ἐστιν 
καὶ ἀκονεται καὶ θεωρειται 26 
Ov μονον εωὡσ εφεσιον 
αλλα και σχεδὸν πασὴσ ἀσιασ 
O raviog ουτοσ Tur Tore rag 
μετεστησεν ἵκανον οχλον λεγων" 
ort ovrot οὐκ εἰσιν θεοι 
οι δια χειρων γενόμενοι 
ov μονον Se rovro ἡμειν κινδυνευει 27 
TO μεροσ εἰσ απε Ney μον ελθειν 
αλλα καὶ τοτ no μεγαλησ θεασ 
ἵερον αρτεμιδοσ εἰσ ovdey λογισ' θησεται 
αλλα καθερισθαι μελλει ἡ ολ ἡ ασια 
Kat 7 οἰκου μενησεβεται 
Tavra δε ακουσαντεσ 28 
και yevo μενο ιπληρεισ Gu pov 
(Fol. 496 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL' 401 


et acha iam 
et s ic ire in hierosolyma 
dicens quia cum fuero ibi 
necesse est me roma uidere 
et misit in macedo niam 
duos qui sib i ministrabant 
timo theum et erastum 
ipse uero substitit tempus in asiam 
Factum est autem in illo tempore 
tumultus non modicus de hac uia dni 
Demetrius enim quidam argentarius 
faciens tempula argentea dianae 
qui prestabat artificibus 
non mo dicam ad quisitionem 
hic con uocauit eos qui cir ca haec 
operabantur ait ad eos 
Uiri artifices scitis quia ex hac 
operationem ad quisitio est nobis 
et audistis et uidetis 
quia non solum ipsius ephesi 
sed pae nae omnis asiae 
Paulus hic qui dam tunc suadens 
e duxit plurimam turbam dicens 
quoniam non sunt dii 
qui fiunt manibus 
non solum autem nobis periclitatur 
pars in re dargutionem uenire 
sed etiam magnae deae 
templum dianae in nihilum deputabitur 
sed destrui incipiet tota asia 
et orbis terrarum colitur 
haec autem cum audissent 
et fuissent pleni indignatione 
(Fol. 497 a.) 


" Cap, XIX. 21—28, 


51 


“> 


102 


-- ---- ο΄- -- 
TIPAH. AIIOCTOA 
— — ey — 


δραμοντεσ eur ro ἀαμφοδον expafoy Aeyovres XIX. 


μεγαλη αρτεμισ εφεσιων 
Kat συνεχυθὴ odn ἡ πολισ αἰσχυνησ 
ὡρμήῆσαν δε ομο θυ μαδον εἰσ το θεατρον 
και συναρπασαντεσ yaloy καὶ αρισταρχον 
μακεδονεσ συνεκδημουσ πανλον 

Βουλομενου δετου παυλου 
εἰσελθειν evo τον δημον 
ot μαθηται exoXvoy 
Tea δε καὶ των ασιαρχων 
ὕπαρχοντεσ avro φιλοι 
πεμψ αντεσ προσ avrov 
παρεκαλουν μὴ δουναι eavroy εἰσ vo θεατρο 
αλλοι μεν o vy αλλο ἐκραζον 
ἢ yap εκκλησια ἣν συνκεχυμενὴ 
και οἰπλειστοι ovk ἡδεισαν τινοσ ενεκεν 
συνεληλὺ θεισαν ex δε του οχλου 
κατεβιβασαν αλεξανδρον 
προβαλλοντων avrov των Ἰουδαίων 

O δε αλεξανδροσ κατασεισασ τὴ χειρι 
ἤθελεν ἀπολογεισθαι τω δημω 
επιγνοντεσ δε ort ἴουδαιοσ ἐστιν 
φωνὴ eyever o μια παντων 


wo ert ὡρασ Svo κραζοντων 


peyadn aprepaa ed ἐσιων 


κατασεισασ δε o -ypap pareve TOV οχλον φησι" 


avdper εφεσιοι τισ yap ἐστιν οανθρωποσ 


OG ov γεινωσγει τὴν ἡμετέραν πολιν 
vaokopov εἰναι THT μεγαλησ ἀρτεμιδοσ 
καὶ TOV Sto σπετουσ ἀνανγτιρρήτων 


OVV OVTOY Τούτων 


Ócov ἐστιν ὕμασ κατεσταλμενονσ ὕπαρχει 


και μηδὲν προπετεσ πρασσειν 


(Fol. 497 5.) 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


currentes in campo clamauerunt dicentes 
magna est diana ephesiorum 
et repleta est tota ciuitas confusionem 


impetum que fecerunt unanimiter in theatra 


et rapuerunt gaium et aristarchum 


macedonibus comitibus pauli 


ipso autem uolente paulo 


introire in turbam 

discipuli non sinebant 

quidam uero asiarcharum 

qui erant amici eius 

cum mississent ad eum 

rogabant eum ne darent se in theatrum 
alii autem uero aliut clamabant 
erat enim eoclesia confusa 

et plures nesciebant cuius rei causa 
conuenerint de ipsa turba 
distraxerunt alexandrum 
propellentibus eum iudaeis 


alexander autem innuens manu 


uolebat rationem reddere populo 
cognito autem eo quod iudaeus esset 
uox facta est una omnium 

quasi horis duabus clamantium 
magna est diana ephes iorum 


cum conp esouisset scriba turba ait 


uiri ephesi quis enim est homo 


qui ignorat uestram ciuitatem 
8e dituam esse magnae dianae 
et huius iouis contra dictione 
itaque non capient ibus his 
oportet wos questos esse 
et nihil temere agere 

(Fol. 498 a.) 


Car. XIX. 28—36. 


© 


— Ga uy — 
IIPAR8 AIOCTOA 
— ee ey, — 


nyayere yap rove avipac rovrove evade XIX. 37 

μητεϊεροσυλουσ 

pyre βλασῴ ἡμουντασ τὴν θεαν jay 

€t μιν ovy δημητριοσ οντοσ 38 

Ot καὶ συν avr τεχνεῖτε 

ἔχουσι προσ avrov σ τινα λογον 

ἀγοραιοι a*yovrat καὶ avOvrarot εἰσιν 

ενκαλιτωσαν αλληλοισ 

ει Oe rt wept ετερων επιζητειτε 39 

εν τὼ vojuo ἐκκλησια EmAVOncerat 

και yap κινδυνενομεν σήμερον ενκαλεισθαι 40 

στασεωσ μῆδενοσ αἰτιου οντοσ 

περι ov δυνησομεθα ἀποδουναι λογον 

TT συστροφὴσ ταντὴσ' 

και TAUTG εἰπὼν ἀαπελυσε THY ἐκκλησίαν 41 
μετα δετοπανσασθαι rov θορυβον XY. i 
προσκαλεσαμενοσ παυλοστουσ μαθητασ 
καὶ πολλα παρακελε car 


αποσπασαμενοσ εἐξηλθεν ew μακεδονιαν 
διελθων δε παντα τα μερὴ exervy a 
καιχρσ oo λογωπολλω 
nrAOev εἰσ τὴν ελλαδα ποιησασ δεμηνασ. γ- 3 
και γενηθεισ avro επιβουλησ ὕπο των iovbaus 
ηθελησεν ἀναχθηναι εἰσ συριαν 

Corey B ro sva avro ὕποστρε > ev 
δια Tyo μακεδονιασ 
μελλοντοσ ovy εξειε ναι avrov μεχρι e ασὰσ 4 
σωπατροσ πυρρον βερνιαιοσ 
θεσσαλονικεων δε αρισταρχοσ 
και σεκουνδοσ και ya ioc 
δουβ ριοσ και τιμοθε oc 
εφεσιοι δε evr υχοσ Kat τροφ iioc 


ovrot προελθοντεσ ej.evoy αντον ἐν Τροαδι 5 


(Fol. 498 5.) 


AOTUS APOSTOL' 403 
—- — -- 

ad duxist is enim uiros istos hoc 

neque sacrilegos 

neque blasphemantes deam nostram 

si quidem ergo demetrius hic 

et qui cum eo sunt artefices 

habent cum ali quos quen dam uerbum 

conuentus aguntur et proconsoles sunt 

accusent se in uicem 

si qui d autem ulterius requiritis 

in legem ecclesia e discutietur 

nam etiam periclitamur hodie accus ari 

seditionis nullius causa esse 

cuius possum us reddere rationem 

de hoc concurso 

et haec cum dixisset dissoluit ecclesiam 


posquam autem cessauit tumultus 


conuocauit paulus discipulos 

et multo exhortatus 

salutans exiit in macedoniam 

cum perambulasset omnes partes illas 
et exortatus sermone multo 

uenit in ellada fecit autem menses tres 
et cum fierent ei insidiae a iudaeis 


uoluit in syriam perduci 


Dixitque spa eireuertere 


per mace doniam 

uolente autem comitari eum usquae ad asia 

sopater uirri beryensis 

thessalonicensium uero aristerchus 

et secun dus et gaius 

donerius et timotheus 

ephesii autem eutychus et trophimus 

hic cum praecessissent expectabant nos troade 
(Fol. 499 a.) 


Carr. XIX. 3;—XX. «s. 


404 


— eee — 
IIPAR. AIIOCTOA 
we ty ---- 


neo δε εἐξεπλευσαμεν 
pera rao ἡμερασ των αζυμων 
απὸ φιλιππων καὶ ἤλθομεν προσ avrove 
εἰσ τρωαδα πεμπτα tot 
εν 7 και διετριψα μεν ἡμερασ erra. 
εν r€ 2 jua. πρωτὴ των σαββατων 
συνήγμενων ἡμων Tov κλασαι αρτον 

O παυλοσ᾽ διελεγετο avrow 
μελλων εξιεναι Ty erauptov 
παρετινε Tov λογον μέχρι μεσονυκτιοῦ 
σαν δε ὕπολαμπαδεσ ἵκαν at 
εν τω ὕπερωω OV ἡμεν συνηγμένοι. 
καθεζομενοσ δετισ νεανιασ' 
ovopare ευτυχοσ ert τὴ θυριδι 
κατεχομενοσ ὕπνω βαρει 
διαλεγομένου πανλοῦυ emt πλειον 
κατενεχθεισ ὕπο του ὕπνου 
ἔπεσεν (TT TOV τριστεγου κατω 
καὶ oo ἤρθη νεκροα 

καταβασ δε o παυλοσ ἐπεσεν er avro 
και συνπεριλαβων και evrev μη θορυβισθαι 
3 yap yvy avrov ev avro ἐστιν 
αναβασ δε και κλασασ rov aprov 
και y ευσα pevor e$ wayoy δε ομειλησαα 
αχρισ avyno ovroc εξ ηλθεν 
ασπαζομενων de avroy 
ἤγαγεν Tov vea. vurkoy Covra. 
kat παρεκλὴ θησαν ov μετριωσ 
npeur δε κατελ θοντεσ εἰσ το πλοῖον 
ανήηχθημεν εἰσ τὴν ασσον 
εκειθεν μελλοντεσ ἀναλαμβανειν rov παυλο 
ovrwo yap nv διατεταγ μενοσ 


wo μελλων avroc πεζευειν 


(Fol. 499 6.) 


XX. 6 


12 


13 


— 


ACTUS APOSTOL | 


nos uero enauigauimus 
post dies azymorum 
a philippis et uenimus ad eos 
troadam quintani 
in qua demorati sumus dies septem 
in una autem sabbati 
collectis nobis frangere panem 

paulus disputabat eis 
incipiens exire post alia die 
extendit que sermonem usque in media nocte 
et erant faculae copios ae 
in superioribus ubi eramus collecti 
sedens autem quidam iubenis 
nomine eutychus super fenestram 
de mers us omno graui 
disputante paulo prolixius 
praeceps datus est a somno 
cecidit de tristego zosum 
et sublatus est mortuus 

Cum descendisset autem paulus cecidit super eu 
et circumplexit et dixit nolite turbari 
anima enim eius in ipso est 
cum ascendisset et fregisset panem 
et gustas set satisque fabulatus esset 
us quae ad lucem sic profectus est 
salutantes aute os 
ad duxerunt iubenem uiuentem 
et consolati sunt non me dio criter 
nos uero ascend im us in nauem 
de uenim us ass um 
inde mox recepturi paulum 
sic enim disposuerat 
in cipiens ipse iter facere 


(Fol. 500 a.) 


Cap. XX. 6—13. 


HPAR. AIIOCTOA 
— — ςς. — 


wo δεσυνεβαλεν npeww εἰσ τὴν ασσον 
ἀναλαβοντεσ avrov ἤλθομεν eur μιτυληνη 
κακειθεν αποπλευσαντεσ τὴ επιουσὴ 
κατηντήσαμεν αντικρυσ χειου 
T Se erepa παρελαβομεν εἰσ σαμον 
και μειν αντεσ εν τρωγυλια 
τὴ €pxo pev ἤλθομεν eto μειλητον 
καὶ κρι κι yap οπανλοσ 
παραπλευσαι τὴν εφεσον 
μήποτε γενηθη avro κατασχεσὶσ TU EV Ty ocu. 
ἐσπευδε yap εἰσ τὴν ἡμέραν THO πεντηκοστησ 
γένεσθαι εν iepo oo λυμα 
απὸ Oe Tyo μειλητου πεμψασ εἰσ εφεσον 
μετεπεμψ aro rove πρεσβυτερουσ ro ἐκκλησιασ 
wo δεπαρεγενοντο προσ avroy 
Opwe εοντων AUTWY εἰπεν προσ αὐτουσ 
ὕμεισ ἐπίστασθαι ἀδελῴοι απο πρωτὴσ ἡμερασ 
eh no εἐπεβὴν εἰσ τὴν ασιαν 
wo τριετίαν ἢ και πλειον 
ποταπωσ μεθυμὼων ἣν 
παντοσ xpovov δουλευων τω κω 
μετα πασὴσ ταπεινο φροσυνὴσ 
καὶ δακρνων και πειρασμων 
των συνβαντων μοι 
ev rao επιβονλαισ των Ἰουδαίων 
wo οὐδὲν ὕπεστειλαμὴν των σὺν φεροντῶ 
TOV avayy ειλαι ὕμειν 
και ὃ ιδαξαι κατ οἰκουσ και ὃ ἡμοσια 
διαμαρτυρουμενοσ Ἰουδ αἰοισ τε καὶ ελλησι 
τὴν εἰσ τὸ νθν peray οιαν 
και πιστιν δια του κυημων op χρὺ 
καὶ γυν εἰδου eyw δεδεμενοσ τω T πορεύομαι 
eur ἵἹεροσολυμα τα εν αυτή συναντήσαντα μοι 


(Fol. goo b.) 


XX. 14 


15 


16 


19 


20 


at 


22 


ACTUS APOSTOL 405 
- —— — 

ut autem conuenit nos in assum 

adsupto eo uenimus mitylenen 

et inde cum enauigassemus prid ie 
peruenimus contra chium 

et alia die applicauimus samum 

et manentes in trogy lio 

sequenti uenimus in miletum 

iudicauerat enim paulus 

praeternauigare ephesum 

ut non contingeret e i morandi quis in asia 
festinabat enim in die pentecostes 

adesse in hierosolymis 

a mileto autem cum mis isset in ephesum 
transmisit presbyteros de ecclesiam 

&d ubi uenerunt ad eum 


simul que cum esset ait ad eos 


uos scitis fratres a prima die 


in qua ingressus sum asiam 

quasi triennium et amplius 

quema dmo dum uobiscum fui 

per omne tempore seruiens dno 

cum omni humilitati sensui 

et lacrimis et temptationibus 

quae euenerunt mihi 

ex insidiis ad iu dae is 

quam nihil substraxerim que utilia essent 

ut adnuntiarem uobis 

et docerem per domos et publice 

testifican do iud aeisquae et graecis 

quae in do paenitentiam agent 

et fidem in dnm nostrum ihm xpm 

et nunc ecce ego ligatus spo uado 

in hierosolyma quae in ea mihi uentura sunt 
(Fol. 501 a.) 


Cap. XX. 14—23. 


— ee, — 
ΠΡΑΞ' AIIOCTOA 
--- -. --- -- 


μὴ γεινώσκων πλὴν ort τὸ αγίον πνὰ XX.23 
xara πασαν πολιν διαμαρτυρεται μοι λεγω 

οτι δεσμα και θλειψεισ 

μενουσιν μοι εν ἱἵεροσολυμοισ 

αλλ οὐδενοσ᾽ Aoyoy exw μοι 24 


ovde ποιουμαι τὴν W νχὴν μου τιμιαν ἐμαυτου 


τουτελίωσαι Tov Sp ομον μου 
καὶ τὴν διακονίαν του Xoyov 
“πιο 

ον παρελαβὸον παρα Tov κυ vv 
διαμαρτυρασθαι Ἰουδαιοισ και ελλησιν 
TO ἐναγγελιον THO χαριτοσ θυ 
και νυν edov €yo oda 25 
ort ouxert οψεσθαι. τοπροσωπον μου 
ὕμεισ παντεσ 
ev our διηλθον κηρνσσων 

C 
τὴν βασιλειαν rov την 
αχρι ovv rc σήμερον ἡμερασ καθαροσ εμει 26 


απὸ TOU αἱματοσ TAYVTWOV 


ov yap ὕπεστειλαμην rov ἀαναγγειλαι 27 
— 
πασαν την βουλὴν rov θυ quy 
4 
προσέεχεται αντοισ καὶ παντι TO) ποιμγιω 28 


om, 
ev ὦ ὕμασ TO ay tov πνα eÜero exurKorove 


— 
TOLLEVELY Τὴν exxAnotav TOU KU 
ἣν TEPLE WOLNT ATO € avro 


δια του auia Toc Tov ἴδιου 


Eyw oda ort εἰσελευ σονται 29 


pera τὴν αφεξ ιν μου λυκοι Bapew εισ ὕμασ 

μὴ φειδομενοι τον πυμνειου 

και εξυμων avrov αγναστήησονται 30 
ανδρεσ λαλουντεσ διεστραμμενα 

του ἀποστρεφειν Tove μαθητασ οπισω αὐτῷ 

Sto γρήγορειτε μνημονεὺ ovrea 31 
ort Tpieruxy νυκτὰ δεημεραν 


(Fol. sor 6.) 


AOTUS APOSTOL 
— OS -- 
nesciens tamquam spm sanctum 
per singulas ciuitates protestatur mihi dicens 
quia uincula et tribul ationes 
manen mi in hierosolymis 
sed nihil horum cura est mihi 
neque habeo ipsam ani mam caram mihi 
quam consummare curs um meum 
et ministerium uerbi 
quod accepi a dno ihu 
testificari iudae is et crecis 
euangelium gratiae di 
et nunc ecce ego scio 
quia non uidebis faciem meam 
uos omnis 
inter quos perambulaui prae dicans 
illu d regnum ihü 
propter quo d ho dierno die mundus sum 
& sanguine omnium 
non enim substraxi ut non adnuntiem 
omnem uolumptatem di uobis 
attendite uos et omni gregi 
in uobis Βρβ sanctus posuit episcopos 
regere ecclesiam dni 
quam ad quisibit sibi 
per san quinem suum 
Ego scio quia introibunt 
pos diescessum meum lupi graues in uos 
non parcentes gregi 
et ex uobis ipsis exurgent 
uiri lo quentes peruersa 
ut abstrahant discipulos post seipsos 
propter quo d uigilate memores estote 
quia t riennio nocte ac die 
(Fol. 502 a.) 


Cap. XX. 22—31. 


TIPAE. ADOCTOA 407 
— SS .ο. — 
ovx ἐταυσαμὴν pera Saxpuwy xx. 
vovÜerov «va exacTov vp 
ω- 
Kat Ta νυν παρατιθεμαι ὕμασ τω Ow 32 
και Tw Aoyw THT χαριτοσ αὐτου 
τω Suva μενω οἰκοδο μησαι ὕμασ 
και δουναι κληρονομιανεναν σ 


TOW ἡγιασμένοισ TOV TAVTWY 


ἀργνριον και χρνυσιον ειματισμον 33 
ουδενοσ ὕμων ἐπεθυ μησα 
αντοι γεινωσκεται οτι τασ χρειασ μου 34 


WAC KAL TOUT ουσιν μετ ἐμον 
ὕπηρετησαν a4 χειρεσ μον 
πα ιὕπεδειξα ὕμειν ort ovrwo κοπιωντασ 35 


Se: αντιλαμβανεσθαι των ασθενουντω 
nH —, 


μνημονενειν Toy λογων του κυ qu 


οτι ουτοσ ειπεν μακαριοσ ἐστιν 


μαλλον διδοναι ἡ λαμβανειν 


και ravra eura θεισ τα γονατα 36 


[Deest folium unum, quaternionis sexcagesimac 
quartae primum, continens Cap. xx. 31— 
xxi. 2 Latino, Cap. xxi. 2—10 Graece. ] 


συν πασιν avrow προσευξατο 
ἵκανοσ δεκλαν θμοσ eyevero παντων 37 
και ENLTETOVTET ἐπὶ TOV TpaxvAov TOV πανλοῦυ 
κατεφιλουν avrov 
μάλιστα ex tw Xoyo οδυνωμενοι 38 
ort εἰπεν OUKETL μελλει ε 
το πρόσωπον θεωρειν 
προεπεμπον δεαντον eri το πλοιον 

Lert ayr σανηχθημεν XXI.: 
αποσπασθεντων δὲ — vam avrov 
εὐθυδρομησαντεσ qxojuey eur κω 
τῇ δε €rtova εἰσ podov 
κακειθεν εἰσπαταρα Kat pupa 
Kat ευροντεσ πλοιον 2 
διαπερων εἰσ ᾧ νεικὴν 

(Fol. 502 6.) aM 


Carp, XX. 31—XXL 2. 


408 


CAP. XXI. 


ACTUS APOSTOL 


ascendentes nauigauimus 
uidentes autem cyprum 

et relinquentes eas a sinistro 
collauimus in syriam 
enauigauimus in tyro 

ibi erat enim nauis 

ex postura onus 

et inuentis discipulis 
mansimus apud eos dies septem 
quidam autem paulo dicebant per spm 
non ingredi hierosolyma 


Sequenti autem die exeuntes 


ambulamus uiam nostram 
deducentibus omnibus nos 

cum uxor ibus et filiis 

extra ciuitatem et positis genibus 


in litore orauimus 


my, 
α et cum salutassemus inuicem 
— 


y reuersi uero quisque ad sua 


nos autem nauigatione expedita 
a tyro uenimus ptolemaidem 
et salutauimus fratres 


num aput eos 


[Deperitt pare inferior hujus folii: 


(Fol. 504 a.) 


Cap. XXI. 2—7. 


conf. Ad- 


apo φητὴσ ονοματι αγαβοσ 
ανελθων δε προσ ἡμασ' 
και αρασ τὴν ζωνὴν του πανλου 
Snoac cavrov rove ποδασ καὶ τασ χειρασ axe 
ταδε λεγει To πνὰ TO ay tov 
Tov avopa, ov ear ἢ (ov avr 
ovrog δησουσιν εἰσ Ἱερουσαλήμ, ιονυδαιοι 
καὶ παραδωσου σιν εἰσ χειρασ εθνων 
wo δεηκουσαμεν Tavra. 
rapakaAov μεν ner 
καὶ οἱ €VTOTTLOL TOV πανλον 
Tov μὴ επιβαινειν avroy ew Ἱερουσαλημ 
Curev δεπροσ ἡμασ o Trav Aor 
τι ποιειται κλαιοντεσ 
και θορυβονντεσ μου τὴν καρδιαν 
eyw yap ov μονον δεθηναι BovAopas 
αλλα και ἀποθανειν eu Ἱερουσαλημ 
ετοιμωσ EXW ὕπερ TOV ονοματοσ Tov KU iq pv 
μὴ πειθομένου δε avrov 
συχσαμεν οἱ εἰποντεσ προσ αλληλουσ 
To θεληματον 6v γεινεσθω 
μετα δετιγασ ἡμερασ αποταξαμενοι 
avaBawopey εἰσ ἵερ 
εκ κεσα 


[Confer Adnotationes.) 


(Fol. 504 5.) 


XXI. 


12 


14 


16 


ACTUS APOSTOL 409 
= —— - 
profeta nomine agabus 

cum uenisset ad nos 

et tulisset zona m pauli 

ligauit suos pedes et manus et dix it 
haec dicit spe sanctus 

eum uirum cus est zona haec 

sic ligabunt hierusalem iudaei 

et tradent in manus gentium 

et uero au diuimus haec 

depraecaba mur nos 

et incolae loci illius paulum 


ut non ascenderet hierusalem 


Respondit autem ad nos paulus 


qui d facitis plorantes 

et conturbantes meum cor 

ego enim non solum ligari uolo ᾿" 
sed et mori in hierusalem 


proposit um habeo propter nomen dni xpi ihu 


cum non suaderetur e i 
qui euimus dicentes ad inuicem 
uoluntas dni fiat 


post hos autem dies refecimus nos 


et ascen dimus hierosolyma 
de caesarea nobis cum 
simul quae ad duxerunt nos 
apud quem ospitare mur 
et cum uenerunt in quen dam ciuitatem 
fuimus ad nasonem quen dam cyprium 
discip ulum antiquum et in de exeuntes 
uenimus hierosolyma 
susceperunt autem nos cum laetitia fratres 
sequenti autem die introibit paulus 
nobis cum ad iacobum 

(Fol. 505 a.) 


Car. XXI. r0—18. 


52 ~ 


410 TIPAR. AIIOCTOA 
ma — c -- 
noay δεπαρ avro οἱπρεσβυτεροι συνηγμένοι XXI. 
ove ασπα μενοσ διηγειτο eva, exao Toy 19 
€ ἐποιησεν O ὃσ row εθνεσιν 
δια τησ διακονιασ avrov 
οἱ δε ακουσαντεσ εδοξασαν τον Ky εἰποντεσ 20 
Θεωρεισ αδελῴφε ποσαι μυριαδεσ εἰεισιν 
εν Ty tovdaia των πεπιστευκοτων 
καὶ παντεσ τουτοι ζήλωται TOV VOJLOV ὕπαρχουσι 
κατηκῆσαν δεπερει σου 21 
ort αποστασιαν διδασκεισ απὸ μωσεωσ 
rove κατα εθνὴ εἰσιν Ἰουδαιοισ 
μὴ περιτεμνειν αυτουσ τα τεκνα 
, pyre «v τοισ εθνεσιν avrov περιπατειν 
Tt ovy ea Tw παντωσ 
det πληθοσ o ννελθειν 
axovooV¥as yap or t εληλυθασ 


"Ἢ 


2 


TOVTO OVV ποιῆσον οσοι λεγομεν 23 
eu new ανδρεσ τεσσαρεσ 

εὐχὴν ἐχοντεσ᾽ « $ eavrov 

rovrove παραλαβὼν αγνισθητι συν avrow 24 
και δαπανησον εἰσ αυὐτουσ 

ἵνα ξυρωνται τὴν κε φαλην 

και γνώσονται παντεσ OTL WY κατήχηνται 

περι ov οὐδεν ἐστιν 

αλλ ort πορευ ov avrog φυλασσων Tov voto 

wept δε των πεπιστεὺ κοτων εθ νων 25 
οὐδεν exovat Aeyety προσ σε 

ἡμεισ yap απεστειλαμεν κρεινοντεσ 

μῆδεν rovovrov τήρειν avrove 

εἰ μη φυλασσεσθαι avrove ro εδωλοθυτον 

και 04440. και πορνειαν 


Τοτεπαυλοσ παραλαβὼν τουσ ανδρασ' λό 


τὴ ἐπιουσὴ ἡμέρα συν αντοισ 
(Fol. 505 5.) 


ACTUS APOSTOL | 


erant autem cum eo praesbyteri conuenti 
cum salutasset eos narrabat per singula 
quae fecit dsin gentibus 


per ministerium eius 


ad illi cum audissent clarificauerunt dnm dicentes 
Uides frater quanta milia s int 


in iudaea qui credi derunt 

et omnes isti hemulatores legis sunt 
diffamauerunt autem de te 

quia ab scens ionem do cens a moysen 
qui in gent ibus sunt iudaeos 

ne circumcidat filios 


neque gentes e ius ambulant 


quid ergo est utique 


oportet multitudinem conuenire 
audient enim quia uenisti 

hoc ergo fac quo d tibi digimus 

sunt nobis uiri quattuor 

uotum habentes super se 

hos a dsume purificate cum ill is 

et eroga in eos 

ut radant caput 

et cognoscant omnes quia quae audierunt 
de te nihil est 

sed ambulans ipse custodiens legem 
de illis uero qui crediderunt gentibus 
nihil habent quod dicere in te 

nos enim scripsimus iudicantes 

nibil tale obser uare eos 

nisi custo dirent se a sacrificato 

et sanguine et fornicatione 


Tunc paulus adsumpsit uiros 


sequenti die cum ipsis 
(Fol. 506 a.) 


CAP. XXI. 18—26. 


^ 


ne key — 
IIPAR AIIOCTOA 
— .---..- — 


αγνεισθεισ εἰσηλθεν εἰσ ro ic pov XXI. 
διαγγελλων τὴν ἐκπληρωσιν rov ἡμέρω 

TOV αγνισμου ὁπτωσ προσηνεχθὴ 

ὕπερ «voc ἑεκαστον avrov προσῴφορα 
συντελουμενησ de rho εβδομησ ἡμερασ 27 
ot de a ro ἀσιασ ἴουδαιοι εληλυθοτεσ 


θεασαμενοι avroy ev Tw lepw 
συνέχεον ravra. TOV οχλον 


καὶ extBadXovow er avrov tax χειρασ κραζοντεσ 28 
ayOpea ἵστραηλειται βοηθειται 

ovroc ἐστιν οανθρωποσ o κατα του λαον 

καὶ TOV νομου καὶ TOU TOTTOU τουτου 

παντασ wavrayn διδασκων 

ert καὶ ελληνασ εισηγεν wr vepoy 

καὶ ἐκοινωνησέεν TOV αγιον τόπον TOUTOV 

ἤσαν yap προεωρακοτεσ 29 

Tpod ιμον Tov ed «atov ev Ty πολει συν avro 

ον ἐνομίσαμεν ort «c τὸ ἵερον εἰσηγαγεν παυλοσ 

εἐκεινηθη Te πολισ ολη 30 

και eyevero συνδρομὴ Tov λαου 

και ἐπιλαβο μεν οἱτου πανλου 

εἰλκὼν eco του iepov 

και eve wo εκλεισθ σαν at θυραι 


ζητουντων avroy αποκτειψναι 31 


ave φασισ Tw χιλιαρχω THE σπειρησ 
ort oAy avvxvvveraa Ἱερουσαλὴμ 
og ἐξαντησ παραλαβων στρατιωτασ 32 
και ἑεκατονταρχασ κατεδραμεν em αὐτουσ 
ot δε εἰδοντεσ τον χειλ ιαρχον καὶ ToV στρατιωτασ 
ἐπαύσαντο τυπτοντεσ TOV παυλον 
τοτε ἐγγισασ 0 χιλιαρχοσ 33 
ἐπελαβετο avrov 
και ἐκελευσεν δεθηναι αλυσεσιν δυσιν 

(Fol. 506 b.) 


M 


ACTUS APOSTOL' 411 
purificatus introibit in templum 

adnuntians expeditionem dierum 

purificationis donec oblata est 

pro uno quoque eorum oblatio 

cum repletur autem eis septimus dies 

qui ab asia erant iudaei uenerant 

uidentes eum in templo 

confuderunt omnem turbam 


et miserunt super eum manus clamantes 


Uiri istrahelitae adiuuate 


hic est homo qui aduersus populum 
et legem et locum hunt 
omnes ubique do cet 
insuper et grecos introduxit in templum 
et communicauit sanctum locum hunc 
erant autem prouidentes 
trophimum et ephesium in ciuitate cum eo 
quem putauerunt quia in templum induxit paulus 
et commota est ciuitas tota 
et facta est concurs io populi 
et cum adprehen dissent paul um 
trahebant extra templum 
et continuo clus ae sunt ianuae 
et cum quererent eum occidere 
nuntiatum est tribuno cohortis 
quia tota confusa est in hierusalem 
qui statim sumptis militibus 
et centurionibus procucurrit ad eos 
ad ill i cum uidissent trib unum et milites 
cessauerunt percutientes paulum 
tunc cum adpropin quasset tribunus 
conpraehendit eum 
et iussit ligari catenis duabus 

(Fol. 507 a.) 


Cap. XXI. 16—33. 


412 


— os —— — 
IPAE AIIOCTOA 
(0-0 A — 


καὶ ervvOavero TU €t) καὶ τισ ἐστιν πεποικωσ 

αλλοι δεαλλα ἐπεφωνουν εν τω οχλω 

kat μὴ Suvapevov avrov γνωναι o ασφαλεσ 

δια τον θορυβον 

exevrevore αγεσθαι avrov εἰσ τὴν παρεμβολὴ 

ore δε eyevero ew rovc αναβαθμουσ 

συνεβὴ rov παυλον 

βασταζεσθαι ὕπο των στρατιωτων 

δια την βιαν του λαον 

ηκολουθ yap ro πληθοσ 

κραζον αναιρεισθαι avrov 

μέλλων τεεισαγεσθαι εἰσ τὴν παρεμβολὴν 

TO χειλιαρχω αποκρειθεισ εἰπεν. 

εἰ ἐξεστιν μοι λαλησαι προσ σε 

o δε εφη ελληνιστι yewoakeur 

ον C €LO εγνπτιοσ 

ο προ TOVTWY TOV ἡμέρων ἀναστατωσασ 

και ἐξαγαγων εἰσ τὴν ἐερημον 

τουσ τετρακισχειλίουσ ανδρασ των σικαριῶ 
Εξιπεν 9« o ravAoc 

eyo ανθρωποσ μεν ειμι Ἰουδαιοσ 

εν rapow Se Tyo κιλικιασ γεγεννημενοσ 

δαιομε Se cov συνχωρήσαι μοι 

λαλησαι προσ Troy Xaov 

και emurpe ψαντοσ Se tov xiX tapxou 

ἐστωσ οπανλοσ᾽ ert των αναβαθμων 

και σεισασ τὴ χειρει προσ αντουσ 

πολλησ τεησυχειασ γενο μενησ 

προσεφωνησεν τὴ εβραΐδι διαλεκτω λεγῶὼ 


XXL 


34 


Ανδρεσ aBeX dot καὶ πατερεσ axoveare pov — XXII. 1 


THO προσ ὕμασ νυνει απολογιασ 
axov σαντεσ δε ore τη ef. pa. ibe 
διαλεκτω προσ φων εἰ 

(Fol. 507 5.) 


2 


ACTUS APOSTOL 
— — SS — 


et interro gabat quis sit et quid fecisset 
alii autem aliud clamabant in turba 

et cum non possit scire quo d certum est 
propter tumultum 

iussit ad duci eum in castra 

cum autem adhuc esset in graduus 
obtigit paulum 

baiulari a militibus 

propter uim populi 

sequebatur enim multitudo 

clamans tollite eum 

et cum iam in duceretur in castris 
tribuno respondens dixit 

8i licet mihi loqui at te - 

ad ille ait grece nosti 

nonne tu es ill e ae gyptius 

qui anti hos dies sollicitasti 

et e duxisti in ere mum 


quattuor mil ia uirorum sicariorum 


Dixit autem paulus 


ego homo quidem sum iudaeus 

tarsesis ex ciliciae non ignotae ciuitatis 
cuius rogo obsegro autem mih i 

lo quiad populum 

et cum permisisset ei tribunus 

stans paulus in gradibus 

et mouit manum ad eos 

magno que silent io facto 

adl ocutus est hebreica lingua dicens 


Uiri fratr es et patres audite me 


nun c aput uos red do rationem 
cum au dissent autem quia hebreica 
lingua a dloquit ur 

(Fol. 508 a.) 


Carr. XXI. 33—X XII. 2. 


HPAR. AHOCTOÀ. 
— “ ty — 


μαλλον ἡσυχασαν καὶ φησιν 

εγὼ εἰμι ἵουδαιοσ ανηρ 

εν ταρσὼ THO κιλικιασ γεγεννημενοσ' 
ανατεθραμμενοσ δε ev ry πολει ταντὴ 
παρα Tove ποδασ γαμαλιηλ, 
παιδενομενοσ κατα ακριβιαν 

του πατρωου νομον ζηλωτὴσ Tov θυ 
καθωσ «aras ὕμεισ παντεσ σήμερον 
καὶ ταυτὴν τὴν odov εἐδιωξα μεχρι θανατου 
δεσμενων ka4 παραδιδουσ εἰσ φυλακὴν 
ανδρασ τε καὶ yu ναικασ' 

WO και ἀαρχιερευσ μαρτυρήσει μοι 

Kat oXov ro πρεσβὺ τεριον 


παρ wy επιστολασ δεξαμενοσ παρα Tuv αδελφω 


εισ KOV επορενομὴν 


αξων και τουσ εκει οντασ 

δεδεμενουσ ev iepov σαλημ 

tva τειμωρηθωσιν 

ενγιζοντιὃδ οιμεσημβριασ δαμασκω 

εξεφνησα τον ουραγον 

περιεστραψα j.. φωσ ἵκανον περι ee 

και ἐπεσὸν εἰσ To edad oc 

και ἤκονσα ᾧ eva; λεγουσὴσ μοι 
ζαυλεσανλετι με διωκεισ 

eyo δε απεκριθην rw ει κε 

eurey δεπροσ pe €yo εἰ ine o vaLopatog 

ov ov δειωκεισ 

ot Se avv ἐμοι οντεσ τὸ μεν ᾧ wo εθεασαντο 

και od οβοι eyevovro 

τὴν Se φωνὴν ovk ἤκουσαν Tov λαλουντοσ μοι 


— 
evra δετι ποιήσω κε 


o δεειπεν προσ μεαναστασ᾽ πορεύου εἰσ δαμασκο 


κακει σοι λαληθησεται περι παντων 


(Fol. 508 5.) 


XXII. 


413 


[Deest. folium | unum, | quaternionis sexagesimae 
quartae sextum, continens Cap. xxi. 2—10 
Latina, Cap. xxr. 10—20 Graec?.] 


Cap. XXII. 2—10. 


414 


Cap, XXI. 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


19 


20 


quae te oportet facere 

ut autem surrexit non uidebam 

a claritate lucis illius 

et ad manum deductus qui mecum erant 
ueni in damascum 

ananias quidam uir timora tus 
secundum legem et testimonio 

ab omnibus iu dae is 


cum uenisset ad medix mihi 


Saule saule frater aspi e 


et ego ipsa hora aspexi 
et dixit mihi 


Ds patrum nostrorum praeordinauit te 


ut cognosceris uoluntatem eius 

et uidere iust um 

et audire uocem ex ore eius 

qui eris test is eius aput omnes homines 
eorum quae uidisti et audisti 

et nunc quid expectas surge baptizare 
et ablue peccata tua 


Inuocans nomen eius 


Factum est autem mihi reuerso hierusalem 


orante me in templo 

fieri me in soporem 

et ui di eum dicentem mihi 

festina et exi cito de hierusalem 

quia non recipient testimonium meum 

et dixi dne ipsi sciunt 

quia ego eram in carcere includens 

et caedens per synagogas 

eos qui credebant in te 

et cum effunderetur sanguist ephan! martyris 


ego eram ad sistans et consentiens 
(Fol. 510a.) 


Cap. XXII. 10—20. 


"HPAS ANOCTOAON 415 
em, 


kat φυλασσων τα εἰματια XXII 
των ἀναιρουντων αὐτὸν 
και εἰπεν προσ με πορενου δι 


ort eyo εἰσ εθνη μακραν ἐξαποστελλω σε 
ἤκουσαν δε avrov axpt rovrov Tov λογου 22 
καὶ empay τὴν φωνὴν avr Y Aeyovreo 
QG4p€ ATO THT γὴσ TOV TOLOVT V 
ov yap καθηκεν avrov {nv 
κραυγαζοντω Se 23 
και ρειπτοντω TO ειματια 
και κονίορτον βαλλοντων εἰσ Toy OUparer 
εἐκελευσεν o χειλιαρχοσ εἰσαγεσθαι avrov 24 
εἰσ τὴν παρεμβολὴν crac 
μαστιξιν ἀνεταζειν avroy 
ἕνα emcyvo δι ἣν αἰτιαν 
OUTWO κατεῴφωνουν περι avrov 
Qo δεπροσετιναν avrov Tour € uw 25 [Deperierunt caetera.) 
εἰπεν προσ TOV ἐστωτα εκατονταρχὴν 
ει εξεστιν ὕμειν ανθρωπον ρωμαιον 
και ἀκατακριτον μαστιζειν 
TOUVTO ἀκουσασ O ἐκατονταρχὴσ 26 
ort ρωμαιον εαντον À eyet 
προσελθὼν τω χειλειαρχω πηγγειλεν avre 


ορατι peur ποιειν 


ανθρωποσ ovrog ρωμαιοσ ἐστιν 

ΤἸοτεπροσελθων o χειλιαρχοσ' 27 

ἐπηρωτησεν avrov λεγε μοὶ συ ρωμαιοσ ει 

o δεειπεν εἰμι 
καὶ ἀποκριθεισ o χειλιαρχοσ εἰπεν 28 

eyo oda ποσου κε φαλαιου 

THY πολειτειαν ταυτὴν εκτησαμὴν 
παυλοσ δε ed eyw δε καὶ γεγεννήμαι 

TOT€ ἀπεστῆσαν απ αντου 29 

(Fol. 5105.) 


Car. XXII. 30—29. 


APPENDIX. 


8. MATTHAEIL  1L21 


22 


[GRAECE, supra p. 5]. 23 


I1. 1 


EX 


Inter fol. 6 b et fol. 8 a haec leguntur: 


qui surgens-accepit puerum 

et matrem eius. et uenit in terram israhel. 
audiens autem quod archelaus regnaret 
in iudea 

pro herode patre suo 

timuit illo ire-et ammonitus in somnis. 
secessit in partes galileae- 

et ueniens habitauit 

in ciuitate quae uocatur nazaret- 

ut adimpleretur-quod dictum est per prophetas. 
qm nazareus uocabitur. 

In diebus autem illis uenit iohannes 
baptista. praedicans in deserto iudeae 
et dicens- poenitentiam agite. 
appropinquauit enim regnum caelorum 
hic est enim-qui diotus est 

per esaiam prophetam dicentem 

uox clamantis in deser to. 

parate uiam dul 

rectas facite semitas eius. . 

ipse aut iohannes-habebat uestimentum 
de pilis camelorum.et zonam pelliciam 
circa lumbos suos-esca autem eius 
erat:locuste et mel siluestre- 

tunc exiebat ad eum 

hierusolima et omnis iudaea- 

et omnis regio circa iordanen- 

et baptizabantur in jordane ab eo: 
confitentes peccata sua- 


. uidens autem multos pharisacorum 


et sadducaeorum uenientes 

ad baptismum suum: dixit eis 

progenies uiperarum. quis demonstrauit uobis fugere 
(Fol. 7 a seu potius Fol. 1a secundae manüs.) 


Carr. 11. 21—11. 7. 


417 


418 


[S. MATTHAEI.] 


ap 


APPENDIX. 


απο THe μελλουσὴσ opyne’ Ποιησαται ovy καρπὸν Ill. 8 


αξιον μετανοιασἾ και μη δοξηται λεγειν ev eavToc. 
[42 
varepa exopey τὸν αβρααμ᾽ λεγω yap ὑμιν- ort δυναται 


o Oc . ex τῶν λιθων τοντων eyeipe Texva Tw αβρααμ- 


” Hén én ἡ αξινὴ προσ τὴν pilav Twv Sevdpwy κιται᾿ 


" 


" 


"s 


IIav ov» δενδρον un ποιυυν καρπὸν καλον exxorrTeTat. 


«at εἰσ vt vp βαλλοται- eyo μεν βαπτιζω vuac ev ὕδατι 
eic peravotay’ o de oic c μου epxoueyoc* io yvporepoc 
μον ἐστινεον ovk etj ἵκανοσ Ta ὑποδιματα βαστασαι" 
we — 
αντοσ vpac βαπτισει ey wut aytw Kat arvpi? 
OV TO WTOLOY ἂν TH Xatpt avTov-Kat διακαθαριει 
τὴν aXoya avrou-Kat συναξει TOV σιτον GVTOV 
eic τὴν αποθηκην.το δα αχυρον κατακαυσι πυρι 
, — 
acpeoo' ToTe Wapayiwerat 0 10 avo THO γαλιλαιασ 
emt Tov topvayny προσ Tov iwavyny-rov βαπτισθηναι 
um avTov' O de wapyno»Oiexo uev avTov λεγων." 
[d 
Eyw xptav exw ὕπο cov Basio0nyat-kat ov epxn 
— 
“ροσ ne’ αποκριθεισ δε οισοειπεν προσ avrov! 
αφεσ αρτιοοντῶσ yap 
προπὸν ἐστιν ἡμιν 
σληρωσαι πασαν δικαιοσυνην" 
rore αφιησιν αντον᾿ 
ld m 
Ka βαπτισθεισ oto 
ενθυσ aveBn 
απο TOv ὕδατοσ 
Και ἴδον 
ανεώχθησαν avro 
0t ουρανοι" 
Kaz idey 
any, 
TO Fva 
— 
του θυ 


(Fol. 16 secundae mans.) 


Car. III. 7—10. 


9 


10 


il 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


[LaTINE, supra p. 6} 


APPENDIX. 419 


Inter fol. 168 b et fol. 177 a haec leguntur: 
[SEC: IOHAN .] 


S. IOHANNIS XVIII. 2 | iudas qui tradebat eum locum: 
quia frequenter ihs conuerat illuc. 
9 | cum discipulis suis* iudas ergo 
cum accepisset cohortem-et a pontificibus 
et pharisaeis ministros-nenit 
illuc-cum laternis et facibus 
4] et armis-ihs itaq-sciens omnia 
quae uentura erant super eum-processit-et dicit 
b | eis-quem quaeritis- Responderunt ei- 
[GRAECE, supra p. 153}. ihm nazarenum- dicit eis ihs-ego sum. 
stabat aut et iudas qui tradebat eum. 
6 | cum ipsis. ut ergo dixit eis ego sum. 
abierunt retrorsum.et ceciderunt in terram. 
7 | Iterum ergo-eos interroganit- 
quem queritis-illi autem dixerunt. 
8 | ihm nazarenum *respondit ihs: 
dixi uobis-quia ego sum.si ergo me 
9 | queritis:sinite hos abire-ut 
impleretur sermo quem dixit‘ quia quos 
dedisti mihi : non perdidi ex eis quenquam. 
10 | simon ergo petrus: habens gladium. 
eduxit eum.et percussit pontificis seruum 
et abscidit eius e 
auriculam dextram.erat aut nomen 
11 | seruo-malchus.dixit ergo 
ibs petro-mitte gladium in 
uaginam.calicem quem dedit mihi 
12 | pater-non bibam illum.cohors ergo . 
et tribunus.et ministri 
judaeorum -comprehenderunt ihm: 
13 | et ligauerunt eum-et adduxerunt eum ad annam 
primum.-erat enim socer caiphae- 
qui erat pontifex anni illius. 


(Fol. 2a secundae manis.) 


Cae. XVIII. 2—13. 


420 


[KAT. IQAN.] 


ev δε xaiapaco σνυμβουλευσασ Toc iovdaiote- 
ors συμφερει ev ανθρωπον αποθανειν 
υπερ Tov Aaov" nkoXovOei de τω me verpooc. 
και αλλοσ μαθητησ᾽ δε μαθητησ exeiwoa 
ἐν γνωστοσ To αρχΐερι"και σννεισηλθεν Tw V 
εἰσ THY avAnY Tov apxiepeoa" 
O de πετροσ ἵστηκει προσ rn Supa eEw: 
eEnAOev ovy» o μαθητησ o αλλοσ- 
oc nv γνωστοσ Tw apxiepes: 
και eimev τή θυρωρω᾽ 
και εἰσηγαγεν τον πατρον" 
Aeyei ovy ἡ παιδισκη ἡ θυρωροσ Tc TeTpo' 
pn Kat ov εκ τῶν μαθητῶν εἰ του avov τοντου" 
Neyer εἰκενοσοουκ expt’ 
εἰστηκεισαν δε οἱ δουλοι και οἱ ὕπηρετι avOpaxiay 
πεποιηκοτεσοτι Ψψυχοσ n»-xat εθερμαινοντοἶ 
s» de uer avTov o verpoc eaToc-xai Üepuevoc ' 
O ovv apxiepevo npwryncey Tov av. 
περι τῶν μαθητῶν avrov και περι THE διδαχησ avrov" 
Απεκριθη avro ic" €*yw pappnaia eXaX goa Tw κοσμω" 
eyo παντοτε eüidaza ev συναγωγὴ και ey Tro iepo- 
σπου παντοτε ot iovdanot συνερχονται᾿ 
και ἐκρυπτῶ ehadnoa οὐδεν᾽τι με exeperraa: 
σπερωτεσ ον Tove ακηκοοτασ τι eXaAyoa αντοισ᾽ 


eide ουτοι οἰδασιν a εἰπὸν eye’ 


vavra δε avTOV εἰποντοσ.εἰσ τῶν ὑπηρετ ων ΤαρθδτΤηκωσ. 


εδωκεν ραπισμα τω ιν εἰπων" 
ουτωσ αποκρινή Tw apxiepe:’ απεκριθη avTw o to: 
ei κακωσ ¢AaAnoa.papTupncoy wept Tov κακου" 
ei δα kaA cc - Ti. pe Cepero’ Agree TeiXev avTov αννασ 
δοδεμενον προσ καιαφαν Tov apyiepea" 

Hy de σιμὼν Trerpoc-ea Toc και θερμενοσ᾽ 
εἰπὸν ovy avTo- p Kat go ex τῶν μαθητῶν avrov ει" 


(Fol. 2 ὃ secundae manis.) 


XVITI. 14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


| 


APPENDIX. 


[SEC. INAN.] 


erat autem caiphas . qui consilium dederat iudaeis 
quia expedit unum hominem mori 

pro populo-sequebatur autem ihm simon petrus. 
et alius discipulus. discipulus autem ille. 

erat notus pontifici-et introinit cum iho’ 

in atrium pontificis 

petrus autem-stabat ad ostium foris 

exiuit ergo discipulus alius 

qui erat notus pontifici 

et dixit ostiariae 

et introduxit petrum. 

dicit ergo petro ancilla ostiaria 

numquid et tu ex discipulis es hominis istins- 

dicit ille-non sum. 

stabant autem serui et ministri ad prunas. 

quia frigus erat et calefiebant 

erat aut cum.eis et petrus et calefaciens se. 
pontifex ergo-interrogauit ihm 

de discipulis suis. et de doctrina eius- 

respondit ei ihs .ego palam locutus sum mundo 

ego semper docui in synagoga et in templo 

quo omnes iudaei conueniunt: 

et in occulto locutus sum nihil. quid me interrogas" 
interroga eos qui audierunt-quid locutus sum ipsis. 
ecce hi sciunt quae dixerim ego. 

haec antem cum dixisset-unus assistens ministrorum 
dedit alapam ihu dicens. 

sic respondes pontifici . 

respondit ei ihs. 


si male locutus sum.testimonium perhibeo de malo. 


‘si autem bene. quid me caedis-et misit eum annas 


ligatum ad caiphan pontificem. 


erat aut simon petrus-stans et calefaciens se- | numquid et tu ex disci 


5 pulis eius es' 


(Fol. 3a secundae tpanüs.) 


Car. XVIII. 14—25. 


:-: dixerunt ergo ei." 


0 


»" 


APPENDIX, 


(KAT. IOAN.] 


XVIII. 


npvncao exeiwoo Kat evrey-ovk euu' Aeye: εἰσ ex Tov δολων 26 
TOV apXiepewa "συνγενησ wy ov ἀπέκοψεν πετροσ TO wrtov” 
ουκ eyw σειδον ey TW κήπω uer αὐτου" 

παλιν ovy ἠρνήσατο πετρωσ «και evÜecoc αλεκτωρ οφωνησαν᾽ 27 

Αγουσιν ovv Toy w απὸ TOV καΐφα eic To WpaiTwpioy" 28 
nv de wpwi’ και αντοι ovx εἰσηλθον εἰσ To πραιτωριον 
wa μή μιανθωσινιαλλα φαγωσιν racxa’ 

Εξηλθον ovy» οπιλατοσ προσ avTova ‘Kal εἰπεν᾿ 29 
τινα κατηγοριαν φεροται xara Tov avov τουτου᾽ 
ἈΑπεκριθησαν kat εἰπεν avro εἰ μὴ ἣν οντοσ 
κακοποιοσοουκ ay σοι παρεδωκαμεν avTov’ 

εἰπεν ovy αντοισ o πειλατοσ. λαβοται avTov upeic. 91 
Kat κατα TOV νομον ὕμων κρινατε avTov" 

εἰπον δε auto οι ιοὐδαιοι᾽ μιν ovk εξεστιν 
αποκτειναι ovdeva’ ἵνα o λογοσ TOV iV πληρωθη 32 

ον evrev .onutveoy row Üavavra ἡμελλον αποθνησκειν" 

εἰσηλθον ovr παλιν εἰσ TO πραιτωριον πειλατοσ. 

Kas edo inoey TOV 19-Ka1 εἶπεν avTes’ 


— 


ov ει o βασιλευσ Tey tovdaiwy’ kat απεκρινατοο tc 
Ad εαντου Tovro Aeyeia 59 addon 
εἰπον σοι περι ἐμου" Απεικριθη o πειλατοσ.μητι Cyw 
ιουδαιοσ eis’ ro αεθνοσ το σον και αρχΐερεισ- 


— 


παρέδωκαν ae enor’ τι ἐποιησασ᾽ απεκριθη to 
ἡ βασιλεια ἡ ἐμη οὐκ ἄστιν εκ Tov κόσμου rovrov" 

εἰ εκ TOU κοσμον TOVTOU ny ἢ eun βασιλεια. 

οι ὕπηραται ay οἱ epos ηγωνιζοτο ἵνα pn παραδω΄ τοισ 

ιονδαισ᾽ νυν δε ἡ βασιλεια ἡ eps ovx αστιν ἐνταυθεν᾽ 

evmey ovy avro ο πειλατοσ᾽ ovkovy βασιλεὺυσ εἰ συ» 37 
Απεκριθη o ig. cV λεγεισ oTi βασιλευσ eiua 

eyw εἰσ TovTO yeyevynpat-xat εἰσ TovTO ὁληλυθα 

εἰσ Toy κοσμον "iva μαρτνρησων τη adrnBea’ 

waco ov ex THE aX nÜeiao-akovi pov THE dora" 


Λέγει avTG 0 πειλατοσ᾽ τι eaTiw αληθεια᾿ 


(Fol. 36 secundae manus.) 


421 


[SEC. IOHAN.] 


negauit ille et dixit-non sum-dicit unus ex seruis 
pontificis. cognatus eius cuius abscidit petrus auriculam. 
nonne ego te uidi in horto cum illo. 

iterum ergo negauit petrus-et statim gallus cantauit " 
adducunt ergo ihm-a caipha in pretorium. 

erat aut mane-et ipsi non introferunt in pretorium. 
ut non contaminarentur-sed manducarent pascha 
exiuit ergo pilatus ad eos foras-et dixit. 

quam accusationem affertis aduersus hominem hunc: 
responderunt et dixerunt ei-si non esset hic 
malefactor . non tibi tradidissemus eum. 

dixit ergo eis pilatus accipite eum uos. 

et scdm legem uram iudicate eum 

dixerunt ergo ei judaei-nobis non licet 

interficere quenquam-ut sermo iho impleretur: 
quem dixit significans.qua esset morte moriturus. 
introiuit ergo iterum in praetorium pilatus 

et uocauit ihm -et dixit ei-tu es rex iudaeorum.et respondit ihs. 
a temet ipso hoc dicis-an alii 

tibi dixerunt de me-respondit pilatus- numquid ego 
iudaeus sum-gens tua et pontifices. 

tradiderunt te mihi* quid fecisti-respondit ihs- 
regnum meum non est de hoc mundo 

si ex hoc mundo esset regnum meum: 

ministri mei utiq-decertarent-ut non traderer 
iudaeis-nunc aut regnum meum non eat hinc. 

dixit itaq-ei pilatus-ergo rex es tu. 

respondit ihs. tu dicis. quía rex sum ego: 

ego in hoc natus sum-et ad hoc ueni 

in mundum-ut testimonium perhibeam ueritati : 
omnis qui est ex ueritate audit meam uocem. 

dicit ei pilatus .quid est ueritas. 


(Fol. 4a secundae manüs.) 


Cav. XVIII. 25—38. 


422 


[KAT. IDAN.] 


Και Tovro atwov-rakiy εξηλθεν προσ ova Ἰουδαιουσ. X VIII. 


και Aeyei αντοισ᾽ eyo ουδεμιαν αἰτιαν αν avro evpioKe’ 


στιν ce σννηθαια ὕμιν. iva eva ἀπολυσω ὕμιν αν Tw rac xa. 89 


βουλεσται ουνιαπολυσω ὑμιν τον βασιλεα τῶν ιουδαιων᾽᾿ 


expavyacay ovv παλιν λεγοντεσ παντεσ᾽ μὴ τουτον. 


40 


αλλα βαραββαν' qv δε βαραββασ ληστησ᾽ Tore ovy ὅλαβεν x 


o πειλατοσ Tov ινικαι ἐμαστιγωσεν᾽ Kat ot στρατιωται 

“πλεξαντεσ σταφανον e£ ακανθωνοεπαθηκαν avrov 

τὴ κεφαληκαι ειματιον πορῴυρουν περιεβαλον avroy' 

και eXeyov- xatpe o βασιλευσ τῶν ιονδαιων- 

και ἐδιδουν avro ραπισματα" ἐξηλθεν παλιν e£o 

o πειλατοσοκαι Keyes ανυτοισ᾽ ide αγω ὑμιν avTOv εξω" 

ἵνα yuwre wrt αν avro οὐδεμιαν αἰτιαν evpicKxw’ 
EEnA0ev ovy 01 ef. φορων τον ακανθινον στεφανον. 

και τὸ πορφυρουν Ἱματιον και λεγει avroi'* ide o avo ' 
Ore ovv ἴδον avrov oi αρχΐερεισ και οἱ Vr peras. 


expavyacay λεγοντεσσταυρωσον σταυρωσον avroy’ 


2 


> 


Aeyet αυτοισ οπειλατοσ᾽ Aafere yneto avrov-kat σταυρωσαται" 


εγὼ yap-ovyx evpioxw ev avro αιτιαν᾽ 
e 
ἈΑπεκριθησᾶν avro οι Ἰονδαιοι᾽ ἡμισ' νομον exopey. 
και κατα Tov νομον o φιλει αποθανειν. 
oe — , 
oTi eauToy viov θυ σποιησον᾽ Ore ovy exovcev o πειλατοσ 
TovToy τὸν λογωνιμαλλον εφοβηθη᾽ και εἰσηλθον 
— 
εἰσ τω πραιτωριον παλινοκαὶ λέγει Tw ιυ- 
, — , 
ποθεν ei σν᾽ O δε .o- aTokpuciy ovk edwKey avTo 
A eyei ovy avro 0 πειλατοσ᾽ euot ov ÀaA eic ' 
ovx oidac oTt ἐξουσιαν exw σταυρωσαι ce’ 
kat εἐξουσιαν exo awodvoa ce’ AmexpiOn avro ie 
^ 
Ovx exeta εξουσιαν κατ euov ovdemiay-es μη mv 
δεδομενον σοι avwbev'’ δια rovro o παραδιδουσ pe σοι. 
μιζονα αμαρτιαν exet' εκ τουτου e{nrat o πειλατοσ 
απολυσαι avTov Ot de ἴουδαιοι ἐκρανγασαν λεγοντεσ᾽ 


(Fol. 4 b secundae mani.) 


Carp, XVIII 


10 


11 


APPENDIX. 


[SEC. IOHAN] 


et cum hoc dixisset-iterum exiit ad iudaeos- 
et dicit eis-ego nullam inuenio in eo causam. 
est aut consnetudo uobis. ut unum dimittam nobis in pascha- 
uultis ergo dimittam uobis regem iudaeorum 
clamauerunt rursum omnes dicentes-non hunc- 
sed barabban-erat aut barabbas latro-tunc ergo apprehendit 
pilatus ihm .et flagellauit.et milites. 
plectentes coronam de spinis-imposuerunt 
capiti eius-et ueste purpurea cireumdederunt eum. 
et ueniebant ad eum-et dicebant-haue-rex iudaeorum: 
et dabant ei alapas.exiit iterum pilatus foras. 
et dixit eis- ecce adduco nobis eum foras. 
ut cognatis quia in eo nullam causam inuenio. 
exiit ergo ihs-portans spineam coronam 
et purpureum uestimentum-et dicit eis-ecce homo. 
cum ergo uidissent eum pontifices et ministri. 
clamabant dicentes-crucifige-crucifige eum. 
dicit eis pilatus-accipite eum uos et crucifigite- 
ego enim-non inuenio in eo causam. 
responderunt ei iudei-nos legem habemus 
et secundum legem debet mori: 
quia filium di se fecit-cum ergo audisset pilatus 
huno sermonem. magis timuit . et ingressus est. 
praetorium iterum-et dicit ad ihm. 
unde es tu-ihs aut responsum non dedit ef- 
dicit ergo ei pilatas-mihi non loqueris 
nescis quia potestatem habeo crucifigere te- 
et potestatem habeo dimittere te-respondit ihs* 
non haberes potestatem aduersum me ullam-nisi tibi esset 
datum desuper. propter ea qui tradidit me tibi 
maius peccatum habet-exinde-querebat pilatus 
dimittere eum - iudei aut - clamabant dicentes- 
(Fol. 5 a secundae manis.) 


. 98—XIX. 12. 


APPENDIX. 


[KAT. IQAN] 


XIX. 


vac yap o βασιλεα εαντον ποιων. αντιλεγει To kaucapi! 


cay TovToy avoXvanc οὐκ et φιλοσ Tov kaicapoc 


O ovr παιλατοσ akovaac τοντῶν Twy λογων. 18 
eya'yev e£o Tov wnat exaÜeurey ext βηματοσ. 
εἰσ τοπον Neyouevoy λιθοστρωτον. 
eBpaic τι γαββαθα-ην δε παρασκαυὴ του πασχα. 14 
«pa nv oce, τριτη᾽ και Aeyes τοισ ιονδαιοισ᾽ 

ἴδε o βασιλευσ ὕμων᾽ οἱ δε ἀκρανυγαζον- 1ὅ 
apo» αρον. σταυρωσον αντονἾ Aeyec αντοισ o πειλατοσ- 
τον βασιλεα ὕμων σταυρωσω" απεκριθησαν oi apxie 
peso’ ovk ἄχομεν βασιλεα ei μη καισαρα. 

TOT€ ovy παροδωκαν avrov avToic "ἵνα σταυρωθηἶἢ 16 

TapeXafor ovy Toy ἵνικαι ηγαγον᾽ και βασταζων eavrov 17 
TOV c'ravpoy-eEnADev εἰσ τον λεγομενον κρανιον Toro: 
oo λεγηται eflpaia τι yo\yora:owov avrov ἀσταυρωσαν- 18 
Kat uer avTov Qvo αλλουσ TevÜev και evrevÜev-uecov δα 
TOV ivy ' eypawev de και τιτλον o πειλατοσ. και εθηκεν 19 
ἐπι του σταυρον ny δε To yeypappevoy ἐσ 0 ναζωρεοσ. 
o βασιλευσ τῶν ιουδαιων᾽ Τοντον ov» τὸν τιτλον πολλοι 20 
τῶν sovdatwy aveyywoay.oTs ey yv nv 0 TOTOGC THE πολεωσ 
σπου ecravpw8n 0 (6 και ἥν γεγραμμενον εβραΐσται" 
ελληνισταιερωμαΐσται᾽᾽ eXeyor ov Tw wethare ἀαρχίερεισ 21 
τῶν Ἰουδαιωνιμὴ 'ypadoe-o βασιλευσ των Ἰουδαιων.- 


σ 
αλλα oTt exeiwoo εἰπενοβασυλοὺυ εἰμι τῶν Ἰονδαιων᾽ 


8 


Awexpi8n o πειλατοσἾο γεγραφα-:γεγραφα. 


9 


Ot ovy στρατιωται ore eoTavpwcay Toy we 
eXaBoy ra ειματια avTov*kat ποιῆσαν τεσ τέσσαρα μερη- 
«κασ TO στρατιω τὴ μεροσ. kai τὸν χιτωνα᾽ 
ἣν de o χιτον a ραφοσ.εκ τῶν ανωθεν ὕφαντοσ ὃδι oXov! 
Eurov δα προσ αλληλουσ᾽ pn σχισωμεν αντον- 24 
αλλα λαχωμεν περι avTov τινοσ ἐστιν" 
ἵνα e Ὑραφη πληρωθὴ ἡ λεγονσα. 
(Fol. 5 b secundae mans.) 


423 


[SEC. IOHAN.] 


si hunc dimittis-non es amicus caesaris. 

omnis qui se regem facit contradicit caesari . 

pilatus ergo cum audisset hos sermones 

adduxit foras ihm . et, sedit pro tribunali 

in loco que dicitur lithostrotus 

haebraice autem gabbatha - erat aut parasceue paschae. 
hora quasi sexta. et dicit iudaeis. 

ecce rex uester . illi aut.clamabant. 
tolle-tolle-crucifige eum-dizit eis pilatus. 

regem urm crucifigam - responderunt 

pontifices-non habemus regem nisi caesarem. 

tune ergo tradidit eis illum ut crucifigeretur. 
susceperunt autem ihm-et eduxerunt . et baiulans sibi 
crucem , exiuit in eum qui dicitur caluarie locum. 
haebraice golgotha-ubi eum crucifixerunt 

et cum eo alios duos. hinc et hinc- medium antem 
ihm 

scripsit aut et titulum pilatus-et posuit 

super crucem . erat, aut scriptum-ihs nazarenus. 

rex iudaeorum-huno ergo titulum multi 

legerunt iudaeorum * quia prope ciuitatem erat locus. 
ubi crucifixus est ibs: et erat scriptum . haebraice ihs- 
grece-et latine-dicebant ergo pilato-pontifices' 
iudaeorum : noli scribere rex iudgorum. 

sed quia ipse dixit-rex sum iudaeorum . 


respondit pilatus-quod scripei scripsi- milites ergo cu crucifixissent eum. 


acceperunt uestimenta eius-et fecerunt quartuor partes 
unicuiq * militi partem-et tunicam. 
erat aut tunica inconsutilis- desuper contexta per totum. 
dixerunt ergo adinuicem-non scindamus eam 
sed sorciamur de illa cuius sit. 
ut scriptura impleretur dicens 

(Fol. 6 a secundae manüs. ) 


Cap. XIX. 12—24. 


" 


e 


id 


^" 


»“ 


424 : 


[KAT. IOAN.] 


XIX. 
AieuepicarTo Ta ιματια μον €eavTOLG . kGL ἐπι TOV inaTicur 
pov εβαλον kXnpoy' Οἱ μεν ouv στρατιωται.ταῦὅτα eroincay’ 
ἵστηκεισαν δε παρα Tw σταυρω TOV ιν ἢ μητὴρ avTov. 25 
και adedon TNO μητροσ αντου᾿ μαρια ἢ του κλωπα. 
και μαρια ἡ μαγδαληνὴη "Ia OVV εἴδων τὴν μητέρα 20 
Kat roy μαθητὴν παρεστῶτα ov ἡγαπα. 
λεγει TH μητρι avTov" 
γυναι ede o. ὕιοσ σον 
evra λέγει ro μαθητη ἴδον ἡ μητὴρ ove 
και ar exeivno THO opac.eXaflev αὐτὴν 
o pabntrns eic τα ἴδια. 
Mera Tovro eidoc 010 28 
ori δὴν Tarra τετελειωται. 
iva πληρωθη ἡ γραφηλεγειδιψω 
σκανοσ ouv ἀκειτο οζονσ μεστονἾἢ 29 
οἱ δα πλησαντεσ σπογγον οξουσ 
καὶ ὕσσωπω περιθεντασ. 
“ροσηνεγκαν avrov Tw στοματι᾿ 
Ore ov» eAaflev το oEoc 0 to evxey! τετελειωται᾽ Kat κλινασ 30 
τὴν kepadny- wapedwKeyv To arva" Ot ov» Ἰουδαιοι- 31 
iva un utyrT ert Tov στου τα σωματα εν To σαββατω. 
ere wapacKevieny yap peyaAn ἡ ἥμερα Tov σαββατον exetvou ' 
ηρωτησαν Tov πειλατον iva κατεαγωσιν avTwy ra σκελη. 
και aproow’ Ἦλθον ovy ot orpariorat-xat Tov hey MpwTou 32 
κατεαξαν τα akeXsj*xat Tov αλλου Tov συνσταυρωθεντοσ 
avTw' ἐπι da TOV ἵν eABorrea. wo ἴδον avTov nén τεθνικοτα. 93 
ov κατεαξαν avrov τα σκόλη Ἶ adda eic των στρατιωτῶν 84 
oy xn avrov τὴν wrevpay evvEev. kat ενθεωσ εξηλθεν 
ata και ὕδωρ᾽ και o eopakwo pe uaprvuprkev-ka. αληθινη 35 
avTov ἐστιν ἡ uaprvpia' κακεινοσ oidey ort αληθη Aeyi. 
ἵνα kat ὕμεισ πισταυσηται᾽ ἐγένετο yap ταυτα-ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ 36 
πληρωθηἌστουν ov συντριβησεται avrov* kavmaAiw. erepa 97 
ypadon λεγειοψονται elo ov e~exevTrncay’p υτ 


(Fol 6 b secundae mans.) 


APPENDIX. 


[SEC- IOHAN |] 


Partiti sunt nestimenta mea sibi et in uestem 

meam miserunt sortem .et milites quidem haec fecerunt 
stabant autem iuxta crucem ihu-mater eius 

et soror matris eius maria cleope- 

et maria magdalene-cum vidisset ergo ihs matrem. 

et discipulum quem diligebat. 

dicit matri suae. 

mulier-ecce filius tuus. 

deinde dicit discipulo-ecce mater tua. 

et ex illa hora accepit eam 

discipulus in sua, 

Postea sciens ihs 

quia iam omnia consummata sunt 

ut consummaretur scriptura. dixit.sitio. 

uas ergo positum erat-aceto plenum. 

illi aut.spongiam plenam acaeto 

hysopo circeumponentes 

optulerunt ori eius 

Cum ergo accepisset ihs acetum dixit. consummatum est-et inclinato 
capite-tradidit spm . Iudaei ergo 

qm parasceue erat-ut non remanerent in cruce corpora sabbato. 
erat enim magnus dies ille sabbati * 

rogauerunt pilatam-ut frangerentur eorum crura 

et tollerentur . uenerunt ergo milites. et primi quidem 
fregerunt crura. et alterius qui crucifixus est cum eo. 

ad ihm aut cum uenissent-ut uiderunt eum iam mortuum. 
non fregerunt eius crura sed unus militum 

lancea latus eius aperuit. et continuo exiuit 

sanguis et aqua-et qui uidit testimonium perhibuit et nerum est 
eius testimonium . et ille scit quia uera dicit. 

ut et uos credatis-facta sunt enim haec-ut scriptura 
impleretur. 0s-non comminuetis ex eo. et iterum alia 
scriptura dicit. uidebunt.-in quem transfixerunt- 


(Fol. 7 a secundae manüs.) 


Car. XIX. 24—J37. 


APPENDIX. 


[KAT. IQAN |] 
XIX 
Mera δε ravra* npwryce Tov πιλατον iwond αποαριμαθεασ- 38 
ων μαθητησ τον we κακρυμμενοσ de 
δια ov ofloy των Ἰουδαιων- 
ἵνα apn, τὸ copa του i? 
και emerpeyer o πιλατοσ᾽ 
HA86v ovry-xat npev o cwpa Tov iv? 
HA8ev de και νιδημοσ. . 39 
o ελθων προσ ov ἐν γυκτοσ TO πρῶτον 
φέρων μιγμα Yuvpyno και adone 
wo λιτρασ εκατον᾽ 
Ελαβον ovv o copa TOV we 40 
xat eóncay avro ev οθονιοισ 
pera τῶν αρωματῶν 
καθωσ εθοσ στιν ἴουδαισ ανταφιαΐζειν" 
Hy δα ev Too oov ἀσταυρωθὴη xn. κηποσ- 41 
kat ey TW kyro μνήμιον κανον» 
e» c 
ovóeTw ovdio 
erc0n* 
exet ovy 42 
δια 
τὴν παρασκενὴν 
των Ἰουδαιων- 
οτι eyyue nv 
TO μνημιον- 
eÜnka» Tov uw 
+H δε uia τῶν σαββατων- XX.1 
μαρια ἡ μαγδαληνὴη 
epxere 
T pe 
oxo 
τιασ 


(Fol. 7 b secundae manis.) 


Carr. XIX 


[SEC. IOHAN] 


post haeo aut-rogauit pilatum joseph ab arimathia. 


eo quod esset discipulus ihu-occultus autem. 
propter metum iudeorum. 
ut tolleret corpus ihu: 
et permisit pilatus- 
uenit ergo-et tulit corpus iha 
uenit aut et nicodemus 
qui uenerat ad ihm nocte primum. 
ferens mixturam murrae et aloes: 
quasi libras centum 
acceperunt ergo corpus iba 
et ligauerunt illud linteis 
cum aromatibus 
sicut mos iudgis est sepelire 
erat aut in loco ubi crucifixus est ortus 
et in orto monumentum nouum. 
in quo 
nondum quisquam 
positus erat. 
Ibi ergo 
propter 
parasceuen 
indeorum 
quia iuxta erat 
monumentum 
posuerunt ibm. 
una aut sabbati 
maria magdalenae 
uenit 
mane cum adhuc tenebre essent. 
(Fol. 8 a secundae mans.) 


. 98—X X. 1. 


425 


426 


[KAT. IQAN.] 


eTt OVENS εἰσ TO uynpiov-kat Brera 
τον λιθον np'uevov ex Tov μνημιον᾽" 
TpeXxet ovy και EpXeTat 
προσ σιμωνα TeTpoy-Kat προσ Toy αλλον 
μαθητὴν ον αφιλι 0 (8- kai λεγει αντοισ᾽ 
npay TOV Kv ek τὸν μνημιου"» 
και ovk οιἰδαμεν που εθηκαν avrov’ 
Ἐξηλθον ovy o werpoo και αλλοσ μαθητησ. 
και epyxoy τὸ εἰσ τὸ μνημιον᾽ ᾿ 
ἔτρεχον δα ot δυο ομον 
" και οαλλοσ μαθητησ προ eüpauer ταχιον του ποτρον- 
καὶ qAOev πρωτοσ εἰσ τὸ μνημιον᾽ἢ 
και παρακνψασοβλεπει κιμενα τα οθονια"- 
ov μεντοι εἰσ ηλθεν 
Epxerat ovy σιμὼν πστροσ ἀκολουθῶν αντω. 
και εἰσῆλθεν εἰσ To μνημιον». 
και θεωρει ra οθονια xipeva. 
^ και To σονδαριον o ny ext Tne Kehadno avrov. 
ov uera τῶν οθονιων κιμανον. 
ἄλλα χωρισ evrervAvypevor ew eva τοπονἢ 
Tore ovv οἰσηλθεν o αλλοσ μαθητησ. 
o ἤλθων πρωτοσ 7 ro μνημιον ἢ 
^ και ἴδεν και ovk σπιστανσεν᾽ Ονδεπὼ yap 
edicay τὴν Ypadny-wri δι avTov 
ex νεκρῶν αναστηναι᾽ Απηλθον ovy παλιν 
“ροσ eavrove ot μαθηται᾿ Mapia δα εἰστηκει. 
" “προσ τὸ pynpio κλαιονσα eto 
wo OV €KAei*ey 2rapexvilrer eto To μνημιον᾽ 
xat θεωρι dvo ayyedouc-eva ?rpoc τὴ κεφαλη 
και ενα προσ Toe ποδινοοπου εκΚεαιτο 
το σῶμα TOV iV. 


και Aeyoucty avr) 6K6LVoL."yuvat Tt κλαιεισἦ 


(Fol. 8 b secundae man(s.) 


Cap. XX. 1—13. 


APPENDIX. 


XX. 


10 


12 


13 


[Late supra p. 154.] 


APPENDIX. 


8. MARCI XVI. 6 


[GaArcE supra p. 325.] 


10 


l1 


12 


13 


14 


15 


Inter fol 347 b et 415 a haec leguntur: 


crucifixam-surrexit-non est hic. 

ecce locus-ubi posuerunt eum. 

sed ite dicite 

discipulis eius et petro 

quia praecedit uos in galileam. 

ibi eum uidebitis-sicut dixit uobis. 

at ille exeuntes-fagerunt de monumento. 
inuaserat enim eas tremor et pauor. 
et nemini quicquam dixerunt. 
timebant enim: 

surgens aut mane prima sabbati * 
apparuit primo mariae magdalenae- 
de qua eiecerat septem demonia. 

illa uadens nunciauit: 

his qui cum eo fuerant: 

lugentibus et flentibus. 

et illi audientes quia uiueret 

et uisus esset ab ea. non crediderunt. 
post haec autem 

duobus ex eis ambulantibus 

ostensus est in alia effigie 

euntibus in uillam. 

et illi euntes 

nuntiauerunt caeteris 

nec illis crediderunt 

nouissime recumbentibus 

illis undecim apparuit : et exprobrauit 
incredulitatem illorum et duritiam cordis 
quia his qui uiderant eum 
resurrexisse non crediderunt. 

et dixit eis. 

euntes in mundum uniuersum. 
praedicate euangelium 


(Fol. 9 a secundae manis.) 


CAP. XVI. 6—15. 


427 


428 


APPENDIX. 


8. Mango: XVI. 


xaen τη xricei! Ort o πισταυσασ 16 


και Bawricbec-cw8noeras® 


o δα απιστησασικατακριθησοταιἶ 


σημια δε eic πιστευσασειν». 
TavTa παρακολουθησεοιἶ 
Ev τω ονοματι μου-δαιμονια 


ἐκβαλλουσι᾽ γλωσσεισ Aadn 


σωσιν καινεισοοφεισ apovaiy" 


xav θανασειμον τι ποιωσιν. 


ov μη avrove Bian’ 


17 


18 


ev appworove χειρασ exiÜucovcew. 


kat καλωσ εξουσιν᾽ 


a, 
O uer ovv xo pera τὸ 


" λαλῆησει avroc-avednupen 


εἰσ roy ovpavor-xai exaÜ.cev 
— 
«v δεξίιων ov Ov’ 
Ἑκεινοι de εξελθοντεσ. 
exnputay wayraxou’ 
—, 
TOV KV συναργουντοσ. 


και Tov λογον βεβαιουντοσ. 


19 


δια τῶν «τακολονθουν των σημιων-. 


αμην 
εναγγέάλιον kara μαρκαν 
ereXecOn’ 


apxerat πραξισ αποστολωνἾ 


omni creaturae ' qui crediderit 
et baptizatus fuerit . saluus erit 
qui aut n crediderit .cdemnabi- 
signa aut eos qui crediderint. 
haec sequentur ' 
In nomine meo. daemonia 
eicient ' linguis loquentur 
nouis-serpentes tollent * 
et si mortiferu quid biberiut . 
non eis nocebit ' 
Super egrotos manus imponent. 
et bene habebunt " 
Et dns quidem postqua. 
locutus e eis. assumptus e. 
in caelum-et sedit 
a dextris di" 
Illi aut profecti- 
praedicauerunt ubiq;: 
dno cooperante: 
et sermonem cfirmante 
sequentib’ signis". 
amen’ 
EuAngelium scd marca 
Explicit ' 


Incipiunt actus aplorum ' 


(Fol. 95 secundae maniis.) 


Car. XVI. 15-90. 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS 


IN QUIBUS OMNES VETERUM OORREOTORUM SCRIPTURAE RECENSENTUR, ET DE LOCIS EXPLICATUR NOTATU DIGNIS. 


N.B. Correctiones in textu nostro interlineares, de quibus hic siletur, primae manüs sive ipsius scribae esse 
judicamus. Quae in Codice, sub primae mants (p. m.] textu, elota potiüs quam erasa, altiüs scrutantibus subinde 
apparent, ea per clot. diligenter notamus: e.g. Fol. 330 G,l 3 "super eum elot. sub ad eum sa p. m." 

De posteriorum correctionibus, qnos A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, L, M nominamus, satis am in Prole- 
gomenis nostris dictum est, s. m. [i. e. secundae mantis] incerti cujusdam neque antiquissimi scriptoris lectiones indicat. 


Fol. 3 a. Prorsus evanuit atramen- | 1.12 supra o prim. in ovro; 9 b. 1. 10 


ium. 

3 ὃ. 1. 18 legas ior non viap p. m.; 
aurno partim elotum 8. m. l 33 re- 
scripsit K. 

4G. l 4 b pro v in -vis, seu potius 
-us G. Ls bprouin-uitG. Li 
8 supra t in -bit G. 1. 23 i supra e in 
-des G. 

46.1. 14 a pro e prim. in ἐπαγγειλα- 
ται Β. 1. 16 τεσ post akovcar addit C. 

5a. 1 8 a in-tae et obelo et puncto no- 
tat s. m. l. 23 nt οἷοί. sub m $n 
puerum p. m. 

5 5.1. 17 ἢ pro e prim., etiam e supra 
at eras. in βεθλεαιμ B. l 19 ov pro 
ea tn διετειασ B. l 22 0 insertum 
ante ἡρεμιου B. 

6 a. l. 5 & supra ue in querere G. 
l. 8 m ad nocte adpendit G. 
supra e in -des G. 
consulari K. 

65.1.2 τ in τὴν secund. mutat in Ὕ 
8. m. l. 6 oB supra on in εφηθη C. 
l. 22 fin. » post bepuarew addit K. 

8a. 1. 3 i supra e tn -tes G. 

b pro u in -gauit G. ll. 27, 29, 30 
initio, deficit pergamena. l. 30 est per 
^^^ supra positum abrogat G. 

8 b. 1.2 em pro ew B. l. 8 marg. 
us: sectionis Ammonianae vix tandem 
legitur. l. 19 "*ov pro Ou prim. habet 
A: forsan gutem rectits Kipling. qui 
cov non OvOv p. m. legisse putat. 1. 26 
.. supra o (articul) s. m.; sic etiam 


l.10 i 
l.270prouin 


1. 18 


supra o prim. in opto. 

ga. 1. 25 b pro v tn -tavis seu potius 
-tauis G. 

95.1. 15 o in -«λαιασ, 1.17 » in μεγαν 
partim erasa. l. 18 x supra lineam 
ante exea Β. 1.27 » supra σ tn -βλη- 
στροσ B. 

IO a. |. 8 in per. . supra pontum abro- 
gat G. 1.9 ἃ supra b (obelo delet.) in -bit 
G. L irt supra ph, 1. 14 h supra ta G. 

10 5.1. 27 rw supra lineam ante xn C. 
ll. 31—33 partim rescripsit K. 

I1 a. l. 27 — supra spa ponit G. 

11 ὃ. 1. 14 fin. -rac pro -των D. 
c ad ada appendit H. 

I2 d. 1 7 — supra a in iustitia G. 
l. 10 t supra n in dixerin G. l 12i 
supra e in -ces G. l 171 primum tn 
sall obelo delet G. 

12 b. 1l. 5 αν supra lineam post Oc C ; 
sic etiam C (nts mavis F) τω post τουτων 
ad fin. lin. 1. 12 legas υμειν sine puncto 
p.m.;iproainopyat- D. 1.35 win 
προσφερεισ erasum 8. m. 1.26 fin. ewe 
post raxv addit A non prima manus, ut 
olim judicavimus. Cf, Tabul. m1. 2. 
l. 28 -σει per puncta supra posita abro- 
gats.m. 1.30 fin. eeras.s.m. Sed 
confer Prolegom. p. Iv. not. 1. 

13a. 1.12 isupra e inomnesG. 1.24 
e supra i erasum tn -ari G. L 31 nim 
exiens et obelo et puncto notat s. m. 1. 32 
u supra b (obelo delet.), et * supra r ultim. 
G, cut forsan dandum est^ sequens. 


]. r$ 


13 ὃ. 1. 28 you supra ew B, etiam 
loco ew erasi D. 

14a. 1. 1 i supra 6 in omnes G. 1. 16 
Jin. " facit eam moechari addit G. 1. 31 
est * est pro etiam etiam G. 

14 b. 1. 11 dele — supra :. 
ac pro ew in ὕμειν B. 
pro ev ovparouw forsan B. 

15a. 1. 8e passum supra ium Οὐ, unum 
etiam per ' '' supra posita abrogato. 1. 10 
t in dat et obelo et puncto notat G. 1. 20 
i supra lineam post fili G. 

15 5. 1. 24 ὦ supra o in avro» C. 1.30 
a pro o tn BAarro- D. 

16 a. 1. 5 it tn facitis εἰ punctis et 
obelis notat ἃ. — 1. 14 x supra 8 in des- 
tera G. 1. 16 us supra τ (obelo notatum) 
in tur G. 1, 26 n supra es in cludes G. 

16 b. Foedatur chemicis haec pagina: 
sic etiam 26, 385, 326, ἄο. 1. 7 fin. 
wo addit A. cf. 125. 1.26. 1. 15 yap 
supra lineam post €ay B. 1. 28 τω supra 
lineam post e» C. xpupaw pro xpugia A. 
l. 31 ov et » in αφανιζουσιν erasit 8. m., 
σ (C) in e (€) mutato. l. 32 & supra 
lineam post κλεπται B. 1. 33 ove ante 
ev erasum 8. m. (legas θησαυρουσουσ ev). 

25 a. 1. 2 e supra is (obelo notatum) in 
maris G. 


l. τό 
l. 31 0 ουρανιοσ 


25 b. 1. 28 a» supra vex C. 

26a.etb. Summa hujus folii pars αὖ. 
scissa est: quae restant 1. 1 a. et b. dedi- 
mus. 

26 b. 1. 23 ew supra líneam ante rn- 
pourra C. 


430 


47 a. ll 11, 14 e supra a (obelo nota- 
tum) in jaj- G. 11]. 16, 19 u supra b 
(obelo notatum) in nob G. l. 21 t pro 
l. 23 8 in utrisque 
l. 38 


c in mittunc G. 
et obelo et puncto notatum s. m. 
e supra lineam forsan 8. m. 

27 b. 1. 10 » in avrov in v mutat D. 

28 a.1 . 4u supra b ín -bit G. 1. 21 
credimus supra etiam improbat per 
'"'*G. 11. 8 er supra lineam inter | 
εἰ unt G. 

28 b. 1l. 1 rw supra lineam post εν C. 
1. 8 σ in ecxvdpevos supra a! eras. scrip- 
sit p. m., vel forsan potius A. l9p 
prim. in pep per punctum abrogat K. 
1. 12 Tov κυ pro ro» xy D. l. 16 litera 
(ω 1) elot. sub a secund. $n avra p. m. cf. 
1.8. 1. 31 avin capaptravoy eras. 8. m. 
l. 33 ἴσρ- pro ewp- 8. m. 

40 a. l 7 rasura incidit post au in 


autem. l. 32 u supra b (obelo nota- 
tum) G. 

29 ὃ. 1. 9 0 mutat nr H. l. 19 ἡ 
supra lineam. post μηγε B. l. 27 e» 


mutat in ev τη H. 

30 6.1. 13 * post δια p. m. casu scrip- 
tum videtur, 

31 a. 1. 6 s secund. in uestris obelo 
notat. G. L 10 i supra lineam post 
fii G. 

31 5. 1. 3 awoxrwac supra σφαξαι D. 
l6 roveras. s. m. 1. 14 fin. avro p. m. 
sed. rescriptum, me judice, negante Wet- 
&tenio. l 21 y» supra lineam post 
eur D. l. 22 x pro x in δικ- D. 

2 a. ]. 4 forsan c pro g in magis p. m., 
corrigente A. 1.25 i supra e (obelo 
notatum) in -nes G. 

32 b. IL τ, 7 lacera est pergamena. 
l 14 epx- pro epyas- B. l. 17 $ pro 
b in rub K. l. 27 e» supra lineam 
ante μαλακοισ B. 

332a.1.5 ἃ supra ue tn que α. 1.17 
8 prim. tn audistis εἰ obelo et puncto delet 
un m. l.25hante arundinem in margine 
scribit Q. 1. ay n in regnum eras. s. m. 

330. L 5 Tow et των eras. s.m. : sic o 


prim. 1. 9. l. 9 δε supra lineam post 
aro A, l. 31 « supra lineam inter a 
et wv À. 


34 a. l. 12 e supra i in omnis G. 
l. 31 ae supra i (obelo notatum) in facti 
G. 


ADNOTATIONE8  EDITOBIS. 


34 Ὁ. IL 5, 13 » in ny eras. 8. m.: sic | (ἃ obelo notat.) G. 


n prim. 1. 7, et eoras Ἰ. 25. l. 32 row 
supra lineam post ino C. 

35 a. 1. 18 uo pro bu (b obelo notat.) G. 
ll 24—27 partim deficit. pergamena. 
l. 24 b pro u in lau G. 

35 5.1. a e supra lineam ante ἰδοντεσ 
B. l 27 c supra lineam post τι H. 
l. 31 Tov eras, 8. m. 

36 a. 1. 1 au supra b (obelo notatum) 


in bellere G. l. 8 u supra b (obelo 
notatum) in -bit G. 1, 28 u supra b, 
m supra t in obet G. 


36 b. Chemicis foedatur haec pagina. 
l.2 ἡ sub ὕ, v &ub ev prim. elot. omnia 
p.m. l.9 7c eras. s. m. ; sic etiam um 
L 19, F1. 20, ore 1,25. 1. 18 κατεαξεν 
pro κατιαξεισ, addito etiam in marg. xa- 
Aap... συντετριμ nuevo post avrov l. 17 F. 
ll. 26—28 lacera est pergamena, hoc loco. 
l 3r α pro e in -povre D. l. 33 a0 
supra rn in στησεται C. 

37 a. 1. 2 u supra b (obelo notatum) in 
salbaG. — 11. 7, 22 ἃ pro b (obelo no- 
tatum) tn -bit G. l 17 fin. in marg. 
"harundinem quassatam addá G. 1.18 
t supra 8 (obelo notatum) tn confringes G. 
l. 23 a in ita perüt omnino in lacund. 
l. 33 b pro u in stauit G. 

37 b. 1. 3 σ᾽ clot. sub X in -ovÀ p. m. 
1. 32 ayaa eraso, o substituit D. 

38 a. 1. 3 c elot. sub i in eic- p. m. 
l. 4 i supra lineam post fili G. 

38 b. 1. 13 avr pro ca D. l. 15 ¢ 
in wowepe (etiam Tov 1. 27) eras. 8. m. 
l 20 ¢ supra e in -era« D. l. 21 ye 
supra av in rno νεασ B, ra supra xax D. 

39 a. 1. 3 uerbum uacuum pro beruum 
uacum G. l. 4 n eupra -det, 1. 12 a 
supra ue in que G. l. 25 b supra u 
in -uit G (c in condemnauit punctato, 
forsan p. m.). 

39 b. 1. 7 avrov eras. 8. m. a supra 
lineam post xewor 1. 8, stem supra e se- 
cund. in eornxecay |. 14 B. 
supra o eras, in ec A. l. 29 4 supra 
ἐσ in ἐστήκει E. 

40 a. l. 1 u supra b (obelo notatum) in 
-ibiG. 11. 12, 15 a supra ue in que G. 

40 b. 1. 24 € supra lineam ante λαλει 


]. 24 » 


B. 
41 a. 1. 3 t supra lineam post -ba, 1. 5 
n supra -ret, |. 7 i supra ru in harunt 


fin. ad audit addit e G. 


l 4 h ἐπ hor et 
puncto et obelo notat G. l 24 ebat 
supra or (sed ebat eras.) B. L 39 i 
supra e (obelo notat.) in -tes, L 30 c eu- 
pra t (obelo notatum) in dit G.  L 30a 
secund. in vadae obelo notat s.m. 1. 33 
g inc mutat G. 

41 ὃ. l. 24 εν supra lineam ante εαντω 
Α. l. 32 σ in πλουτουσ erasit 8. m. 

41 a. 1. 7 b pro u in ueati G. 
l, 27 u supra 
b (obelo notatum) in ber- G. l. 33 u 
supra o (obelo notatum) tn -uos G. 

42 b. 1. 28 xy supra θην B. 
τῶν supra lineam post παντων C. 

43 a. l. 29 periit omnind e in eis. 

43 b. l. 10 » in ἐλαληνσεν eras. s. m. 
l. λό νιοι 8. m. per rasuram pro vto rye 
Bac factum. 

44 α. 1. 4 i supra e (obelo notatum) ἐπ 
habe- G. 1l. 16, 30 b pro u in -auo- G. 
l. 3a isupra e (obelo notatum) in colleg- 
G. 

44 b. 1. 31 A prim. in βαλλουσιν eras. 
8. fh. 

45 a. 1. 18 à supra ue in querenti G. 
l. 20 e supra i prim. tn uindedit, etiam 
i supra e (obelo notatum) G. 

45 δ. 1. 32 e supra a in evap- H. 

46 a. l. 1 intelleximus in marg. (=. 
supra etiam posito) G. l. 19 fin. c 
post hae habet G. 

46 b. 1.12 τὴν supra lineam post wee 


l. r4 


l 33 


B. 
474. 1. 8 u supra b (obelo notatum) ἐπ 
-abit G. 1. 26 ae supra i (obelo nota- 
tum) tn secuti G. 

47 6.1. 16 o supra ὦ ponit A, ὦ in o 
mutat Κ΄. l.27»supra ἡ K. 

48 a. 1l. 14 g pro c tn frac G. l. 16 
ue supra lineam post a tn -carunt, sed 
postea elot. l. at fin. bas post tur 
habet G. 1. 261 in fluct- mutatur p.m., 
Ὁ semi-formato. 

48 b. l. 21 ar: post -cap* addit L. 
(: τελοσ: ut solet, tn margine posito). 
l. 30 o supra o in προερ- C. 

4923.1. 3 r in ergo et puncto et obc!o 
notat a.m. G ponit den supra na L 13, 
& supra -ce 1. 14, m supra -sa 1. 1ς. 
l. 29 ἃ supra b in -bati (obelo notatum) G. 

49 5. 1. 10 obclo notat ἃ in Ba» K. 
l. 12 ac supra ein -care A. 1.22 D? 


pro -wri, etiam pro -wre 1. 24, ot habet: 
«νι et -wre reponit K. 

zo a. 1. 6 pro au tn aut (au eraso) e 
habet G. l. 33 8 £n utrisque et obelo 
et puncto delet s. m. 

50 ὃ. 1. 3 sub κνὴν lineolam ponit K. 
ll. 9, 16 D! pro -wrei habet οι, sed -wrei 


reponit. K. l. 13 fin. ι post. -φημεια 
addit K. l. 14 yw delet s. m. (D), 
reponit K. 


51a. 1.2 (sic etiam 51 b) hiat perga- 
mena. ll. 9, 14 coinquinant in marg. 
(— super communicant posito) G. 1. 20 
u supra y (obelo deletum) G. 

51 b. L 4 va eras. s. m. 

53 a. l. 26 e supra a in jaj- G. 

51 b. 1, 4 και To περισσευον TU» κλασμ 
p. m., sed super rasuram rescriptum. 
Prior lectio (nisi forte Tov fnit. lin.) 


perüt. l. 19” supra $yre, supra oy- 
8. m. (H.1). 1, 20 o pro a in σημιαν 
H. 


53 d. l. 2 autem supra lineam ante 
turbae G. — 1. r1 ut ante signum, 1. 19 
a supra ue t» querit G. 

53 5. 1. 4 fin. w pro -τε K. L 19 
v (postea, eras.) supra lineam post ro A: 
τον ζωντ oc legit H. 

544. l. 19 uiuentis in marg. (—— 
super saluatoris posito) G (alid quam in 
53 ὃ manu). 1l. 23 meus supra lineam 
post pater G. l 25 b pro v in -vo 
(immd potius -uo) G. 

54 δ. 1. 10 ὦ supra o (obelo notatum) 
tn εἰλεοσ B. 

55 a., 55 5. Il. 30, 31 Aiat pergamena. 

55a. ἢ. 13 8 supra ue in que, sunt 
supra hom- G. 

55 b. 1. 6 ror secund. per puncta supra 
posita abrogat s. m. l. 20 c pro ¢ ha- 
bet D. 1. 29 eraparrec D, literd quam 
scripsit p. m. ante rrec omnind delet4. 

56a. 1. 17 ἃ supra b in bis G. 

57 a. 1l. 14d pro t in at, 1. 25 ' supra 
o in hoc G. 

57 b. 1. 1 » supra o eras. in κοκκοσ B. 
l. 7 δ woc p. m., sed o Voc 8.m. 1. 30 
y supra lineam post new B. 

58 α. 1. 2 π supra hic A ut mihi vide- 
tur: forsan p. m. l $ e supra a in 
jaj- G. l. 8 8 ante m obelo notat G. 

— — 
l r5 facit aut prae[stat abscisso] G, 
etiam per (———.) abrogato. 1.17 u 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


supra b (obelo notatum) in bidetur G. 
lat b prou in liueri G. l. 26 n in 
-iens obelo abrogat G. 

58 b. 1. 16 δε erasum 8. m. 

59 5. 1. 13 U pro ἡ tn ἡμων B. 1. 28 

1 f supra ἐστε referunt ad versus in imá 
pagind per G suppletos 

εσται δεδεμμενα ev Tow ουρανοισ 

και οσα a» λυσητε emi Tyo yno b uw b 
l. 31 Tov erasum s. m. 

60 a. 1.3 ἃ supra b (obelo notatum) in 
salb-, l. 4 n supra -ri in fuerit G. 1. 19 
8 tn lucrast- obelo notat 8. m. 1, 28 1 
post terram refert ad versus in imd pagind 
per G suppletos: 

erunt ligata in caelis 

et quaecumque solueritis in terram ᾧ 

60 b. 1. τ in ov yap ew δυο x.T.À. 
mutat D. — 1. 8 fin. xc erasum. 1. 18 
0o supra o0 in awobnva A. 

61 a. 1. 14 m supra lineam post dece 
G. 1.15 be supra -an- et autem supra 


eo G. 1. 18 fin. ere pro i secund. in 
restitui G. l 22 est obelo abrogat 
8. m. 


61 ὃ. 1. 24 ντεσ C supra vow erasum. 
l. 29 » tn θηλὺν eras. s. m. 

62 a.1. 7 m supra lineam post nequa 
G. l. 24 m supra ep in teptantes G. 

62 b. 1. 6 και eras. [deest Latinà]. 

63 a. 1. 8 per tn marg. G, pro di quod 
obelo notatur. 1. 12 causa in marg. 
G, ratione per ~~ notato. 

63 b. 1. 17 v supra lineam post o (ar- 
ticul.) A. 1. 31 a supra lineam ante 
δυνατὸν A. 

64 a. 1. 4 ta supra lineam post manda 
G. l. 16 fin. e in me deest p. m., ad- 
dit G. 

64 b.1. 3 c supra x in «καμεν B. 1.7 
ἢ pros in καθισ- B. l. 9 B supra 
lineam ponit tac ante B: sic etiam a 
post -σιον |. 13, e supra αἱ tn -erai 1. 25. 
l. 29 evSexarnp elot. sub evvarny e p. m. 

65 a. 1. 27 b pro u in dauo, 1. 29 m 
supra n (obelo notatum) tn iden- G. 

65 b. 1. 1 e tn -μεισθ- obelo notat Κ΄. 
l. 26 £e supra eo in ἐστιν K. 

66 a. 1. 16 patrem supra famil, s supra 
m sequens (obelo notatum), 1, 22 ibi supra 
e (obelo notatum) in te G. 

66 b. 1. 19 a0 p. m. me judice (Kipling. 
A, forsan rectius): perit atramentum. 


431 


67 a. 1. το i in accessit mutat. p. m- 


l 20 b pro u bis in uiuit- G. 1, 29 
ges supra lineam post re G. ll. 30, 31 


a supra o (obelo notatum) in eorum G. 
67 b. 1. 7 — supra &xpov forsan A vel 


B: sed 715. 1.0 — sub awxar et + 
in marg. K. 1.25 velot. sub tin ἵνα 
p.m. l 30 .. supra v eras. 8. m. 


l. 31 οιησ elot. sub ισ δε p. m. 

68 a. 1. 14 u supra o (obelo notatum) 
in fond- G, l. 17 & supra ne in caene 
G. l. 21 a in saedentes obelo notavit 
8. m. 

68 b. 1. 2 ε elot. sub in -φαγη p. m. 
l. 8 fin. exes secund. p. m., me judice, sed 
“ super exei prim., ' super xpeuay 8. m. 
[nescio an rectius. Kipling. exe. secund. 
sm. (A), " et’ p. m] 115 -you A 
pro “γιον : restituit » K. 111. 26, 27 ὦ 
pro o4n occara H: sic 69 b. 1. 16. 

69 a. ). 6 u supra b (obelo notatum) in 
solb- G. l. 10 est supra lineam post 
factum G. .1.25a supra ue in que G. 
l. 26 o supra lineam p. m., obelo notat 
8. m. 

69 b. 1. 5 fin. o post yeyparra: addit 
H. 1.19 ow supra ὦ in avro B, tte- 
rum οἷ (ὦ eras.) D. L 33 » ante avi 
eras, 8. m. 

70 a. 1.9 n ante c, h post c, G supra 
lineam. 1.16 o in filio obelo notat 8. m. 
l 19 etiam per^^^^ abrogat s. m. ll. 31, 
33 h in haruit obelo notat s. m. l. 32 
punctum superius post discipuli p. m., 
forsan casu. 

yo b. 1. 7 re οἷοί. sub on in agre p. m. 
l. 17 fin. ον post λογον addit D: cf. 71b. 
L 3t. 

71 a. 1.3 e suprai prim., ]. 10c supra 
d prim. (d obelo notat.), 1. 17 b pro u in 
-auo et u supra b (obelo notatum) in bos, 
l. 25 m supra b (obelo notatum) in -ribus 
G. 

71 b. 1. 1 » supra lineam post ro B. 
l3 uera prim. per puncta supra ponta 
abrogat s. m. l 7 fin. o pro w tn δνω 
8. m. l 31 init. o» pro oA, nist maris D. 

72 8.1. 5 m supra n (obelo notatum) in 
identidem G: sic 73 a. L 1. 

72 ὃ. 1. 25 ἢ supra ὃ eras. in ὕμων B. 

73 a. ll. 9—16, in marg. recens manus 
adscripsit Magi .iii- Caspar " Malchus- 
Patisarca - Latrones cu xpo crucifixi: 


432 


Gemas. dext. Demas, sinist.’ In Nico- 
demi Evangel. (Thilo, Cod. Apocryph. 
N. T., 1832, p. 588) latrones Teords et 
Δημᾶς nominantur; in Actis Nicodemi 
sive Actis Pilati, (Tischendorf. Evan. 
Apocryph. 1853) Γίστασ et Δυσμᾶσ. 

74 G. l. 4 b pro u in parauolis G. 

75 a. 1. 3 qui autem ommutuit e 1. 6, 
eras. potius quam elot. sub et dicit ei p. m. 
l. 4 i’ et supra o (obelo notatum) in hoc (c 
forsan s. m.) G: sic 1. 21 u supra b (obe- 
lo notatum), in bidetur, 1. 23 m supra e 
tn tept-. 

76 a. l. 3 post sem addit en G. 1.39 
dicet per ''''" supra posita abrogat G. 

"6 b. ]. 24 wayra ov» prim. per puncta 
et lineam abrogat K. l. 27 yap per 
. ¥- supra script. abrogat 8. m., forsan G: 
L 28 


esp 


sic super enim 77 a. l. 27. 
a prim. in αδυσβ- eras. s. m. 

77 a. 1.13 d supra p (obelo notatum) in 
ponec G. 

2715.1. 3 τὴν prim. per puncia supra 
posita abrogat K. 1. 29 οἱ supra lineam 
ante λεγοντεσ C vel ἘΠῚ 

78 a. ll. 15, 16 b pro u £n -auitur G: 
stc 1. 32 b pro u in deu-. l 25 h 
in haridam obelo notat s. m. 

48 b. 1. 20 fin. ot post τυφλοι addit A 
vel D. 

79 a. ll. 7, 10, 13 hiat pergamena. 
l. 33 ur in paretur per '" supra positum 
abrogat s. m. 

80 a. 1. 8 h supra cr, et o pro ἃ in 
urnatis G. 

8o b. 1. 3 forsan ἡμῶν p.m., sed ἡ 
perüt omnind: v erasum, cujus vestigia 
jam leguntur, viz primae mands est. 1.7 
lacera est p : vinculo membrana- 
cto tegitur oup, sed " adhuc legitur. 
l. 31 ὦ et c supra o et v erasa in οδυνων B. 

81 a. 1. 3 i supra e prim. in demitte- 
tur G. 

81 b. 1. 1 rur supra lineam post rar» C. 
l 17 ov prim. eras. (? post X posito) A. 
l. 18 o pro w in eorwo H. l. 30 fin. 
gra pro ouo H. 

82 a. 1. 15 eniet finis e 1. 14 elot. sub 
ideritis p. m. l. 32 u supra b (obelo 
notatum) in salb- G. 

83 a. l. 1 e p. m. elot, ante tunc. 

83 5. 1. 19 no supra lineam ante ew- 
ἤλθεν D. 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


84 a. ]. 32 i supra e prim. (obelo no- 
tatum) in demisisset G. 

85a. 1. 3 e tn feidelis et obelo et puncto 
notat & m. l. 6 u supra b (obelo no- 
tatum) in serbus G. 9 

85 b. 1. 1 -εταὶ primd, sed ἐσαι p. m., 
T eloto subo. 1. 8 η elot. sub e secund. 
in ἀρκεσει p. m. 

86 a. 1. 14 n supra et ín dicetes G. 

86 b. 1. 21 a tn eva eras. s. m. 

87 a.1. a7 fin. est * post tuum addit 
G. 1.29 m supra lineam post nequa G. 

88 a. 1. 22 est per ""' supra posita ab- 
rogat G. 

88 ὃ. 1. 29 ere supra lineam ante λεσεν 
K. 1.31: Lad σοδ: refert in marg. 1. 32. 

89 b. 1. 9 wo in Nexpwoou eras. s. m., 
post puncta, supra posita. Cf. 81 b. 1. 17. 
l 35 uaroc prim. eras. 8. m. ll. 33, 
33 primae mants sunt, sed sub verba 

προσ Tove ἀρχιερεισ Kat εἰπεν avrow 

τι θελεται μοι δουναι elota. 

go ὅ. 1. 3 σ in ow eras. 8. m. 
supra pe in ἀποκρεισ K. 

91 a. ll. 1—6; a1 deficit pergamena 
(sic or ὃ. 11, 1—3; 24). 1.9 tsecund, 
tn itte obelo notat G. 

gt 5.1. 6 » (ut videtur) elot. sub ιν in 
adecu p. m. 

92 a. l.3t h supra t in getsamini G. 

91 b. l. 11 avrovc οἷοί, sub rove pa 
p.m. 1, λό c supra lineam post rov C. 

93 a. I. 18 ens supra it (obelo notatum) 
in abiit G. 

93 5. 1. 24 in λεγειωνησ mutat ὦ in o 
anina D. 

94 G. IL 1—4 deficit pergamena (sic 
945.1. ἡ. 17 te in accedentes per 
puncta supra abrogat s. m. l. 9 ic 
supra e in ame G. 

94 5. 1. 18 v pro » in rovro», oc pro a 
in Xeyorra D. l. 23 post ἐεσιωπα ma- 
culatur pergamena. 

95 a. 1. 20 eum secund. per ''' supra 
positum abrogatG. 11.528 tn -deuitis 
in b mutat G. 

95 b. L 31. Dele : in marg. 

975. 1. aw pror in roca K, addd etiam 
cov post roca F, cov l. 3 punctato. 

98 a. 1. 5 e supra i tn praenis G. 

98 b, l. 10 p pro ἃ prim. in φλαγελλ- 
A. 1l 38« supra lineam ante ariya- 
yov B: cf, vers. Lat. 


]. a1 «6 


99 a L 2 ultum supra lineam post 
tum (lineold per e in fieri insertá) G. 
l. 5 m obelo notat, b pro u in -euitis Àabet 
G. l 27 h supra cl, 1. 28 et supra 
lineam ante duxerunt G. 

995.1. 27 cin avroceras. 8. m. 1. 33 
c pro fin ζαφθ- E. 

100 a. Titulus vinculo membranaceo 
legitur. ll. 17, 45 b pro u tm liuer- G. 
l 22 ἃ supra b (obelo notatum), 1. 27 m 
supra n (obelo notatum) in iden-, 1l. 29 8 
supra e tert. in tenebre G. 

100 b. 1. 20 ve supra ed, ἡ in e mutato 
C. l. 24 Xe supra lineam ante -yorres 
B. 1. 30 » supra lineam post papa B. 
l 31 Tov supra $ (per puncta supra 
posita abrogatum) C. 

tor a. 1.8 b pro a in liuerat G. 1.22 
u pro b prim. (obelo notatum) in serb- G. 
1, 23 A (pro a) supra re tn terre G. 

tor b. l. 11 λισασ prim. eras. s. 9, 
punctis priüs supra positis. ll. 13, 3t 
ἢ supra lineam post papa B. l 26 
super φνλακασ (partim eras.) κουστουδιαν 
ponit M. l. 48 ro supra lineam post 
-uca» C. 1.20 super r v φυλακ (η εἰ 
ἡ p.f. prorsus eras.) THe κουστουδιασ 
ponit M. 

102 a. 1.20 b pro ἃ secund. in juue 
G. 11. 20, 28 h supra cr in sepul 
crum G. 

102 b., 103 5., 104 b. partim, abscissac 
sunt sectiones Ammonianae. 

102 b. l. 15 τὴν supra lineam post 
eu C. 

103 a. l. 11 te supra lineam post vide 
G. ll. 15, 26 b pro u $n -deuitis G. 
l. το fin. ibs elot. sub eis p. m. L 28 
ne supra lineam ante -runt G. 

103 b. l. 1 lacera est pergamena (sic 
104G3.1.1—4). 1. 2 supra lineam ante 
a» A: simillimum verd est e p. m. 115 ὃ. 
l. 23. l. 13: ad sect. Ammon. perti- 
net. 

104 a. l. 2 b pro u in nouis G. 

104 b. ll. 1—3 rubro script., initio 


Evangelii. l 1 fin. θν disertissimi : 
sic "o yeyore»* l. 4. 1. 3 α supra lineam 
post & K. l.9 @ pro x in kv A (me 


Judice), qui etiam ἣν per. . abrogat, et v 
ad fin. lineae in o mutat. ibid. e (xt 
videtur) elot. sub ἡ in ἣν p. m. l 20 
κε supra wy in elu», 1. 22 οἱ supra lineam 


ante οὐκ, |. 23 ex supra lineam post οὐδε, 
l. 30 ὕμιν supra lineam post εἰπὸν B. 

113 b. l. 11 $ supra p in νυμιοσ E. 
l. 30 ὃ elot. sub o p. m. (ante δε). 

114 G. l. 3 fin. ueniunt ad eum οἷοί, 
p. m. 

114 5.1. 24 a supra lineam post ov A. 

115 a. ]. 2 xpa? elot. sub ihs p. fm. 

115 b. 1. 6 no in δειψησω per puncta 
supra posita abrogat, deinde eradit 8. m. 
l. 22 o supra lineam ante pa H. 1. 32 
avrov supra lineam ante ev C. 

116 a. 1.1 b pro ἃ in uiuit bis G. 
l. 3 b pro u in dauo (sic legas, non davo) 
G. 

116 b. 1. 20 ν supra lineam post ἡνεγκε 
B. 

117 G. 1. 3 puncta sub ui in -tiauit 
ponit 8. m.: cf. text. Graec. 

117 5. 1. 3 o supra lineam ante ovx 
E (o minutissimo etiam post ovx semi- 
formato) 1, 26 e supra lineam ante 
ορτην A. 

118 a. l. 4 pro ἃ in -auor- secund., 
]. 5 pro u in lauo-, b Aabet G. l. 29 
— sub basiliscus K. 

118 b. ll. 3, 33 € supra lineam ante ἴδ. 
A. l. 4 x eras. sub o secund. in βασι- 
λισκοσ (c p. m. esse videtur). l5a 
elot. sub € in Ke p. m. l. 19 ro supra 
lineam ante wary C. 

119 a. 1, 36 b pro h in helzetha forsan 
p. m. 

119 b. 1, ar 8e supra lineam ante 
ασθεν- A, l. 22 £e supra ev tn evev- 
σεν A. 

120 b. 1. 3 » supra lineam post eXve 
. B: sic etiam 1. 4 » post eXeye, l. 28 την 
ante. (wy. 1. 10 εἰ elot. sub yo in 
ποιησὴ p. m. 

121 ὃ. 1. 20 gu in μου eraso, av. reponit 
A. l. 25 v tn λυχλον in σ mutat B. 

122 a. l. 16 dico prim. per puncta 
supra posita improbat 8. m. l. 20 
ejus supra lincam ante quod A. 

122 b. 1. 4 X supra | in awecralxey 
B. l. 8 apaprarovcat in a μαρτυρου- 
ca. mutat p. m. aro elot. sub vpo p. m. 
l. 21 wy super aa in ὕμασ B. 

123 b. 1l. 14 c in oc obelo notat K. 
l*16 re supra lineam ante ecrw H. 
1. 38 συ.σ... 1 elot. sub Swoexaxo p. m. 

124 G. l. 1 batibi elot. sub debat p. m. 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


IL 26, 27 hiat pergamena (sic 124 b. 
l 27). 

I24 b. IL 10, 28 e supra lineam ante 
w H. 1, 27 av tn avrov eras. 8. m., 
eliam per puncta supra posita antea 
abrogatum. 

125 a. l. 6 te supra m in aum K. 

125 ὦ. l. 17 ya supra po in ἐρσωμεθα 
B. l 22 e secund. in εἰπεν mutat B 
l. 26 ἐστιν prim. erasit 8. m.: 
per puncta supra posita etiam antea abro- 
gatum. 

126 a. 1. 6 u pro o in hoc A: forsan 
p. m. l. 17 bi supra e in -emur G: 
sed bi rursus deletum, 

126 b. 1. a — sub wo in διδωσ K. 1. 20 
jin. » post eavró K: sic 128 b. 1. I4 fin. 

127 b. 1. 15 και eras. 8. m.: eay supra 
ria C. l. τό init. και p. m. rescript. 
super rasuram. 

128 a. 1. 17 fin. t erasum: etiam antea 
et obelo et puncto notatum. — sub viue- 
ritis 1. 28, uibet 1l. 3t K, lineis similibus 
etiam in margine positis. 

128 b. 1. 11 vo elot. sub ov ultim. p. m. 
l. 25 fin. x addit B post ἐστιν. 

129 a. 1. 7 ἃ in aeo eras. 8. m. 

129 b. 1. 6 s Latine elot. sub o in σε 
p. m. l. 22 o supra lineam post avro 
H. l. 24 init. ov pro οἱ prim. B. 

130 b. 1. 3 ὁ supra oc in avroc A, me 
judice. 

132 0.1. 23 ro supra lineam post a 
B, qui etiam v pro ¢ in avrow habet. 
l. 29 o pro a in ἐλεγαν B. 

134 a. l. 3 m secund. in manums par- 
tim eras. 1. 24 — eub ihs autem est Καὶ 
notantis: sic etiam 133 b. 1. 24; 153 b. 
l 10; passim, in marg. — l. 29 muliere 
per puncta supra posita abrogat 8. m. 

134 b. 1. 28 ὃ secund. super rasuram 
rescript. p. m. 

135 a. l. 3 8 in inclinatus per puncta 
supra posita abrogat s. m. l. 27 ein 
et obelo notat s. m. 

135 6. l. 1 ν eras. sub © in -πων p. m. 
l 12 τῇ supra o in ζησετε E. lL 15 
o pro a in edeyay K. Ibid. e supra 
a in avrov A. l 30 vro supra v in 
τον E, sed ro» supra κοσ D ut videtur. 

136 b. 1. 36 wi supra eu tn euew B. 
l]l 27 e supra lineam ante wpaxa A: 
forsan p. m., eed periit atramentum. 


1n o. 


433 


137 b. 1. 2 a supra ev (eras.) A: re- 
ponit e» H.. 1. 3 — sub εἰ in erre K. 
l. 6 ovy pro ovx, et ne" (sic) pro Onper B : 
reponit οὐκ et θημεν H, θ΄ eraso. — 1.9 
jin. a, pro ον (eras.) B: reponit ον H, qui 
a obelo tranaftxit. l. 11 AGA pro αληθ 
habet B. l 17 εν elot. eub 9x in -9xev 
p.m. 1.29 αἱ supra e ultim. in are- 
μαζετε B. 

138 a. 1. 2 t in audiuit partim eras. 

138 b. l. 5 λεγ elot. sub συλ p. m. 
L 8 o pro a secund. in aweOavay K. 
l. 18 e supra lineam ante ἴδη A. 

140 a. l. 37 & in aeum obelo notat 
8. m. 

140 b. 1. 15 θη secund. erasum: sic ¢ 
secund. in iyi L 6. 

I41 b. 1.12 o supra lineam ante ὅσ A. 
l. 16 ec supra lineam ante τιν C. 1. 23 
v pro a in. nSowaro D. 

143 6.1. 13 σκου supra aw in yeow- 
ow E. 1. 30 c secund. in eorw puncto 
abrogat 8. m. 

144 b. 1. 26 ay supra lineam post -θησ 
B. lage supra wo tn Tow A, forsan 
p. m. 

145 a. 1. 12 e tn ego (g etiam in c 
mutato) erasit 8. m. l. 25 s prim. in 
lapidastis et obelo et puncto abrogat s. m. 

145 b. 1. 9 fin. duae literae (forsan 
p.m.) erasae. 1.19 rho secund. erasit 
8. m. 

146 ὁ. 1.1 e supra lineam ante w A. 
l. 9 w pro ἢ in αὐτὴ A. L 13 κε 
(postea erasum) supra lineam ante xot- 
para B! l. 33 o elotum inter x et w. 

147 α. 1. 8 quoniam lumen mundi 
€ l. 7 clot. sub si quis autem ambulat in 
p. m. 

147 5. 1. 14 » pro o secund. in κοσμοσ 
D. l. 32 ov supra ὃ et a pro o post 
à C. 

148 a. 1. 28 n supra es in uides D1 
ἃ in caecidit obelo notat s. m. 

148 b. 1. 3 ai elot. sub e in xe p. m. 


l. 4 fin. o post πω addit B. 1. $ avru» 


pro ων habet B. l. 8 σ elot. p. m. 
ante ino. l. 27 e supra lineam post 


wept B, me judice. 

149 b. L 8 xaipac A: post x scripsit 
$ó p.m. ]. 30 € supra lineam ante 
oprny B. l. 32 w supra οἱ tn ya E. 
l. 33 o supra lineam post orw E. 

55 


434 


150 b. 1. 8 » supra lineam post ηλειψε 
|. BR. L 32 eopray post ew τὴν eras. 
(orn et tantum non v perierunt). 

151 a. l. 4 i supra lineam ante bi K. 
l. 31 stera super rasuram rescriptum. 

151 5.1. 3 w pro o in οσσανα A. 

152 b. 1. 2 w elot. sub o in πεσων p. m. 
]. 10 ον (postea erasum) supra x in δια- 
koc À vo supra oc in διακοσ C. 1. a1 
fin. tres literae p. m. erasae post edeyov: 
forsan Sav. 

153 5.1. 19 e supra lineam ante ἴδω- 
ow A. l 20 ewe supra lineam ante 
orpag- D. 

154 G. l. 11 ll elot. sub g in signa 
p.m. l. 13 n elot. sub t in -pleretur 
p. m. 1. 18 oculos eras. sub cor p. m. 

154 5. 1. 5 > post αλλ et wa (a postea 
eras.) supra lineam post αλλ B. 1.22 
w pro o in wapada A. 

156 b. 1, 12 v in πετρουσ eras. 8. m. 
l. 20 o in marg. ante carayac, x prox 
ante Xeyei etiam ov 1. 22 supra lineam 


post ποιησ D. l. 23 w ín εγνω casu 
quodam eras. L 26 ovdac elot. sub yo 
ayo p. m. 


157 a. 1l. a fin. me et obelo et punctis 
supra positis abrogat 8. m. 

157 ὃ. l 1 init. και evo lineold (etiam 
puncto super x posito) antiquá manu de- 
lentur. l 9 AA elot. (obelo etiam 
notata) sub y in ayaxare, quae litera 
p. m. esse videtur. L 14 fin. v» addit 
ad guy D: postea vvv eras. ]. 20 fin. 
t pro v in cov 8. m. 

158 a. ll. 15, 24, 25 Atat pergamena: 
sic 158 b. ll. 24, 25. 

158 b. 1. 5 « supra a in eyrokare B. 
ey. .....[eyvexerre αν teste Kipling.] jam 


eras. ad fin. lineae addidit F, 1, 1a 
supra εἰ in Aew B. l. 77 « supra 
lineam post wae D. l 30 fin. ro, 


ll. 32, 33 » in avrov eras. s. m. 

150 6. 1.1 » eras, in αὐτὸν 8. m. 1, 4 
€ supra tin ἐστιν B. l. r4 a prow 
ett pron in ἐγφωνησω habet At — 1.27 
t supra, ein ὕμεν E: εἰ etiam supra ὦ in 
μενων (v fin. puncto supra posito notat.) 
8. m. B, ut videtur, sed εἰ iterum eras. 

160 b. Chemicie foedatur haec pagina: 
sic 1625 ; 164 b. 1. 4 9 pro a prim. in 
ayarare B. 1.6 V (i. e. μου) supra 
lineam post wap, a etiam in ἡ mutato 


ADNOTATIONES EDITOBRIS. 


E. 1. 18 fin. 7 refert ad calcem pa- 

ginae, ubi scribitur nescio quá manu 

(forsan J) 

V 999 ὕμεισ καθαροι ἐστε διὰ Toy Aoyor 
oy λελαληκα ὕμιν 

payare εν ἐμοι καγὼ ev ὕμιν καθωσ TO 

κλημα ov δυναται καρπὸ 
φεριν 
literis noni ferà saeculi. paululüm ad 
dextram procumbentibus. ηδη view κα- 
θαροι ἐστε eras. sub 1. 19 ad usque ad 
pew p. m. ut videntur: cf. 1. 18. L 21 
yap per puncta supra posita abrogat 
8. m. l. 23 ve super en in enor B. 
l 25 οὐδὲν supra lineam post ποιειν: 
ὕμιν supra εν]. 31 C. 1]. 26 winexAnOy 
eras, 1. 418 κ elot. subw p. m. 1.33 
supra lineam € ante μι & supra v in 
pov B. 

161 a. 1, 11 is in sciatis et obelo et 
punctis supra positis abrogat s. m. 1. 31 
uobis supra lineam post fet, et: 

jam uobis mundi estis propter uerbum 
ad calcem paginae J ut videtur : cf. 160b. 

161 b. l. 1 fin. üpac addit F post 
nyarnoa, ὕμασ post καγω per e, supra 
porta improbato. l τι τι supra 
lineam. post ἵνα D: sic etiam οὐκ ἐστε 
supra τε 1. 28. l. 12 yap, 1. 13 07, 
L 17 oc, l 32 pov per puncta supra 
posta abrogat 8. m. 

162 a. L 4 ta elot. sub d p. m. 

162 b. l. 3 w supra a in ὕμασ B, ew 
et o in Op. per puncta supra posita. abro- 
gatis. ll. 6, 11 o supra a in exar B. 
l 12 supra lineam e ante pe prim., 4 

st με prim. B, «iterum eraso. 1.17 
eot. sub o t^ pe p. m.: TO Trà TC 
GÀ p. m, super rasuram rescriptum. 
1, 26 fin. post eue addit αλλα F, 1. 28 
on supra lineam ante re A. 

I63 a. 1. 6 a elot. sub e, e sub a secund. 
tn habebant p. m. 

163 ὃ. L 20 a» supra lineam post oca 
B. ll. 33, 34 Pro τι ἐστιν rovro F 
habet 

ἔλεγον 
ov» TOVTO TL ἐστι» O λέγει TO μικροί») 
ouk οιδαμεν τι λαλεῖ ee. 

164 b. 1. 2 ore prim. per puncta supra 
posta abrogat a. m. l. 21 ore supra 
lineam ante εαν D. ]. 26 fin. aÀAN 
post ὕμειν addit F: cf. 162 b. 1. 26. 


165 b. 1. 11 νυν supra lincam post και 
D. ll. 12, 27 e supra lineam ante w 
A. L 31 e supra ἡ ἐπ πατὴρ B. 
l. 32 "supra yer, ‘supra toy 5. m. ordi- 
nem mutantis. 

166 a. 1. 6 i in inullum eras. s. m. 
L 17 e elot. super i in qui p. m. 

166 b. 1. 18 e» τω κοσμω supra εγὼ 
ero, e£ 1. 19 ve supra o0 C. IL. 17, 
I8 marg. iva wow καθωσ neo? s. m. 
eras. 

167 a. 1. alelot. sub i in illos p. m. 

167 5.1. 8 c supra vo in πιστευόντων K. 

168 b. ll. 3, 7 p section. Ammon. in 
marg. prorsus abscissum. 

177 ὃ. L 32 wepww supra απὸ C. 

178 a. 1l. 1 ti in quaeritis et olelo εἰ 
punctis supra positis abrogat s. m. 

178 b. 1. à* elot. sub ἡ in -a re p. m. 
l. 23 και o Oo elot. sub μον κα (post xo) 
p. m. 

170 a. ]. 4 i ante xii eras. 8. m. 

179 ὃ. 1. 8 rov prim. in avrovrov 
(punctis antea abrogatum) eras. s. m. 
]. 16 » supra ov, 1. 27 X supra nA B. 

180 a. 1. 15 t elot. sub n in sciebant 
p. m. 
180 b. L 4 p elot. sub e in πετροσ 


p. m. l. 6 ad supra yw in μεγων B. 
l. 33 evo elot. sub axa p. m. l 33 ov 
supra v6 C. 


181 b. 1. 8 av et obelo et punctis supra 
positis abrogat s. m. : postea eras. 

182 a. l. του formatum p. m. sub b 
l. 4 a elot. sub e in diligebat p. m. 

182 b, 183 a. IL 1—3 rubro, snito 
Evangelii, 

182 b. l ro τ $^ τὼν eras. s. m. 
L 11 B tn marg. erae. s. m. Cf. 184 b. 
l.32. 1. 32 € supra lineam ante dum A. 

183 a, 1.11 “ Prior i in hierodis obelo 
notatur" Kipl: parum id cerno, hiantc 
pergamená. 

183 5. L 8 o pro p in μεγαρ B. 

184 a. Turpiter foedatur haec pagina 
punctis manu recentissimá additis: 
l2' supra est antiquioris mands esse 
videtur. 

184 b. L 5 » elot. sub v secund. in 
αὐτου p. m. l 19 » in »» (puncta 
antea, notatum) eras. . m. L 20 7 pro 
3 in ποδαποσ H. l 30 4 supra 
lineam post papa C. 


185 a. l. 10 r? eras. sub p in obpro- 
p. m. 

186 b. Pagina ferà evanida, primd re- 
centiore pigmento, deinde vili atramento, 
pessimà renovatur; p. m. ductus subinde 
vix satis certà. leguntur. l. 2 μεγαλια 
pro μεγαλα p. m. habet tnstaurator. 
l.4 c pro » in yeveay instaurator: idem 
etiam ἢ pro « scribit in βραχι- 1. 6, v ante 
συν ponit 1, 21, o pro a in ἡλθαν» l. 24. 
Prorsus incerta sunt & et ε vel forsan εἰ 
(vinculis inclusa) v. 30: item punctationis 
notae M. 8, 12. 

187 a. 1. 28 hiat pergamena: sic etiam 
187 b. 1. 18. 

188 a. 1. 6 qui eras. 8. m. 
ea? elot. sub et in etenim p. m. 


Ll rr: 


188 b. L 6 ro tn nugfayero eras., v 
etiam, p. m. rescripto. l 20 4 supra 
e (reseriptum) tn eurgor- K: sic ἡ supra 
T prim. in ταυτη 1. 28. L 28 w pro 
a prim. in xapa B vel D. 

189 a. l r9 b pro ἃ fn uethl- K. 
1. 23 8 proi in pariret H, ut videtur. 

189 b. 1. a εἴ elot. sub À in peyadny 
p. m. l. g & supra vo in ovparov B: 
ν supra T prim. eras. in αἰτουντων H. 
l 16 o pro w in γεγονωσ B vel D. 
l. 29 e supra lineam ante ibo» A: € 1. 20, 
et (minds certà) 190 b. 1. 19 p. m., me 
saltem judice. 

190 b. 1. 15 pe prim. in προσδεχομε- 
μενοσ eras, 

I91 α. 1. 1 uo! elot. sub est p. m. 

191 b. 1. 21 τὴν supra lineam ante 
πολιν, punctum supra e iW εαντων, ἢ 
supra e secund, in ερεθη 1. 23 C. 1.24 
Tro tn nutayero eras.: cf. 188 b. 1. 6; 
327 b. L 1; 3298. 1. 3; 441 b. 1. 29; 
470 b. 1. 381 

192 ὃ. 1. 7 pac τρεισ elot. sub θημερασ 
p. m. l 23 fa supra ap in vape0 A. 
1 33 haec linea, scalpro rasa, haud facile 
legitur: confusa sunt omnia: cf. 193 a. 
ll. 32, 33. 

193 a. 1. 4 apostrophus in fine lineae 
casu scriptus, ut cidetur. 

193 b. 1.1 οὐυδαιασ elot, sub rovpaca 
p. m. Ll 3 a secund. in αβιλλιανησ 
eras, 8. m, 

194 G. 1. τό’ supra b m humiliab & m. 
nisi ad p. m. referre malis. 


194 5. 1. 2 apostrophus supra w in | 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


-war p. m. videtur: cf. 193 a. L 4. 
Ll 5 τ elot. sub ὃ in δε p. m. 

195 @ 1. 3 e secund, in habentei per 
obelum et punctum supra pontum abro- 
gat 8. m. l τό i primà scriptum pro 
o secund. 1n populo p. m. 

195 b. l 14 eyerero ante taxwB in- 
trudit recens manus. 

196 a. 1. 13 wong elot. p. m. (nempà 
¢ sub i in ioseph scripto). 

196 5. L 13 ἃ ἐπ ὡβὴηλ in ὃ mutat H. 
l 15 ὃ prim. in salomon eras. 1.23 
a supra ain wax H. Lineolas per pa- 
ginam spargit etiam, recens manus. 

197 a. |. 3 la elot. sub sa in mathusala 
p.n. L 7 c ante ainan H: x p. m. 
prorsus eras. 

197 5. 1. 8 fin. o οἷοί. sub a in γενων- 
τα p.m. 
l 25 Tov prim. in rovrov eras. 8. m. 

198 a. 1. 5 και ovk epayer οὐδεν elot. 
sub et nihil manducauit in p. m. l. 7 
s in illis eras. 8. m. 

198 b. 1. 4 δι supra εὖ in edacxey H. 
l. 6 ὃ in ped improbat eadem manus (H) 
quae post qv addit τεθραμμενοσ, et εισηλ- 
θεν ante xara 1]. 7, e etiam in εἰωθοσ re- 
scripsit: cf. versionem Latinam. — 1l. 10 
va supra ar in ἀπτυξασ C. l. 13 fin. 
κεν supra μαι C. l. 16 pari eras. 
8. m. (punctis supra positis antea, abro- 
gat). l 17 7 supra x in πυξασ C. 

199 b. l. 11 » supra o in ναιμασ B. 
l. 16 ov supra no in tho B. l 29 w 
supra o in ναζορηναι B. l. 33 » supra 
c in ρειψασ B. 

200 a. l. 2 quia nemo elot. sub multae 
ul p. m. Ἰ. 10 h elot. sub e prim. in 
eliseo p. m. 

200 b. 1.1 » elot. sub a tn -yacay p. m. 
]. 31 fin. avr....eras.: forsan avrai 
p. m. 

201 b. l 15 i0e supra -pe B: sed 0 
postea. erasit H, € p. m. tn O mutato. 
l. 18e supra a eras. tn -σομαι B: ¢ etiam 
in v mutato, ft -σομεν ex -σομα. 1.24 
δ supra win wre E. 

202 b. ]. 14 » in ny eras. s. m. 
t supra e in -yker B. — 

203 6. 1. 13 o supra lineam ante 0c A. 
l. 20 yno supra lincam post roo, etiam e 
supra ιν in agua B. l. 27 o supra 
lineam post 0aufov B. 


l. 33 


435 


205 a. 1. 6 s secund. in -loss obelo et 
puncto supra posito improbat s. m. — 11. 26, 
47 (sic etiam 205 b) hiat pergamena. 

205 b. 1. 1. marg. legas pa: l 14, T 
in μετ ad Y. formá proximé accedit. 

206 b. 1. 22 ει prow prim, in δύδυμον 
A, forsan p. m. l. 33 ka prim. eras. 
8. m. 

207 b. l 12 o pro v ante μισθ- H. 
1. 28 € pro ἡ secund. in ernpnas- H. 

209 ὃ. 1. 9 e (x scriptum) in exB- super 
literam quandam (i?) elotam. 1.23A 
proxinxa\e ἢ. 1. 32 e supra lineam 
ante xewn D. 

410 b. 1. 9 © pro τ in Ti et a supra 
1.16 y prim. in 
l 33 To» 


lineam (i.e. waco) B. 
-"yury- super rasuram script. 


| eupra lineam ante owor C. 
l. 16 » supra σ in rye D. | 


211 α. 1. 15 αἵ elot. super c in cui 
p. m. 

2115.1. 33 «supra lineam post exo B. 

212 a. 1. 8 a elot. inter r et ἃ in er at 


p. m. 1, 12 ἃ elot. sub i prim. in iu- 
uenis p. f. l. 28 no elot. sub sit in 
misit p. m. 


212 b. 1. 2 D pro «aa habet. αλμοι 
και a. » supra lineam Bl. 29 supra ι 
ultim. in edixatwoa, 1. 30 supra a» $n 
twayou. 

213 a. 1. 29 s οἷοί. sub m in dm p. m. 

413 b. L Δ row prim. eras. s. m. 
l.6 » supra av in iwarye B. 1.20 τ 
pro 8 in ποδαπὴ H : cf. 184 ὃ. 1. 20. 

214 b. 1. 30 » supra lineam post noa 
B. 

215 a. l. 22 r οἷοί. sub i in intra p. m. 
l. 30 da clot. sub qu in quaedam p. m. 


215 b. 1. 13 e supra lineam ante ix- 
pasa A. 

Διό a. 1. 20 n in essent ef obclo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat 5. m. — 1.28 
erunt elot, sub it diab p. m. 

217 b. 1. 16 cin -δισκετο p. m.: forsan 
v inchoatum primd. — 1. 18 νημειοισ elot, 
sub eio. ew p. m. 1. 19 « supra 
lineam ante εἰπεν B. l. 20 € supra at 
secund. in δαιομαι, 1. 29 a supra γι in 
λεγιων B. l. 22 θα supra ap in axap- 
rw C. 

218 a. 1. 26 n tm -antur et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 

-218 b. 1. 4 or supra πο in aov C, sic 


l 17 ηγα supra λι tn λιων. l. 31 post 


436 


ἀνὴρ p. m. proculdubio rye. συναγω ha- 
bebat (τ v^ yw vestigiis restant), oculo ad 
lineam. sequentem. vagante; yno πεσων 
adhue leguntur: post aynp H rel L cor- 
rexit ὦ oropa, aipoo και ad vers. Latin. 

219 a. l. 1 hiat pergamena: sic 219 b. 
Lt. 1, 24 8 prim. in dismisiti partim 
eras. 8. m., item i ultim. eras. 

219 b. 1. 3 ca supra lineam p. m., me 
judice: pro ov p. m. scriptor primà ov 
vel wy dedisse videtur. L 33 A supra 
xa in καιετε D. 

220a. 1.7 profluuium sanguinis e lined 
sequente elot. sub tunicam ejus p. m.: 
unde fluxit error linearum: cf. Prolego- 
mena. 

220 6.1.23 w supra ov in xaredow P. 
l 9 νι supra lineam post unde E. 1. 12 
c et v in vaca» erasis, yr vel yr supra 
lineam inter a et a ponit K. 1. 33 95in 
-pwing super laesam pergamenam. 

221 α. ll. 21, 42 domum intraueritis | 
ibi manete e lL 19, 20 elot. sub non ac- 
ceperint uos | exeuntes p. m. 

221 ὃ. 1. 13 punctum in medio πὶ casu 
seriptum videtur, ]. 18 vrow post av- 
roo delet s. m. 1, a9 inter v et T ín 
avrove macula (|) casu intercidit : cf. 1. 
13. 

233 a. 1.2 hoc ego elot. sub quo ego 
p. m.: itcm l 9 ses elot. sub seo p. m. 

222 b. 1.11 sub ore p. m. elotum est 
τιδ ut ridetur. l. 23 cea supra or in 
avOpwror, etiam ἡ loco a erasi in κερδη- 
σαι et axoXecat ]. 24 A. 

223 a. L 19 sa elot. sub an p. m. 

223 b. l 17 μὲν supra lineam post 
ποιησω C. l. 28 Τὸ arctatum in lined 
post εἐθεασαν A, o puncta ab L addita 
(..) recipiente. 

224 b. 1. 32 ¢ eupra ex in μεκροτ- B. 

226 b. |. x O eot. partim sub O tuit. 
p. m., partim in marg. l. 14 6v elot. 
sub x in xu p. m. 1. 20 ὃ supra lineam 
ante ay A, δε in textu eraso: πρωτον 
etiam per puncta supra posita abrogato. 
l. 32 τ supra lincam ante ove ΟἿ 

427 5. 1. 5 v pro ἡ in nuew B, 1 17 
U supra ἡ C. l. 19 η tert. (ante ewe) 
eras. 8. m. 

228 b. L 25 ovoua elot. sub νομω p. m.: 
τι supra lineam. A, forsan etiam p. m. 
(cf. vers, Latin.). 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


229 a. 1. 27 1 elot. partim ante g, 
partim sub g p. m. 

229 b. |. 4 ce supra ev in περιεπεν C. 
ll. 8, 10, 12 € supra lineam ante ἰδων A. 
l. 18 x pro x (scalpro eras.) in πανδοκει 
A. 

230 b. 1. 26 o supra a in μεσανυκτιου 
A. 

231 a. l. 9 nos per punda supra posita 
abrogat 8. m. 

232 a. 1.1 e £n eius casu quodam era- 


sum. — l ror? elot. sub 8 in serp- p. m. 

| 2332 b. L 8 v supra lineam post avro 
B. |l 28 4 insertum inter po et 
t B. 


233 a. l. 4 custo rescripsit K. 1l. 20, 
23 posi p. m. ordinem corrigit etiam K : 
cf. Prolegomena. 1 33 in per punctum 
supra positum improbat s. m. 

233 b. l. 17 ἐστι» per puncta supra 
posita improbat a. m. 

234 6.1.17 τα secund, in δυσβακτατα 
eras. s. m, l 19 a post y B!, primae 
man(s lectione prorsus erasd, 

235 b. L 3 era« clot. sub noe p. m. 
1. 8 o pro 0, levi lined erasd, s. m. 

236 a. 1. 16 e ante suffoc- elot. 

238 b. 1. 4 av tn avrov eras. (p. m. 
addit ϑυ). l 11 κ pro y tn avey-, 
l. 14 σ supra e in era K. his i 
pro nin ἡμὼν B: cf. 2275.1 5. 

239 a. 1. 5 hiat pergamena. 

239 b. 1. 7 σ in exewoc p. m., sed pau- 
lulum supra lineam. 

240 b. 1. 2 πατὴρ p. m. rescripsit H, 

2415.1. 3 o pro o in -rao forsan etiam 
p. m. l 22 4 supra απ in συνκα- 
vrovca D. 

242 ὃ. 1. 4 T post $a B, p. m. lectione 
prorsus erasá. 

244 b. 1. 2 € supra lineam ante ιδητε 
A: cf. 229 b. l 27 rov supra lineam 
ante ec xaror D. 

245 a. l. 26 n in incipiens et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 

245 b. 1. 16 v in ov δε et obelo et puncto 
supra, posito abrogat s. m. L 31 fin. 
Geo post yer addit D. 

246 b. 1. 3 ev supra lineam post *yeyov 
A. l 12 win wewecin p mutat A: 
p supra T scribit B. 

247 b. 1. 14 xe supra € in προσδεται 
D? sic etiam 1. 24 » post. ἔλθω et Tov 


post ew supra lineam B. 
post exove: in textu D. 

248 b. L 18 A in λειμοσ tantum non A 
p. m.: notat s. m. 
lineam post εδιδου A. 

349 b. v supra lineam |. 2 post 36e B : 
sic etiam 1. 6 « ante κατεῴ-, l. 12 τὴν 
ante στολήν. 


l 31 fin. » 


l 26 av supra 


aso a. l. 31 ad ille respondens e 1. 32 
elot. sub pater autem eius e 8. m. 

250 b. 1. 6 εἰ p. m., sed rescripsit K. 
l. 20 ὦ pro οι tn eyro B; sic 1. 27 B 
pro ὃ in καδουσ. 

251 b. IL 11, 19 ὦ supra o in μαμονα 
B; sic ro supra lineam post απο 1. 27. 
l. 31 fin. & post avrov addit D, me ju- 
dice: cf. 349 b. 1. 6. 

252 a. 1. 19 s in servire casu puncta- 
tum, m secund. p. m., sed i inceptum 
primà. l 31 d elot. sub t prin. 
p. m. 

2526.1. 2 velot. sub o secund. in πλου- 
σιοσ p.m. — l. 20 fin. o post ὕδατὸ adiit 
A, nec dela ~. 

253 a. L 21 e elot. sub i en refrig- 
p. m. 

253 b. l. 16 wre supra corr in ἐριπτο 
E. l. 20 ewraxta uerarona (e L 31) 
elot. sub peravoncyn adec p. m. L 23 
No in μετανοήσω eras. 8. m. 

254 a. l. 26 c in sicut formd ad g 
proximé acccdit. 

254 b. 1. 19 tn -evéoOe puncta ridentur 
esse p. m., literam e abroganiis: cf. vers. 
Lat. 

255 6. 1.1 o elot. sub x in και p. m. 
l. 15 e supra δι (inter ὃ et ἡ B. L 26 
v supra limeam post εἐξηλθε B. 

256 b. 1. 10 wa supra ey in εγρω B, 
forsan A. l. 15 exe συϊναχθηςο) 
vra, €l. 14 elot. sub eheyer δε και παρα. 
Bod p. m. 

257 b. 1. 17 » supra lineam post erv- 
wre B. l 21 e supra lineam ante 
avro» B. 

258 b. ]. 9 ἡ p. m. in pyrepa rescra- 
sit K. 

259 a. εἰ ὃ, 1, 33 Àiat in foramine per- 
gamena. 

259 b. 1. 7 ra elot. sub Op p. m. in 
εθνεσιν. 1. 27 fin. » post εἰπε addit D. 

a6o a. l 11 i ante nihil et olelo ct 


puncto supra posito abrogat 8. m. 


260 b. 1. 1 ror p. m. rescripsit K. 
l. 18 ἡ pro οἱ in nuvoos, v pro v ín μοι H. 

261 a. 1. 16 hominem elot. sub introi- 
bit p. m. 

261 b. 1. 4 ey in ἐνεπεμψα- et obelo et 
punctis supra positis abrogat s.m. 1. 19 
y supra lineam post «A0e A hic (cf. 
257 b. 1. 17; 262 b. l. 11). 

262 b. 1. 11 » supra lineam post βηθα- 
va B. l. 34 ea» o super rasuram re- 
&cripsit p. m. . 

264 a. l 2 s p. m. elot. inter pi et 
asset. l. 7 eub 8 p. n. in sepaem 
litera, (t?) est elota, a etiam et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 1.8 
e elot. sub t in te p. m. l. 24 quid 
facerent [ei] e 1. 27 elot. sub eum perdere 
eum p. m. ob ebant antecedens, unde 
Jluxit error linearum: cf. Prolegomena. 
1.27 d e 1. 38 init. elot. sub e in et: hic 
locorum error detectus. 

264 b. 1. 16 μι supra av, 1. 24 στ supra 
ει an -weed- B. 

265 a. l 32 ilum secund. abrogat 
8. m., puncto inter | et u posito. 

267 a. l. 31 ua elot. sub ia p. m. 

267 b. 1. 26 o in παντεσ forsan A 
potius quam p. m. : p primd scriptum sed 
eras., non elot. ll. 14—16 trans has 
lineas literae quaedam crassae (ηνφειυει) 
aliend manu imprimuntur potids quam 
scribuntur, 

268 a. 1l. 7 m in dexteram puncto su- 
pra posito abrogat s. m. l27n 
munera dei e 1. 28 elof. sub sti de abund 
p. m. 

268 b. L 25 e supra lineam ante 
to A, 

269 a. 1.2 m im lapidem et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat 8. m.: e 
ctiam in parie- p. m., sed mutatum ti- 
detur. 
p. n. 

269 b. 1. 9 a supra ro in τορὴ B. 
l. 28 αἱ pro ἢ ante e» A. 

270 b. 1. 4 σ elot. sub À in προβαλωσιν 
p.m. 1l 5 909 prim. per puncta supra 
posita abrogats.m. 1. 11 linca trans- 
versa in I' secund. rescripta videtur. 
1, 16 we prim. in ενιῴνιοσ erasit 8. m. 
Ἰ, 25 ¢ super o in ηυλήσετο scripsit A. 
l. 31 » supra vr in epoBovro A rel 
B. 


l. 29 8 clot. sub e in omnes 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


271 5.1. 2 ex per puncta supra posita 
abrogat s. m. l. 22 « supra oc in 
avroc A. 

272 a. l. 6 punctum supra e secund. 
forsan casu, nisi maculam malis: sic 
etiam c in sacellum 274 a. l. 12, a in 
βασιλευσ 279 b. 1. 8. 
marg. et ^ supra em in semini, recentis- 
simá manu, fortasse Bentleii. 

272 b. 1. 4 » elot. sub wo in αντοισ 
p. m. 
l. 29 rac supra lincam ante "18. A? 

474 α. l. 14 d elot. sub t in emet p. m. 


l. 16 qui in 


l. 27 t supra θη in ecOnre A. 


274 6. 1. 2 marg. o errore in sectione 
Ammoniand, l. 9 v clot. sub o in 
]. 23 quid sibi vdit o- ad 


Jin. lin., spatio post ν vacuo, parum scio; 


-μενοσ p. m. 


Kipling. legit ot pro a-, vix satis recto. 
l. 28 o in e£eor- et obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogat 8. m. . 

475 ὃ. 1.3 e et a supra lineam, e ante 
wove, a post ous A; sed 1. 12 o supra 
er in erw B. l. 6 avrov per puncta 
suprà posita abrogat s. m. l. 16 o 
werpw elot. sub pw και ὃ p. m. l. 32 
jin, « in -qre eras. s. m. 

276 a. l. 1 r prim. rescriptum p. m. 
l. 20 d in ad- et obelo et punctis supra 
positis abrogat 8. m. 

276 b. 1. 9 μὲ supra ov in evpoy E. 
|. 31 fin. wy elot. sub ov in γὙεινομενον 
p. m. 

277 ὃ. 1. 6 init. a punctis supra positis 
abrogat a. m. 
ante rov E. 


l. 28 av supra lineam 


278 a. |. 16 s secund. in missi et 
obelo εἰ puncto supra posito abrogat 
8. m. 

278 b. 1. 2 Jin. των post αντων και 


eras, 8. m. l. 33 τ pro 0 in μασθοι 
— . . 
D. l 33: τκα sectionis Ammonianae 


index hic in textu ab 1, insertus, post 


ω-ς 
sectionem, rx legendus est: sub e£ αρισ- 


τερων ad “calcem paginae (rx in mar- 
. . — . ἈΞ 
gine posito: rxB ad 279 b. 1. 2 ablegato) 
—, 
habet idem L 
— — 
TK 0 de to eXeyer πατιρ 
ager αὐυτοισ ov yap ot 
δασιν τη ποιουσιν 
cf. a»vayvocua εἰσ τιν παρασκευγην: 
279 b. l. 14 marg. et Prolegomena. 
279 a. l 33 litera crasa sub ὃ in 
autem p. m. 


437 


279 b. 1. 14 $ elot. sub Bp. πι. 1.24 
we supra ev in ἐπλησοντι D. Cf. Tabu- 
lam 111. 4. l 31 εἰ pro ἢ tn παρα- 
τίθημι D. 

280 a. Sub titulum scripst G, wut 
videtur, p p daa quo [sic]. 

280 b. l. r4 εἰ supra ἡ in vpato E. 
l. 28 e supra a in -σαν A. 

281 a. ]. 17 eius elot. sub ihu p. m. 

281 b. l. 1 a et υψεν elot. sub v et 
‘ETO p. m. l 21 av in avrove et 
obelo et puncto supra, posito abrogat s. m. 
1. 26 fin. ny secund. elot. p. m. l 29 
Twy supra lineam post παντων D. 

282 b. l 16 ἡμέραν in voce onpepay 
lined delet K. 

283 b. 1. 3 € pro a secund. in παραβ- 
A. l. 9 wy δε elot. sub ovre p. m. 
l. 13 v elot. sub o tn εἰπὸν p. m. ]. 16 
n ypaó elot. sub rac yp p. m. 1. 28 
e in ewa obelo delet s. m.,.. supra « 
posito. 
A vel B. 

284 a. 1. 33 ti in videtis, etiam er in 


l. 30 e initio lineae, ante dere 


ert 284 b. 1. 1, rescript. s. m. 

284 b. 1. 4 « supra lineam post κα A. 
l. go in πλησθηναι fn p. mutat B. 

285 b, 286 a. ll. 1—3 rubro, initio 
Evangelii, 

485 b. Supra li«eam C acribit rw post 
ev 1. 13, ἡ supra € tn Kae- l. 15, v post 
ro l 26, ἡ supra e in evdox- l. 3o. 
l25esupra vin ic A; o pro ἡ in τὴν, 
etiam o pro ὦ in -νων l. 28 D. 

286 a. l. 31 sanctus elot. sub eiecit 
eum p. m. 

286 b. 1.6 Ba prim. in βαβασιλεια 
eras. 8. m. l. 15 o prim. in προσβασ 
obclo delet s. m. 11. 36 « supra lineam 
ante ovx, B. Ibid. T in γραμματεισ 
tantum non peritt. 

287 b. 1.6 a in πνευνα erasit 8. m. 
l. 25 «in ηιδισαν eras, s. m. cf. Prole- 
gomena. l 30 xo elot. sub £e p. m. 
in wpoonvtero. l. 31 init, re prim, 
sed etiam rg p. m. 

288 b. 1. 22 x pro x tn ovrnxOnoay A, 
me judice: à contrario, ¢ p. m. in 290 b. 
18: cf. etiam 293 b. 27, 31. 

289 b. l. 4 init. v pro τι primd, scd 
τι D. m. l 5 rac per puncta, supra 
posita, abrogat s. m. 
lineam post πασ A. 


1, 22 o supra 


438 


291 a. 1. 33 n secund. in nonuum et 
obelo et puncto supra posito abrogat 8. m. 

291 b. L 15 v pro v in avro, l. 17 μ 
supra -αμ- B. L 22 λεσα elot. sub 
krec p. m.: et o (ut videtur) elot. sub ε 
in axoAecucw |. 31. 

293 a. l 1 no elot. sub qu p. m. 
l 6 primd u pro b p. m. in introibit. 
cf. Tabulam 11. 1. 1. 

292 b. 1. 21 A supra eX in ἀποστελη 
B.  L 27 avrov elot. sub rov tax p. m. 

293 a. 1.6 n elot. sub t in faciebat 
p.m. 1, 23 met obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogat s. m. 

2930.1. 5 o pro » in γραμματεῖ B. 
l. 6 σαι secund. eras. s. m. 1l. 7 ai in 
ἐξεσταται eras. 8. m., T praecedente in ι 
mutato (εξεσται s. m.). l. 19 7 pro 6 
in μεμερισθαι H fortasse. 

294 b. l. 15 0 pro τ in καθησται A: 
aliter 293 b. 1. 19. 1.25 c in εξανε- 
στειλεν obelo abrogat s. m. 

295 b. 1. 11 ακονωσιν € 1. 12 elot. sub 
Brerwow p. m. 1. 13 (supra yo in σννω- 
ow B: sic etiam |, 14 ὦ supra o in 
αφεθησομαι, εθ et μαι punctatis. l. 32 
punctum supra À prim. forsan casu tan- 
tum positum. 

296 a. l. 5 gn elot. sub ng p. m. 

296 b. 1. 2 σ in μεριμγαισ obelo abrogat 
&. m. l 33 marg. y sub 8 sectionis 
Ammonianae apparet: utrumque scripsit 
L. 

297 b. 1, 3 intl. c supra o prim. H, « 
tn orc. eraso. Ibid. o pro ν in μεικροτερον 
ΟἿ, qui etiam μὲν supra ear sequens 
scripsit, sed μεν postea est erasum, 1.12 
Jl. 16, 
17 ε ter eras. & m. in αλλαι εἰ πλοιαι 
πολλαι. 

298 a. 1. 27 a eras, sub i in sile p. m. 


ν supra lineam post exedve B. 


298 b. 1. 2 ν elot. sub o in γερασηνων 

p. m. l. 16 e ante I in Iówr H. 
— . 
1. 21 post «v addit c minutum A. 

299 a. 1. 5 legas spu. l 13 d elot. 
sub t in et p. m. ; sic]. 30 ἃ elot. sub a 
ín eamus. 

299 6. 1. 4 v supra oc in avroc B. 

. . — 
l. 18 « prim. in uno et obelo et puncto 
supra posito abrogat 8. m. 
— 
lam sub 0c ponit K. 

300 a. 1.1 s in sper elof. p. m.: sic 

l. 32 t οἷοί. sub 8 in sit p. m. l. 25 


l.20 lineo- 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


ad eum per puncta supra posita abrogat 
p. m., ut videtur (cf, text. Graec.). 

300 b. 1. 6 pe supra lineam post we A. 
1, 7 καὶ per puncta supra posita abrogat 
8. m. l 15 τὴν supra lineam post 
δυναμιν E. 

301 a. 1. 25 n elot. sub u tn ueritatem 
p. m. 

302 a. l. 14 t elot. sub n in erant 
p. m. 

302 b. 1. 1 χ' pro k in ovx A. 1.8 
ain rac mutatum (forsan in o), v etiam 
supra ec in συνγενεσῖ posito A, 

303 a. L. 8 a elot. sub o in suo p. m.: 
item l. 30 u elot. sub o in uestrorum 
p. m. 

303 5. L 18 av (αν Mill. errore) clot. 


ad finem. l. 20 e pro ἢ in ἡνίχεν, e 
etiam supra m A. l 23 x pro x tn 
ox A., 1. 28 de per puncta supra 


posita abrogat s. m. 
γενεχλιοι; A. 

304 a. l 14 n elot. sub d in -iaden 
p. m. 

304 b. 1, 9 o tn ov tert. punctatum, 
forsan casu. l. 17 fin. » per punctum 
supra positum abrogat s. m. l 33 
w supra o tn evxatpoo B. σ 

305 b. 1. 8 v elot. sub Ὕ in ἐπλαγνισθη 
p. m. l 13 o supra lineam ante ro- 
voc, k addito ad finem lineae B. 1. 24 
o pro win δνο D. . 

306 a. l. 7 tm elot. sub s-m p. m. 
l. 12 litera prius scripta sub 1 £n disci- 
puli p. m. 

306 b. 1. 7 σ in προσαγειν obelo abrogat 


l. 29 0 pro x in 


8. m. l. 24 lineolam post φοβεισθαι 
ponit H. l. 27 c supra ec tn e£eora»- 
to A. 


307 a. l. 12 i pro e in mare prius 
scriptum (te sic). l. 28 a clot. sub e 
in -erant, l 31 n elot. sub g in genn., 
p. m. ; sic etiam 1. 33 ἃ (ut videtur) eras. 
sub o secund. p. m. 

307 b. 1. 19 *y elot. sub x in πυκμη 
p.m. 1, 21 ν οἷοί. sub a tert. tn wapa- 
δοσιαν p. m. 

308 a. 1. 6 a clot. sub o tm -oibat p. m. 
l 1:3 s ante scribis et obelo et puncto 
supra posito abrogat s. m. 
xetp (sic) elot. sub manus p. m. 

308 b. 1. 9 ev supra lineam ante τολὴν 
C. l 20 e£e supra lineam ante pov 


]. 20 Tras 


E. l. 21 $ elot. sub r in -ceras p. m. 
l. 24 ad finem addit ra E. l 28 er 
supra lineam post ov6 C. 

309 ὃ. l. 5 ν elot. sub o in ἀσυνετοι 
p. m. l. 15 οἱ supra lineam ante 
κακοι C. l. 23 », 1. 28 οἱ supra lineas 
p.m. me judice: aliter Kipling. 1. 25 
wo, 1. 26 καὶ per puncta supra posita 
abrogat s. m. u 

310 b. l. 1 a tnceptum οἷοί, sub e in xe 
p. m. :l. 25 οἱ δὲ per puncta supra 
posta abrogat s. m. 

311 ὃ. L 22 e prim, in μελεγαδα in a 
mutatum, e erasum, « ante δ᾽ insertum 
ab A, ut videtur. 

312 a. L 10 a elot. sub r secund. in 
terram p. m. 

312 b. l 20 σὺν per puncta supra 
posita, abrogat s. m., quae etiam puncta 
scripsit supra ww k in B\ewew και 1. 28. 
haec forsan casu. 1. 21 a in -Oap-, 
l. 22 tapaxad p. m., rescripnt K. 

313 5. L 14 fin. welot, sub oin oo p. m. 

314 a. l. 20 r elot. sub t secund. tn 
tertia p. m., sic 1. 22 h elot. sub b in 
obiurgare p. m. 

314 b. 1. 1 € supra lineam ante avrov 
A. l. 6 yap per puncta supra posita 
improbat s. m. 1.14 Primd τινε wie 
(sic) potius quam Twec δε, sed Se eras. 
δ. m.: win o mutato per H: B Àabet oe 
supra lineam ante eorykorwr. 
supra lineam post λια B. 

315 b. 1. 3 avrov elot. ad finem linear. 
l. 21 fin. » minutum ad ἐληλυθε addu D. 

316 b. 1. 2 ka tn καὶ secund. p. m., 
rescriptum s. m.: sicl.8 kara, L3 


l. 247 


Ae secund. eras. 8. m. 

317 ὃ. L 8 o supra lineam ante voc 
A. l 21 e» supra lineam ante ava- 
κλισαμενοσ, ax etiam in κα mulato, C. 

318 b. 1l. 13 « supra e prim., € secund. 
in o mutato, A, me judice: sicl. 31 ἃ 
pro a secund. in σκωλησ A, ut videtur. 

319 b. 1. 4 a» supra lineam ante acras 
C. ll. 8, 9: παλιν elot. sub exp 
p. m., et εδιδυσκεν (a super v p. m.) av- 
rove k €. 1. 8 eub avro» a etear:» avd 
p. m. L 12 ve supra er tn eretAaro 
C: v etiam elot. sub pin pw ὕὑσὴσ p. s. 
1. 18 jin. » tn θηλυν puncto supra posito 
abrogat s. m. l 26 e prim. eras. 
8. m.: ἢ supra v in Tw C. 


320 b. 1. 4 ap in wadapia punctis 
supra positis abrogat 8. m. 

321 a. εἰ b. 11. 5—7 manca hiat per- 
gamena, ll. 31—33 chemicis sunt foedatae. 

321 ὃ. 11. 5—8 literarum quas cernere 
licet, nonnullae tantum in 322 @ trans- 
fusae leguntur. 

322 a. 1, 26 n secund. in centiens et 
obelo et puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 

322 b. 1. 8 w supra ov tn Üararov B: 
sic diam L 11 o supra £, et 1. 31 στ 
supra 0 in ητοιμαθαι. 

323 a. l. 18 nobis elot. sub buob p. m. 
l. 30 punctum supra a prim. forsan casu 
scriptum. 

323 b. 1. 3 was per puncta supra posita 
abrogat s. m.: sic etiam καὶ secund. 324 
b. 1. 9. l 18 w supra o (obelo nota- 
tum) in ναζορ- B. l 22 και esrereuuor 
aurw πολλοι € l. 21 elot. sub o 6e πολλω 
μαλλον"εκραξεν V p. m. 

324 ὃ. 1. 9 εἰ supra tn καικαθηκεν A. 
l. 14 τὴν Oupay elot. sub pare£w-e p. m. 
l. 24 ein ἐστιβαδασ puncto supra posito 
abrogat s. m. l 3o και eras. s. m., 
etiam punctis supra positis priis abro- 
gatum. l 32 ὦ pro o tn οσσαννα A. 
l. 33 ¢ supra lineam ante ἐροσολυμα A. 

325 5.1. 2 ἢ supra a in ουσασ A, me 
judice. l. 4 ον secund. punctis supra 
positis abrogat 8. m. l. 20 Tw elot, 
subok p.m. Á 1240pro y in aurny A. 

326 a. 1. 29 & elot. sub 8 in omnis 
p. m. 

326 b. 1. 7 σ tn διακριθησ puncto supra 
posito abrogat 8. m. 

327 b. l. τὸ in διελογιζοντο puncto 
supra posito abrogat s. m. l.37 
supra v in υμειν D. l. 5 θα supra v 
in φοβουμεν A, l.9 » pro w in εἰσ, 
y in ποιαν et εξουσιαν punctis supra po. 
sitis abrogato, A. 

328 a. 1. 19 ead punctis notata, casu, 
ut videtur. 

329 a. l. 23 ceipis elot. sub spici p. m. 

329 b. 1. 2 ro in εθαυμαζοντο punctis 
supra positis abrogat 8. m. l. 18 fin. 
€ in vey punctatum 8. m., casu ut vide- 
tur. l. 20 ἡ ante γυνὴ partim eras. 
sm. 1, 26 ὦ supra literas noou punctia 
supra positis deletas B. 

330 a. l. 3 super eum e 1: 2 clot. sub 
ad eum sa p. m. 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


3300. 1.3 » supra lineam post av 
A1 

331 a. 1. 23 et ex tota e 1. 22 elot. 
sub et diliger p. m. 

331 5.1. 3 9 supra w prim. in θωσω 
A: « in exxOovo et obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogat 8. m. 
(cf. 1. 8) A, ut videtur. 1, 26 y supra 
g À. l. 33 et 332 ὃ. 1. 1 7 pro ὃ 
habet in ποδαπ- D. 

332 a. l. 7 et per puncta supra posta 


abrogat s. m. 
332 b. 1. 6 or elot. sub ὦ p. m. 


ra supra lineam ante εθνη B. 

333 ὃ. 1. 2 & (μέ videtur) elot. sub ε in 
ipew p. m. 1. 10 a suprae in -yero B. 

335 a. 1. 26 1l elot. (propter illa se- 
quens) sub a in folia, p. m. 

335 b. 1. a μη supra lineam post ov D. 


lL. 20 jua pro apa 


l. 30 


l. 13 ὦ supra ov in θυρουρω B. l. 24 
καὶ per puncta supra posila improbat 
l. 29 » pro *y secund. in γνγη B. 

336 a. l. 30, 337 a. 1. 32 punctum 
supra p prim. : cf. 416 a. 5; 437 α. 
Lory. 

336 b. l 4 e» punctis supra positis 
abrogat 8. m., lineold (i.e. v) supra ἡ in 


8. m. 


avr, positd, l. 1o ew elot. sub noa 
p.m. 1.15 — supra ὦ p. m. esse vide- 
tur, forsan casu. 1. 31 re supra lineam 
post Uraye B. 


337 b. 1. 7 καὶ εξ eras. s. m., lined 
recenti per καὶ ἐξηλθον οἱ μαθηται avrov 
ductd. — lar ain τρυβαλιον eras. a. m. 
l. 33 To per puncta supra posita abrogat 
8. m. 

338 b. 1.15 ov punctis supra positis 
abrogat s. m.: vix cum Millio puncta 
p.m. diceres. l 20 μη punctis ab. 
rogat, ue supra lineam post 8en posito, B: 
cf. 1. 15. l 29 ἡ supra e prim. in 
ακηδεμονειν ponit A, xn etiam per puncta, 
eupra posita abrogato. 

339 a. 1. 20 mihi elot. sub simu p. m. 

340 a. l. 4 bi elot. sub 88 in possibilia 
p. m. 

340 b. 1.4 * elot. sub e prim. p. m. 
l. 14 « supra v in συνδονα A. l. 23 
v pro p secund. in ὕπηρερων B. l. 30 
fin. « addit post εψευδομαρτυρουν B. 

341 a. L 4 8 elot. sub m in seruum 


p. m. 
341 b. 1. 18. rye supra lineam ante 


. 8 pro v in Anora A. 


439 
δυναμεωσ D. 1.250 pro w in avro 
D. 

342 6. L 3 T pro o secund. in smi - 
capa, B. l. 16 punctum supra 7 in 
prye- forsan casu positum. l 17 0 
supra lineam ante uy, etiam o prov B. 

3430. 1. 2 A secund. (puncto notatum) 
in A mutat s. m., qui etiam |. 9 € prim. 
in αποκρειθεισ et obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogat. 
oxAw habet D? 
ante βασιλει B. 
φλαγελλωσασ A. 

344 b. 1. 20 vin ny, 1. 22 o tn βασιλεουσ 
puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 


L 14 TO oxÀo pro τω 
L 17 Tw supra lineam 
l 24 p supra ^ in 


l. 33 
l. 29 macula 
quaedam , juxta σ in orpy forte incidit, 

346 a. 1. 17 in duas partes elot. ad 
finem lineae. l. 21 t semi-formatum 
sub e in et p. m. 1.29 t elot. sub n 
secund. in ascenderant p. m. 

346 b. 1. 3 ἡ supra e tn ernoaro B, 
nis potius A; cf. 325 b. 1. 2; 338 b. 
l 29. Etiam rov elot. sub μα in πτωμα 
p. m. ln 4 εἰ prim. in ειτεθνηκει 
punctis supra positis abrogat s.m. 1 22 
Primam lectionem σήμιον aroxaduy ipsa 
p. m. vertit in uu» axoxudic, o. in ση- 
pior per punctum tmprobato, v pro a 
secund., v pro vij posito: quae sequuntur 
εἰ post mutationem sunt addita, e enim 
partim super y elot. scribitur, 

347 b. 1. a rov supra lineam ante ro- 
vor C. l. 9 e supra lineam ante ira» 
A. l 17 punctum supra a prim. 
8. m., sed l 19 p. mw, forsan casu. 
L 18 ἡ pro ὦ in avre A, ut videtur. 

415 a. L 2 punctum supra m secund. 
p. m., forsan casu: sic etiam supra ἢ 
415 b. 1. 8, supra p secund. 416 a. 1. 5. 

415 ὃ., 416 a. ll. 1—3 rubro, initio 
Actuum A postol. 

415 b. 1. 10 δι supra lineam ante npe- 
pow A: ” supra τεσσ et ’ supra δι 
recentior manus. l. 11 ¢ tn orravo- 
μενοισ, 1.12 o in Tac eras. 8. m. l 1:3 
y pro k in συναλισκ- H. L 17 re 
supra lineam post ἤκουσα C: etiam φη- 
ow δια Tov στοματοσ abrogat s.m. punctis 
supra positis. Il. 20, 22 uncis (1; et “ἢ 
inclusas abrogat s. m. 1.26 ew secund. 
eras.: ὦ pro ov habet H, ut videtur. 

416 a. 1. 3 ἃ supra co in incoauit G. 


440 


l. 8 re supra lineam post et, uit supra 
m prim, ponit, i etiam in -iam obelo 
delet G. l. a1 te in potest obelo 
abrogat G, item re secund. in restituere 
l. 26 (8 supra re posito). l 29 a 
supra lineam ante ut G. l. 32 punc- 
tum supra e in -uen- p. m.: casu, ut 
videtur. 

416 b. 1. 6 « inter a et w in απηρθη, 
των supra lineam post απο, ponit B. 
1. a1 o supra lineam ante ro D. l. 31 
Tac per puncta supra posita improbat 
8. π 1. 32 T pro u in μήητρι, μὴ supra 
qr posito, B. 

417 a. G εἰ obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogat a in quae |. 1, e in nubes 
}, 5. l 4 m elot. sub t in dixisset 
p.m. l. 5 oa elot. sub u in eum p. m. 
L τι d supra lineam post qui G: ba 
eloto sub tà in statis p. m. 1.13 u pro 
b prim. (obelo notat.) G: sic pro b (obelo 
not.) l 29. 1. r4 enim et lineolá et punc- 
tis supra positis abrogat G. l 15 
mod prim. eras, s. m. l. 23 h elot. 
sub o in iohannis p. m. l. 27 alafei 
habet G ante alphei punctis supra positis 
abrogatum. 

417 b. 1. 3 9e supra yap (obclis dele- 
tum) G. l 4 € supra lineam ante de 
A. l 10 καὶ pro oc, v supra lineam 
post ekaxe Ὁ. 1.21 pro» D. 122a 
ἐστω supra lineam pro m secund. eras. 
C. l. 26 c in wo eras, s. m.: lineo- 
lae post e£, item post ματο 1. 28, item 
supra em 1, 21 Οὐ, forsan casu. 1. 28 
y supra v in ἴωανου D. l. 32 @ pro € 
aecund. in ἐστησεν A, 

418 a. Quae sequuntur sunt G cor- 
rectoris: 1. 1 autem supra his, cum et 
isse punctis supra positis abrogata: l. 3 
autem supra praeter, praeterea obelis 
deleto: 1. 8 i secund, punctatum (for- 
san tamen p. m.): l to i supra um 
obelis deltum: 1. 11 e pro i prim. in 
possidit: m im mercedem ef obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogatum : |, 21 ius 
supra orum obelis deletum: 1. 24 x bis 
uiris supra orum prim. lineolis deletum ; 
con supra uen ; obeli ("") supra uirorü: 
l 26 niam obelis (prids etiam punctis 
positis) abrogatum ; u supra b obelo nota- 
tum: l 28 i supra e in iohannen, s 
addito post en finale obelo deletum: 1, 29 


ADNOTATIONES8  EDITORIS. 
& in usquae obelo deletum. l. 30 b 
elot. sub n in nobis p. m. 

418 5b. 1. 5 init. € pro a prim. D. 
l. 7 $ elot. sub o prim. p. m. ll. 9—13 
chemicia laesae partim rescript. l9 
ow pro ων B. 1. 10 o supra lineam ante 
l 21 xat punctis supra po- 
l. 24 » supra ar in 


KAnpoo B. 
sitis abrogat s. m. 
ἡρξατο A. 

419 a. G etiam 1. 1 n ponit supra 8 
secund. obelo deletum : 1, 11 fin. i supra 
o in -los obelo deletum: 1. 16 uox in 
marg. per ad echo relatum, cf, Tabul. 
III. 8: 1l. 24 e aupra i in coip- obelo de- 
letum : 1. 29 a in quae olylo delct. Ἰ, 
20 u in eius eras. 8. ἢ. 1. 30fu prosae 
primo K, qui ctiam punctis supra positis 
abrogat un sequens, item ad 1. 33, t prim. 
et tert, rescriptis, 1. 31 a supra lineam 
post quia K. 

419 b. 1. 5 τὴ WS διαλεκτω pro τὴν 
διαλεκτον B. l. 7 & ad finem lineac 
addit B. 
ἵουδαιαν E. 
l 24 eras. s. m. 


l. 9 re supra lineam post 

l. 12 0 in λιβονησ et rore 
1, 15 ae pro ἢ in 
κρητησ, ec pro οἱ D. l 22 a pro € 
in διε ponit, λεγον punctis supra positis 
abrogat, eXeyó post rec addit Ἐ, 1, 25 
e» supra lineam ante δεκα E. l 26 
πρωτοσ punctis supra positis abrogat s.m. 
l, 29 U pro ἢ in ἡμειν D: sic 1. 30 0 pro 
T secund. in ενωτισατε. γὰρ 
pro ουσησ, .γ. prog in wpac, .γ" etiam 
ad fin. lineae eras. A, ut videtur. 

410 a, l 25 un supra lineam ante 
decem (i etiam ponit supra e secund. 
obelo deletum) forsan E: cf. text. Graec. 


l 26 e prim. in elebabit eras. 8. m. 


l. 33 ἐστιν 
“ΞΔ 


l. 30 cu supra lineam post aus ponit, et 

i sequens obelo delet G: item i secund. in 

hii L 32 puncto supra posito abrogat, 
420 b. 1. 3 » pro c secund. tn πασασ, 


σ secundo in capxag eraso, A. l. 6 
c supra lincam post opaca A. l. 7 
evinmoag supra ενῦπν B. l8eeto 


in eyw eras.: super w (cujus ne vestigium 
quidem superest) e habet D. ll. g— 
13 ex parte rescripsit K: sic ll. 10—14, 
4121 Ga. Ll 10a elot. sub σ in — p. m., 
ut videtur. l. 12 796 γησ p. m. viz 
apparet. l. r3 a pro ε ante $, no 
supra ge B: sed μεταστραφισται K, cf. 
Tabul nr. 10. 1. 16 vov punctis supra 


positis abrogat s. m. 

prim. in ναζοραιον D. 
δοκιμ (ut conjicere licet) p. m. prorsus 
periit sub αποδεδι quod laxius. scribit 
corrector B: ac p.m. sub y (praecedente 
rasurá) tantum non latet: porrd per " 
supra απο]. 19, ' supra αποδεδιγ 1. 20, “ 


l. 19 w supra o 
l. 20 init. δε- 


(errore pro "") supra ew 1. 20 ordinem 
mutat 8. m. l. 20 i pro y in ἡμασ B. 
l.22:w pro ca in oca B. 1.31 o evan 
escens supra lineam post e tert. B. 

421 a. 1. 5 e supra s (ubelo deletum) 
in filiaa G. l. 25 e supra au (obel.s 
deleum) in auditam G. -l 28 ge 
supra a (obelo deletum) in amitibus G. 

421 b. 1. 9 tnit. e ante dew H, 1. τὸ 
init. ε ante yvwp B. l. 19 jin. o pro» 
in εἰδων D: sic 1. 20 0 pro a in wuacer, 
l. 21 oc voc super καρδιασ H, ut videtur. 
l. 21 οσῴφυοσ etiam in margine habet G, 
cf. Tabul mr. 9. 1. 22 uncis (< >) 
lineam abrogat 8. m. (A1) sic * initio, 
> ad finem 413 a. 1. 32. 1. 23 fin. srpo- 
ειἰδωσ ἐλαλησεν περὶ τησ post avrov addit 
F; cf. Tabul nur. 7: 


1.23 Nota scripsit recentissima manus. 


in marg. 422 a. 


l 25 e supra a secund. eras. in erxa- 
ταλειφθη A. l. 26 4 secund. in eibew 
eras. 8, m.: δὶς o inilio 1. 32. l. 27 
Tro pro ov in ow H. l 31 Tovro o 
ὕμεισ pro vjuy F, ad fin. lineae. 

422 a. ]. 5 8 secund. in spsem el eras. 
et puncto supra posito abrogat 8. m. (non 
G).  L8aínnequae obelo abrogat G. 
1, t1 b pro u in impleuis G, qui ctiam 
et obelo et puncto supra posito abrogat 
l. 15 & secund, in patriaarcha; 1. 31 m 
de ante praecordia; 1. 30 m in -tionem. 

422 b. 1. 4 supra lineam a» ante 6v, 
vc post rov B: item supra lineas, 1. 7 
avro» post Ke, 1. 8 rov ante cw B, sed 
l.23 o post ro C. l. 11 0 pro a in 
eway, τεσ etiam, addito, B. l 33 
punctum supra T in τὴ p. m., forsan casu. 

423 a. G etiam l. 15 autrus per lineo- 
las (’’’’) supra positas abrogat ; 1. 20 e 
habet supra it in accipite, et is supra e 
obelo abrogatum ; 1. 26 h habet supra xo 
in exortabatur; 1. 27 n in hanc εἰ obelo 
et puncto supra posito abrogat. 

423 ὃ. l. 1 « supra lineam ante ry 
secund. B... 1.4 re suprareC. ]l. 10 
Jin. kao, 1. 11 fin. καθημεραν addit F, 


11 init. o εἰ o in row eras. 
]. 18 
l. 21 " supra 
ὡραν, supra lineam τὴν ante earn, ν' 


ttem 1. 
l 13 a» in κατοικουσαν eras. 8. m. 
av elot. sub ev p. m. 


post evarn, c post rn sequens, (etiam 
‘supra και]. 22%) C, ut eidetur.. 1 22 
iov, 1. 27 avrwy punctis supra pontis 
abrogat 8. m. 1, 26 v im avrwr eras. 

l. 29 e supra lineam ante du» 
l. 30 ew supra lineam post -rac, 
l. 33 » και ante εἰπεν 


8. m. 
A. 
e supra w C. 
erae, 8. m. 

424 a. G etiam habet 1. 13 in supra 
lincem ante id; ]. 18 di supra ie in 
cot tie; 1. 23 ἃ supra o prim.: per 
lineolas (' ' ' 5) etiam supra positas 
abrogat |. 17 autem secund., ll. 39 init, 
33 et. 

424 b. 1. 24 7 supra lineam post croa 
C. l 28 τ ín τῇ puncto notat p. m., 
forsan casu. 
punctis supra positis abrogat s. m. 

415 a. ll. 7, 12 u supra b obelo nota- 


l. 29 ro tn Tovro secund. 


tum; l. 10 b pro u in uasea; 1l. 13 — 
supra do; 1. 21 m £n petrum obe'o nota- 
tum (u praecedente in o mutato), n ultim. 
in iohannen et obelo et puncto supra 
posito abrogatum ; haec omnia per G. 
L 33 in iudicio elot. sub tis in iudi p. m. 

425 b. 1. 3 rov, l. 4 θέλοντοσ, 1. 3: 
Tw» punctis supra positis abrogat s. m. 
1. 6 « in φονεια, l. 13 ort eras. 8. m. 
l. 10 9 pro V in ὕμεισ D: C etiam habet 
L 12 or supra lineam post rovrov; L 18 
ro supra lineam ante xovnpoy, 1.50 
w supra o sccund. in xpovow A. l. 33 
σ elot. sub » in προφητὴν p. m. 

426 a. G etiam l. 4 voluit per lineolas 
(΄ ") supra positas abrogat: 1. 6 u supra 
b (obelo notatum) ponit, etiam m post 
homicida; l. 14 A (pro a) supra ue in 
que; l 17 scimus supra quia; l. 33 b 
pro ἃ in -tauit. 

426 b. 1. 2 € pro ov in euov B (cf. 1. 7). 
l. 7 « supra lineam post o habet B, e in 
«σεν per eundem in a mutato. 1.8 
U elot. sub σ in rac p. n. 1l. 10 o pro 
y in ny B: sic 1. 16 » pro c secund. in 
εκαστοσ. l 15 w supra τ ante aoc 
G: sic 1. 20 T pro « in καὶ per eundem. 
l. 24 « in ewer partim eras.: s. m. etiam 
abrogat, punctis supra positis, και ]. 25; 
rel. 29 ; nuepay 1. 30. 


mE — ὁ MÀ 5 ————M— 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


427 a. 1. 6 1 elot. sub e in samuel p. m. 
G etiam habet 1.12 n supra et in -di- 
cetur; l. 14 ns supra ui (non t) obelo 
deletum ; 1. 16 u supra b obelo deletum ; 
l 25 ua supra lineam post ser; 1. 26 n 
in erant obelo deletum : 1. 33 1 supra e 
prim. tn pontefex obelo deletum. 1. 31 
8 in sunt punctatum (p. m.?), forsan 
casu; sic etiam c prim, 428 a. 1. 31 et 
σ prim. 428 b. ). 8. 

417 b. 1. 24 init, τ praefigit ante o δεδ- 
C. l. 30 re supra lineam post row C. 
l. 31 οἱσ pro wy in avrov B. 

428 a. G etiam habet l. 1 & supra i ix 
caifas, et n supra oa in io athas; 1. 3 
init. et in marg., et n supra et in -isset ; 
1. 10 i supra a (obelo deletum) in -facie, 
is supra e in hominem, i ante -um per 
^^ abrogatum; 1. 18 s supra m obelo 
deletum ; ]. 22 n in quondam obelo dele- 
tum ; |. 23 b pro c tn suc; 1. 25 ἃ supra 
b obelo deletum ; 1. 34 het obelo et puncto 
supra posito abrogatum. 1. 6 u primd 
pro o in spo p. m. (ut ridetur). 

428 b. 1. 3 v eras. sub » in σημεῖον 
p. m.: forsan » potius A correctori dan- 
dum est. ]. 4 αἱ fn γεγονεναι et 1. 25 
nv secund. eras, s. m. |. 8 a pro e in 
εἐπιλησ- H. 
ante λαλειν E. 

419 @. l. r1 fin., forsan casu scriptum 
p.m. l. 19 u (non eras.) sub n in nos, 
eliam p. m.: cf. 428 a. 1. 6. J. 20 
non supra lineam ante loqui E: cf. Gr. 
et 420 a. 1, 25. 

429 b. 1. 5 e supra «in kawa C. 


l 20 μη supra liweam 


l. 15 
T pro Ύ in ayiac, X supra ia posito, A, 
l. 18 e supra lineam ante wc, |. 19 « 8u- 
pra er in γενεσθαι, 1. 27 ἡ supra lineam 
post ἣν C. 

430 a. l. 1 omnia elot. sub mare e 


p. m. 
mena, 


ll το, 13 abscissa est. perga- 
1, 24 punctum in d. i p. m. 
casu scriptum, 

430 b. 1, 5 νπηρχον punctis supra po- 
sitis abrogat 8. m. 1. 6 init. και erd., 
et e super x (prorsus deperdito) B, qui 
etiam a pro e in reo habet (quasi legeret 
€ φερον rac): ídem porro pro vr in πι- 
πρασκοντων (vr prorsus deperdito) ue" 
scripsit, legena -ομενων (e pallidum initio 
lineae per se correctoris H ease diceres). 
l. to fin. ὦ bibliopequs tantum non ope- 


i er rr ——————— —————————————— IRR 


44} 
ruit. l. 13 v pro » in xopwr X. 
l. 14 » supra lineam post nveyxe B. 1.17 
v in caóóvpa in 1 rertit 8. m. 1. 20 
‘supra e in pepoo aliena. manus, casu. ut 
videtur. 1, 33 προσ ......» € l. 23 
1. 26 » 


pro σ in μεσον, l. 30 ὦ pro ov in εψευσου 


clot. sub o σατανασ τὴν p. m. 


B. 1.39 ro supra lineam ante πονη- 
ρον B. 

431 ὃ. 1. 9 e supra δὴ A. l. 10 
προσ supra lineam ante αὐτὴν C. 1. 30° 


ἡ pros in πληθι E. l. 31 «et supra 
T in kara, et o supra lineam post xara 
E. 

432 @ l. 14 que punctis supra positis 
abrogat s. m, 1,17 & elot. sub e in 
e am p. m. 

431 6.1. 4 supra lineam x post δε B, 
E post περι EY 1. 13 € pron in nOerro 
H. l. 16 e pro a secund. tn avewtay 
H. l. 30 δε supra lineam supra xa 
A. l. 31 εν (vix ey) post ευὐρομεν eras. 
8. m. 

433 a. 1.17 t inceptum p. m, sub s 
prim, in -iaset, 

433 b. 1. 4 otro pro ται in yernra D. 
]. 10 ya in ἤγαγον eraso, e pro ohabet D. 
Ilid. ov supra lincam ante μετα C vel E. 
]. 13 apxe supra lineam ante ἵερευσ E: cf. 
Tabul.i1.6. 1.18 fin. « post rourw addit 
B. 1- 18 © pro $ in egayayew H. 
l. 19 rovr lax? scripsit super exew eras. 
H. ll. 20, 21 transponit s, m. per " ' 
initio linearum : sic etiam (non eddem 
manu) 434 a. l. 20 « supra lineam 
post δε A. l. 25 def" pro $oiy B. 
l] 27 rw» post αφεσιν, 1. 28 avrov post 
ἐσμεν, supra lineas E. 1. 27 εν avro, 
l. 29 παντων punctis supra positis abro- 
gat s. . l. 30 δε supra lineam post 
wva C: » etiam in ον ante ἐδωκεν eras, 
8. m. 

434 a. 1. 2 8 elot, sub n in sermones, 
l. 20 mi supra on in honibus E: cf. 
429 a. 1. 20. 

434 b. 1. 6 1 pro v tn eavrova. s. m. 
l. 12 εἰ pro ἢ prim. in προσεκληθη, ca», 
supra lineam A. 
ανηρε supra lineam D. 


1. 14 διελυ erazo, 

l. 15 fin. dte- 
λυθησαν post avro addit F. l 22 
εἰσιν punctis supra positia improbat 8. m. 
|l. 31 « supra lineam post umrore T. 
l. 32 ewetor eo. (und literd ante exer, 


56 


442 


quatuor fere ante eo deletis) lego; nihil 
amplius restat p. m.; nec quid scripserit 
conjecturá assequi possum (errant Mill. 
Wetst.): θησαν habet B post exec, 0 su- 
per T posito, ex eraso. 

435 b. 1. 2 και προσκαλεσαμενοι ὁ 434 b. 
l 33 elot. sub μη XaXew eret TW ovo p. m. 
l. 14 τη ad fin. post dkaxoma F. 1. 16. 
Hanc lineam uncis ( $. >) improbat s. m. 
l. 17 δε supra lineam ante -o. A. 1. 26 
. T supra lineam ante avrgc C1 

436 a. l. 14 pi^ pro cup δ. m., forsan 
C. 1. 16 punctum supra e secund. casu 
fortasse scriptum. 

436 b. 1. 2 ν minutum post rappeva A, 
me judice. l. 10 av potius quam av 
(periit litera secunda) eras. s. m. 1. 17 
ad fin. xk ασιασ post κιλικιασ addit B: 
cf. Tabulam rir. 3. l.21 J) supra e 
in ew, l. 23 » supra lineam post ov B. 
l. 24 a pro e (jam prorsus deperditum) 
in -rec B. l. 32 a secund. in κατα 
eras. 8. m. 


43; a. Ll 1t p puncto notatum, p. m. 
437 6.1. 3 w supra o prim. in vato- 


Teg va 
l. 6 και arencayre avro 


l 13 ^ pro ἡ in αδελφη 
B. l. 19 e pro ἢ in εἐξηλθε, ex pro ax 
(o eraso) H. 
quae etiam punctis. supra positis καὶ 
ll. 21, 23 abrogat. 


paioc B. 
παντεσ B. 


l. I9 εἰ prim. eras. s. m., 


L 22 0e supra 
lineam post κακει B. l 23 4 gro ἢ 
in μετωκησεν D. 

438 a. l. 4 "supra iterum ponit G, ut 


ridetur. l. 26 i pro e tert. in herede- 


tatis 8. m. 
438 b. 1. 10 o supra lineam ante ἴακωβ 
Dn. l. 15 punctum supra v in σοφιαν 


p. m., forsan casu: sic etiam t in -tioni- 
bus 479 a. l. 14. 
439 a. 1. 8 b per rasuram in. u mutat 
s.m. 11. τό is pro ae in regae s. m., 
forsan A. 

439 b. 1. 19 x ad fin. post $apaw addit 
D vel D. 1, 20 αὑτὸν e supra ro avr 
C. l. 21 πασ ἢ σοῴφια (av, τ, v εἰ ν 
erasis) s. m. l. 28 a pro € in 3uvrero 
D! l 33 ov supra lineam post 6e A 
(cf. vers. Lat.). 

440 a. |. 3 à in praetio eras. 8. m. ; 
sic 1. 22 8 in quae. 1. 14 t elot. subs 
secund. in esset p. m. 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


440 ὃ. Chenticis miser2 foedatur haec 
pagina. ]. 1 3 pro o in rore v ettam 
supra oc B. l. 2. Hanc lineam uncis 
(« ») abrogat s. m. ]. $ ew eras. 
8. m.: sic etiam 1. 29 καὶ et yap. l. 1a 
ουτωσ καὶ et υσεν erasit, a in eóvya in εἶ 
mutatit H, l. 15 o pro w in duw H. 
l. τό p pro a in πλησθεντων, e pro a in 
aurw (v eraso), y pro ἢ in ern (er eras.) 
B. l 17 o supra lineam post opove 
B! l. 20 και eras. s. m. post avrov, 
sed x periit omnino, ]. 27 at pro ov 
in Avcor D: o perit omnind. l. 28 
ep pro ov B (τ in Tomwoc rescripto). 
l. 30 M (e. pov) supra lineam post 
λαου, et αἱ supra e in eyurrw E: cf. 
160 b. 1. 6. 

441 a. l. 9 u semi-scriplum pro e in 
iudicem. l. 16 et secund. eras. δ. m. 
l. 26 us elot. sub & e in facta est p. m. 

441 b. 1l. 3 punctum supra T secund, 
p. m., forsan casu. 1. 8 int. o eras. 
& m.; sic ]l. 13 εἰ in weet. l 14 c 
supra cv in axoveoGe A, forsan p. m. (cf. 
vers. Latin. et 439 ὁ. 1. 33). L τό fin. 
Tov post αγγελου addit F. l. 29 το in 
amryyovro eras s. m., * in ν mulat A: 
ya. p. m., me judice. 

442 b. L 8 exewa pro εἶτα pelpn (ut 
videtur) D. 
etiam e prim. in warepeow: ε secund. in 
a mutat D. lost fin. e pro « in 
μωῦσι D. l. 12 par in rasurd deesse 
videtur : ντν laxiüs scribit D pro πα 


l. ro init. ev eras. δ. m., 


(quasi legeret Tov τυπονὴ, v p. m. ante v 
erase: προσωπον p. m. Wetst. malé : anne 
potius παρατυπον] cf. Stephani Thesaur., 
qui Schol. in Aristoph. Acharn. 516 
c'tat. 
l. 19 » supra lincam post evpe D. 


]. 14 jin. v tn ἴησουν eras. 8. m. 
l. 25 
c pro v in pov H. ]. 33 kat punctis 
supra positis abrogat 8. m. 

443 a. l. 5 punctum supra c prim. 
forsan casu. l 19 8 im scons- 
et obelo et puncto supra posito abrogat 
8. m. _ 

443 ὃ. l. 1 o warepes ip” pro exewor 
F. 1.3 rno supra lineam post περι C. 
l. 9 
re punctis supra positis abrogat s. m. 


l]. 5 rewe elot. sub veo eX p. m. 


l. 14 
l. 26 δε 
l 27 vn. 


l 11 » supra lineam post ede B. 
a supra ἢ in nveuryp- A. 
supra lineam post θεισ A. 


——— M — 


eras. 8. m. in φωνὴν et μεγαλην. L 25 
ἢ pro ein στήσεισ H. 

444 a. 1, 22 i pro e in -ntes s. i. 

444 b. 1. 2 rno supra lineam post χω- 
pac C. l 4 uncis (*) abrogat s. m.: 
sic ( * >) 1. 16. l. $ € supra νκ in 
συνκομισαντεσ E: o fn. eras. 8. m.: εἰς 
etiam l. 10 σ prim.eras. 1.13 T super 
A prim. in καλελθων H: viz cum Wetst. 
καθ- p. m. l. 17 supra lineam δὲ οἱ 
οχλοι ante rou, rov ante φιλιππου, add it 
etiam ομοθυ (0v eraso) ad fin. lineae C. 
l 18 Ovu^ ὃ in rasurá ante o» C, τὸ 
(forsan potius re) post o» eraso: Wetst. 
legit ενιζοντο p. m., Mill. ouabor ro. 
l. 20 axo ante πολλοισ (o eraso) H, p. m. 
lectione (fortasse x[ap]a) deletá. 
& supra lineam ante xwror B. 


l. 23 
Ἰ. 27 κ 
ad finem lincae post μαγενων addit B. 
]. 38 «oro» B inter ε et To: p. m. lectio 
deperit. 

445 α. l. 5 & in quae eras. s. m. 


*' eteg rare p. m." Wetat. 


IL 23—25 lacuna in pergamenam inci- 
dit. 1. 26 1 secund. tn uiri εἰ obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat 8. m. 

445 b. 1. 9 καὶ eras. 8. m., sic Lot v 


in efewra»ro. l ro p elot. sub w 


prim. p. m. 
t pro a in ovdeva D! 


l. 19 ¢ in ewe eras., etiam 
L 23 eo^ pro ov 
in ἐπετιθουν A vel B. l. 28 e proa 
in προσηνεγκαν D. 

446 a. 1.4 m prim. partim eras., sic 
l. 28 a prim. in paecunias. 

446 6.1. 1 To in marg. ante ἀργυριον, 
etiam cov supra lineam ante ow D. 
l. 2 fin. v elot. sub σ secund. in ἐνομισασ 
p.m. 
p.m. 1. 5 yap supra lincam ante xap- 
δια C. l. 7 e pro ἢ prim. in ἀαφηθη- 
σεται, etiam pro v tn σου D. l.9 εἰσ 
pro nv, » pro a (o, ut videtur) in wrixprac, 


l. 3 a elot. sub ὦ in xpuuaruv 


c supra lineam post χολή, ov pro w in 
συνδεσμω B. l 12 σε cot, sub δε 
p.m. in δεηθητε, τ pro e secund. semi- 
scripto p.m. : “wep pro περι B. l. 14 
v supra oin o» B. 1015 lineam uncis 
(* *) abrogat 8. m.: « etiam pro v in 
διελυμπανεν ponit. 
(^ ") abrogat s. m. 


Voces supra lineas, ev ante 


l 27; Twoo uncis 
]. 28 avrqe oo pr» 
avrov B. 
ἵεμουσαληὴμ |. 29, κα ante καθημενοσ |. 30, 
avrov post apuarog |, 31 D. la 
dialysin his habet p. m. 


455 b. Supra lineas ἡ post εἰ Ἰ. 7, o 


post avacra 1. 17 C. 1. 8 e £n eibov et 


0be/o et dialysi supra «positd abroyat s. m.. 


456 b. 1. 1 o pro v in lom A, ut 
videtur, ut et 1, 12 fin. ὦ pro ὃ in avro 
( eraso). Il. 14, 15 wo punctis supra 
positis abrogat, νομιλῶ post ov addit F 
(ut videtur) l. 14, idem 1. 15 habet avr^ 
pro kac prim., εἰσηλθεν pro εἰσελθων (re 
sequente eraso), evpew". pro evpev. 1. 16 
7 pro $ in εφιστασθαι B! l.17 cin 
αθεμιστον, etiam re l. 26, eras. 8. m. 
l. 19 δε supra ἣν in pnva A. l. 24 
Terap pro τησ Tp. B? 

457 b. Supra lineas v post ov 1. 4, ce 
ante προσ]. 5 C. l. 7 δου (i.e. δ' ov: 
εἰ ita Wetst.) p. m. lectio esse videtur: 
sed ‘Sov hab.t A, ov. (δ eras.) C cum 
vers. Lat. l.ST proc in cov prim. C: 
idem 6v πάρεσμεν supra axovom, decem 
puncta supra βουλομενοι habet. li: 
Jin. at pro wor B1 Supra lineas ryo 
post ολησ l. 19, αὑτὸ post εχρισεν 1. 22 
C. l. 32 pera punctia supra positis 
abrogat 8. m., v in τὴν et Tp mr, ~ in 
] 33 4 supra lineam 
ante ey secund. C (i.e. avro μεν: Kip- 


ἡμέρα erasis. 


ling. minis rectà αὐτο" a. m.). 
458 b. 1. 4 a» supra ve in συνεστρα- 


ῴφημεν B. 
aytov C. 


l. 20 rov supra lineam ante 
l. 22 γλωσσαισ και μεγαλυ- 
γοντω laxius scribit D! ante » rov 6», 
7». m. lectione scalpello prorsus deperditd. 
Lix errore versionis Latinae conjicias xevauc 
(4. €. καιναισ)ὴ ante yA. p. m. (“ ποικιλαισ 
seu mavis erepau" Mill.) **...... Kat peya- 
Auvew”” Wetat. 1. 24 ve supra ἃ in 
kwiat E, “supra rio et ‘supra δυναται 
(ordine mutato) s. m. 1. .30 "m pro 
δια A. l. 33 T in marg. ante ou o 
supra lineam post οἱ D. 

4:9 a. l. 29 d elot. sub i in ibu 
p.m. 

459 b. 1. 1 » supra ar tn εδεξατο, ]. 2 
€ supra τ tn exavou, l. 3 εν pro at in 
nOednoa, 1. 14 0 supra T in κατεξησ, 
forsan. etiam 1. 26 o supra lincam post 
avacra E. l. 12 cv» secund. eras. 
8.1. — l. 16 e» supra lineam post εἰδον, 
l. 30 de supra lineam. post eyevero A, ut 
videtur. 
H. 


moda, etiam 1. 23 ante eprera C. 


L 21 7 pro 0 in αθενισασ 
Ta supra lineam |. 22 ante rerpa- 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


460 a.l. 31. Punctum supra n in noli, 
forsan case, 
l. 19 
l. 26 ca supra a» 
l. 30 Tov punctis supra 


460 b. 1. 15 v pro t ín avro: B. 
t pro a in wa B. 
in εδοξαν D. 
positis abrogat s. m. 

461 a. 1. 1 tim tres uiri p. m., vescript. 
8. m. 

461 b. 1. 5 verae pro ac in ελληνασ F. 
1.13 776, l. 23 wo, l. 27 Kas rore punctis 
supra, positis abrogat 8. m. lore 
pro 0 in θαρσον H: F avrov addit ad 
fin. 1. 23 post παρεκαλεσεν et ll. 26—28 
ita refingit E: 


va ἡ ἐκκλήσια καὶ διδαξαι 
συναχυθηναιτοχλον ἵκανον 


p» [4 
eset eens 4 
και TOTE πρωτωσ XPHMATICTA εν AYTLOXELG 


του μαθητασ χρειστιανουσ (" ’ ordine 
mutato). 

462 a. l 32 n in erant et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat s. m. 

462 b. l. 1 ονοματι αγαβοσ p. m., re- 
scripsit K. l 3An supra av in peyay 
C. l. 9 » pro c secund. tn ἀποστει- 

L 17 ἡ pro a tert. in 
l. 28 wept avrov punctis 
l. 323 v 


λαστεσ D! 
μαχαιρα D! 
supra positis abrogat s. m. 
pro ov in κοιμουμενοσ H. 

463 a. 1. 30 u supra o secund. (obelo 
notatum) in prodocere s. m., forsan A. 

463 b. 1.1 » supra lineam post αλνσεσι 
C. l. 3 8 elot. sub 0 in θυρασ p. m. 
1.6 vw? elot. sub X in πλευραν p. m. 
l. 16 εἴ elot. sub *y secund. in ἀγγελον 
p. m. l. 28 v elot. sub y prim. in 
ayyeror p. m. l 33 » supra vo in 
twavou C. 

464 a. 1. 9 t elot. sub ἃ in autem p. m. 
l. 10 verba dividas caicia te, 

464 b. Madore pessima foedatur haec 
pagina; sic etiam 466 b, 468 b, 470 ὃ, 
472 ὃ, 474 ὃ, 476 b. 
rescripsit K ; anne p supra lineam ante 


l. t μενον apxou 


aaxou p. m. sit (ut judicat Kipl.), parum 
scio. 1. 4 fin. πυλωνοσ rel finxit vel. ve- 
scripsit F? post rov: p. m. lectio amplius 


spatium complexa est: vix cum Wetst. e£v 


primae mands esse diceres. l. 8 και 
punctis supra positis abrogat e. m. 1.9 
τον supra lincam ante rer por C. l. τοι 


supra lineam ante δε, προσ pro edeyor 


eras, (cujus verbi e prim. et γον adhuc 


443 


supersunt), » supra lineam post avr, C? 
]. ir c supra ἐσ p. m., me judice (A apud 
Kipl.). l. 15 εξ, 1. τό και, 1. 17 wa 
et ot ante v finale eras. 8. m. liga 
8. m. post cery super a (p.m. ut videtur): 
sequuntur duo feré literae prorsus deper- 
ditae. Perperam Mill. rov avyar p. m. 
l. 28 Procul dubio awoxravOnvat p. m., 
sed perierunt omnind o et τι deinde ax 
pro oxray A: postremó axOyvar supra 
lineam B, Onvat p. m. in textu per puncta 
supra posita abrogato. 

465 b. l. 10 ἡ pro a in φωναι H. 
l. 14 € supra lineam ante κωληκοβ- .B. 
l. 16 9 pro e prim, in evtaye H; acd » 
supra lineam post ev£aye C. 1 18 j 
pro a, et a pro e tert, in axearpeyer H. 
l 20 καὶ pro Tov, et 1, 38 rov pro kai 


prim H. l 25 «v kac supra lineam 
post ow C. 

466 a. 1, 27 e partim elotum ante u in 
que p. m. 


466 b. 1. 3 "supra πο, ‘supra αγιον 
(ordine mutato) s. m. 1. τὸ init. Forsan 
και wepted- p. m. (και et p, enitio lineae 
apparent) εἰ ita. Wetst.; kac we eraso, ὃ 
super p habet H. L 1:4 fin. Forsan 
βαρίησουαν vel cum Wetst. «σοναμ (cf. 
467 b.]. 32 et vers. Lat.) p. m.: » proa 
in fine H, » vel pw sequente. deperdito. 
l. 18 και, etiam 1. 30 ovcac, punctis supra 
positis improbat s. m. l. 19 o vel 
potius a periit inter er equ: λυ pror D: 
** Av post rasuram lax’. Fuit erouac " 
Bent. apud Ellis, Crit. Sacr. Ὁ. a4. 
I. 23 uncis (‘’) hanc lineam improbat 8. m. 
l. 27 πασησ supra lineam post καὶ B : qui 
ctiam «e pro ot in ὕιοι habet: cf. Tabulam 
III. 3. l. 31 punctum supra ἢ p. m., 
μὲ videtur. 

467 a. 1. 27 omnes supra lineam post 
et, B: cf. Graec. 

467 b. 1. 13 » 1n τὴν eras. 8. m., quae 
etiam rio l. 18, τη 1. 28, punctis supra 
positis. improbat. l.18 σ pro v in 
l. 27 xa proba. 1.33 
supra lineam avrow ante τὴν, av post 


y» E. 
468 b. 1. 1 supra lineam y ante e, Ta 


Aoyou A, 


Tavra post e in ews D. l. 19 v in 
ἐπλήρουν erat. 8. m.: » supra a» iA 
iwarno B. 1.21 7 pro 0 in μεθ H. 


l. 27 fin. avro (ut videtur) p. m., sed ἡ 


414 


deperiit omnino: F habet avrwy, addens 
τοῦτον αὙγνοουντεσ. 1. 28 Quae p. m. 
scripta adhuc supersunt, dedimus: forsan 
primd μη συνιενταισ rac ypapac, feró cum 
Wetst.; vix αγνοησανταισ Tac *ypadac, 
ut judicat Kiplingius, aut αγνοουνταισ 
cum Millio: prima enim litera M. non A 
fuisse videtur. H, erasá p. m. lectione, 
και Tac gw ante ac substituit. Ll 32 
qr"sarro πίλατον ἀγερεθηννὶ (uncis < > 
postea improbatum) addit F. 

469 b. 1. 1 ¢ supra lineam ante εἰσ, εἰ 
ec* pro ov A. l 2 fin. εἰσιν eras. 
8. m.: &ic etiam 1. 6 κα. 11.3, 4 uncis 
(^) improbat 2. π. 1. 8 wou punctis 
supra positis tmprobat 8. m. l9v 
pro va in πλειονασ H! 

470 a. 1. 25 ta elot. sub ci in suscitauit 
p. m. 

470 b. 1. 4 » supra lineam post o prim. 
A. l. 9 fin. μὲν pro re A, me judice: 
evanuit atramentum ; re pro certo lectio 
est prius scripta. Ll. 18 ce in &eny7- 
σεται punctis supra positie improbat 8. m. 
l.22 τα supra lineam ante ρηματα E. 
1, 28 ro (re judice Wetstenio) in emi- 
Üovro eras. s. m. : o vel ε pert: of. Fol. 
rot 6. 1. 24. 

471 a. ll. 4, τί turpiter abscissa est 
pergamena. 

471 5. 1. 3 fin. row post Xoyow addit 
F; row ante Xoyow lineold supra positd 
abrogat K. l. 6 σα supra ap in wap- 
ρησιαμεγοσ A, me judice; sic etiam 472 
b. 1. 12: possunt tamen esse p. m. 1.8 
yo supra » in dow C. l. 9 δε supra 
lineam post exiby B. l. 10 e supra a, 
αι supra e secund, in kpeware B. 1. r3 
ren proxeyD. l. 14 "supra φωσ, 
‘supra τεθεικα (ordine mutato) s. m. 
l. 22 a pro o in παρωτρυνον E. 

411 b. l. 12 oa supra ap in παρησια- 
μενοι A. l. 15 wy super ov in avrov, 
forsan etiam p. m., nisi mavis A: cranuit 
atramentum, Cf. 470 b. 1. 9. l. 23 
και, l. 25 εἰσ, 1. 32 τησ punctis supra 
positis improbat 8. m. 
1n λυκαωνιασ 8. m. 

473 a. l. tg r in ter secund. lineolá 
supra positá improbat Κ΄. 

473 b. Titul. TIP vinculo papyraceo 
obtegitur. Supra lineas l. 5 Tn ante 
φωνη, 1. 9 À supra À in ανηλατο, 1. 17 


l 24 o pro v 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


rno ante πολεωσ C. l 23 και, l. 26 ἡ 
in -παηθεισ eras. 8. ἢ. 1l. 24 Aeyorrec 
pro φωνουντεσ (φων cl v erasis) D. 1. 29 
Tov punctis supra pontis improbat s. m. 
l 33 » supra lineam post εἰασε, x^ Ta 
pro κατα (xa eras.) C. 

474 b. 1. 4 fin. o p. m., rescriptum 
8. m. l. 5 fn. rao addit post καρδιασ 
F. Supra lineas |. 9 $e ante avrov, 
l. 16 ov supra ec, 1. 27 εἰσ ante ελθειν B. 
L 12 και, l. 18 » in τὴν punctis supra 
positis improbat a. m. 1.16 » pro v 
secund. in avrov H. l 19 ow ante 
τω H: p. m. lectio deperit. 

475 a. l. 12 lineolam supra is ponit K. 

475 b. L 2 marg.: legas 25 pro 23. 
1. 10 avrow semi-erasum 8. m. 1, 12 
y supra lineam post ἡνυξε C. l. 29 wr 
supra ow tn avro C. 

476 a. 1. 30 c (ut videtur) elot. sub n 
in hanc p. m. 

476 6.1. 5 εἴ pro o in παρεδοθησαν, ad 
supra yw in peywo DB. L7oim 
απηγγείλαντεσ eras. 8. m., sic και 1. 18. 
l. 13 T supra ὃ tn δὲ forsan C: evanuit 
atramentum. l 17 a pro e prim, a 
pro ἡ in ἀγεστησεν (ἡ prorsus deleto), ev 
eraso, H, ut fiat avacrac: ev m». etiam 
punctis supra positis improbat 8. m. 
L 20 fin. ev post apxasor addit A. 1. 21 
Tov supra lineam post δια C. 1.25 σ 
supra lineam post sv B vel C: evanuit 
atramentum. 

477 6.1.2 o tn πιστευσομεν, 1. 17 δε 
eras. 8. m. l. 7 ν secund. in BapraBay 
eras., v pro v in παυλον H, qui etiam 
l 8 w' pro οι habe. Ἰ. 15 T supra 
lincam ante ουτωσ (c eraso) C, no etiam 
in συνφωνήσουσιν €raso. l 24 o in 
textu ante rot, etiam ὧν pro noe H. 

478 a. 1. 14 punctum supra ἃ ultim. 
casu ponit p. m. l. 20 a Graec? elot. 
ante a secund. 

478 b. 1. 2 init, e eras, 8. m.: literae 
ferà tres [χει] deperditae inter ε et ev. 
l. 4 ac in ebotace» et obelo et punctis 
supra positis improbat 8. m. 1. 13 ra 
supra lineam post xa B: cf. 479 b. 1. 8. 
l. 15 punctum supra 0 casu ponit p. m. 
1. 17 e£ secund. punctis supra positis im- 
probat s. m.: legas υμασ. l. 19 a pro 
o in διεστειλομεθα D. l. 38 a supra 


au in ravra B. l. 30 U pro ἢ in ἡμειν 


Ht  L 31 τῶν supra lineam post rov- 
Tw» B!: evanuit atramentum. 

479 4.1.37 a elot. sub ain judam p. m. 

479 5.1. 2 ται (sic) post ow addit E. 
l. 6 e» ἡμεραισ ολιγαισ tncis () >) tmpro- 
bat 2. m. l. 8 ya supra ay in συνα- 
γοντεσ B. l. 14 orrea whe L 12 elot. 
sub καὶ exear p. m., etiam eo elot. sub 
da p. m. l 18 προσ supra lineam 
ante avrovg [sic p. m.] A: cf. Tabulam 
IH. 2. l. 23 tni. και eras. s. τα. : καὶ 
aupra lineam post pera E: κυ post rov 
ad fin. Ft 

480 a. }. 3 t semi-formatum pro 8 
sccund. l. 33 s elot. sub c in disces- 
gerunt p. m. — 

480 b. Supra lineas rov ante «v }. 9, 
τῶν ante αποστολων l 30 (tantum non 


I pro T bis) E. 
481 a. l 1 a Graec elot. sub a in ad 
p. fh. 


481 ὃ. 1. § οἱ pro yr in γενομενην H. 
l ro "supra ὠφθη, ‘supra τω 8. m. 
l. 11 fin. qv addit post rw E. L 18 
..Supra ἢ forsan casu: va supra ax in 
αχθεντεσ, etiam 1. 20 » supra az in 
νεαπολιν E. l. 23 e pro ἢ secund, in 
nun» H: T prim. etiam tn raury 1. 23, 
ui eb o in nxovoer L 33 eras. s. m. 
l. 33 x elot. sub 0 in θν p. m. 

482 a. 1. 21 i secund. in indie eras. s. m. 

481 b. ν supra lineam post rapexadece 
jJ. 4 Bi, post παρειχε L 12 E. l. τὸ 
οὐ pro a in πυθωνα A: reeté vidi 
Wetst. Ll 13 δια Tovrov uncis (^ ") im- 
probat s. m. Ll 15 καὶ eras. ἃ. m.: c 
pro o in expatoy H. l. τό axo supra 
lineam ante δουλοι E. Liza in 
ευαγγελιζοντεσ, 1. 32 Ta et » in cOry 
eras, 8. m. l 25 fn. Punctum in medio 
loco addit 8. m. l. 28 e pro a tert. in 
προσαγαγοντασ A: cf. 1, το. 

483 a. 1. 8 (sic 484 a. 1. 19) a in quae 


eras. 8. m. l. 16 homini supra lineam 
post hi E (cf. Graec.). 1. 24 iin ispes 
eras. 8. m. l. 28 b elot. sub p in oj- 


tulissent p. m. 

483 ὃ. l. 3 puncta supra af in xpa- 
ζοντεσ 8. m., forsan casu. l 4 και 
pro Tore H. l 12 » in ησφαλισαντο, 
λυ in aveduGy l. 20, etiam και 1. 23, cras. 
sm. lig eco »ukr' op pro μεσον 
tno νυκτοσ (vryo eras.), et 1. 16 « supru 


Loin δεσμοι C. 1. 31 προσ rove ποδασ 
punctis supra positis improbat s. m. 

484 b. 1. 1 init. καὶ eras. 8. m. l.9 
o supra du in ελυσεν D. ll. 12, 13 
init. καὶ p. m. (cf. vers. Lat.) scalpello 
prorsus deletum. 

485 b. l. 1 av eras. δ. m., σοι post av- 
τοι punctis supra positis vmprobat alius: 
postea eras. l.19 6 secund. in wapa- 
καλεσαντεσ, etiam ll. 31, 24 και, et 1. 24 
c prim. in εἰσωθοσ eras. s. m. l. 21 
και supra lineam post karyA0op C, puncto 
p.m. supra 3 in ἀπολλωνιδα forsan casu 
posito: sic supra n $n -unt 486 a. L a1. 
1. 28 τον supra lineam post or: E. 

486 b. L 1 τῷ (vel rw) Σιλεα marg. 
K recentissimé. — 1l. 9 scalpello delentur 
literae non minus tres (forsan arr errore) 


post emor. 1. 11 fin. ν secund. in ἴσωναν 
eras, 8. m. l. 12 a pro € in rwea B. 
l. 15 εἰσιν punctis supra positis improbat 
8. m. l 21 a pro “ἐσ in akovcarrec 
B. 1. 25 o supra lineam post εἰ secund. 
C. l 33 o pro o secund. in exec B 
vel H. 

487 b. 1. 2 i8 supra vw in ελληνων, x 
ad fin. lineae addito, B: E pro xa 


vyGUttoP 


secund. yu habet: 1. 3 wr οὐκ 
ολίγοι pro ec Kat γυναικεσ H, praeeunte 
E in 1, 2. 
s. m. 1. 6 supra lineam o ante λογοσ, 
—- 
Tov ante 0v E. 


eras. s. m. 


l. 7 και, 1. 8 εἰσ αὐτὴν 
l. 9 pa supra ac in rac- 
l. τά θιστω lazxids scribit 
super ταστανο eras. H. l. 23 σ supra 
lineam post avrov et |. 39 *y supra vx, a» 
supra xo $n maparvxorrag C. l. 24 
To supra lineam ante wva, et 1. 26 » supra 
vy in συγαγωγὴ D, nisi matis C. 1. 32 
βαλλ pro λαβ in συνέλαβον A. l. 33 
οἱ minutum pro ἡ in Gedy H 1 
488 b. 1, 1 » in oder, etiam 1. 29 ort 
1, 4 Tow supra lineam ante 
1.6 διδ elot. sub ὕπο p. m. 


σοντεσ B. 


eras. 8. m. 
aptoy B. 


1. 18 a»Üe pro Üucro ('amwro p. m. ut 
videtur? Wetst. malà) E. l 20 » 
supra lineam post ἡ B. l. 26 e pro o 
secund. in karowot H. l. 27 v supra 
οὗ E. l a8 Kn. addit τι avroc H. 
l. 29 8 pro o ante dove, l. 33 o supra or 
A rel D. 


]. 4 uncis (*?) improbat | 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


489 a. 1l. 10 t elot. sub n $n uellint 
p. m. l. 18 Àiat pergamena ante a 
final. 

489 5.1. 1 supra lineam ¢ post xa, σ 
post Ta tn κατα, o supra » erasum tn 
οροθεσιαν E. l. 3 fin. » post avro 
addit D. l. 4 α !n evpocar (o in e 
etiam mutato) obelo improbat s. m., quae 
etiam T in Τ' transfert. l. 5 w supra 
o (obelo notat.) in ov, 1.6 w supra ἢ in 
avry C?, etiam νπαρχων ad fin. 1.5 addit 
E. l 9 rov prim. in rovrov obelo 
improbat 8. m. : e» supra yo in yoo C. 
l. 12 ovre punctis supra positis abrogat 
s. m. 1.16. ra τησ in ταυτησ (ὃ prov 
&. m.) eras, etiam 1]. 17 e pro a in 
παριδων D (.. supra « addito). L 18 
iva obelo transfigit, a pro e in παντεῦ 
habet D. 
evrea pro car D. 

490 b. Nonnulla in hdc pagind (ll. 19 
—21), madore pessimà foedatd, recenti 
manu rescripta sunt. l 3 or supra 
θα in ἐληλυθα B. 1.5 fin. » prog m 
κλανυδιοσ A. 1.7 α pro e in κατωκη- 
σεν A1,1. 8o prowB. 1. 13 punc- 
tum supra v in Tov p. m., forsan casu. 
l. I4 καὶ eras. s. m.: sic etiam T prim. 
l 17 init., v secund. in διαμαρτυρουμε- 
voc l 18. .1.232 init. a» pro e (ut con- 
jicere licet) D. 1l. 27—31. Quae adhuc 
leguntur, dedimus: Kiplingius ex vers. 
Lat. restituit 1. 27 [$ vu]: l. 29 
[απο rov axv]Aa (immó potius [δὲ axo 
axv]a: l.3o [εἰσ] ante ηλθεν et τὸν 


]. 28 e in εκολληθησαν eras., 


| [oh[xo]r: 1. 31 7[o]o (vix rov ut Wetst. 


putat) post ovoua : B ita omnia refingu: 


καθαροσ eyw απο Tou 
σ 
νυν εἰσ τα εθνὴ πορενομαι Kat 


μεταβασ εκειθεν 


ἦλθεν eu οἰκιαν τινοῦ 
τι τιον — 
ovouaT,. ιουστου GeBopevov Trop Oy 


491 a. l. 20 cto p. m. rescripsit s. m. 

4915.1. 8 © pro σ secund. in σειωσησ, 
no ad finem verbi addito D. l 30 τα 
supra lineam post ζητημα D. l. 33 ἢ 
pro e prim., a pro v in ἀπελυσεν D. 

492 b. Scalpello rasa sunt nonnulla 
]. 1; 35 43 10; 18; 19. Ll 1 ewe pro 
aro in awodaBopevs D (a prim. perit). 
l. 2 init. oras (Ussher.) vel pera (Mil. 
Wetst. Kipl.) periit omnind, preter | ini- 


, post rast, l. 31 post ηὔξανε D. 


445 


tio lineae. L 4. Quae restant. p. m. 
scripta (a Kiplingio post Wetst. perperam 
lecta, rore γαλλιωνὴ dedimus: D ita sup- 
plet: καὶ οὐδὲν Tovrwr T ante w γαλλιω, 
vt ened ante εν. L 10 προσ eras. ante 
εὐχὴν: o periit omnino. l. 15 8 pro 
T im Te, O0 prow in avrov H. l. 334 
pro 8 $n δε, ep secund. etiam eras, H. 
l. 19 Super spatium scalpello erasum 
xapy laxà scripsit H: vix pxay p. m., 
ut judicat Wetst. 1. 20 no pro ov in του 
H. 1l2350pror in κατεξησ D. 1. 33 
aw eras. s. m. 

493 a. l. 9 punctum supra a (etiam 
ante hl. 32) p. s. : forsan casu. 

493 5.1. 2 » supra a» $n warov, l. 3 
ey pro ἡ in «roc, et τῇ supra lineam 
post e» D: cf. Tabulam rrr. 5. l. 4 
Kat prim. eras., e pro o secund. in axove 
carros, etiam δὲ supra lineam ante 
avrov A. 1. 15 » in woduy eras. s. m. 
1. 27 ¢ supra lineam post οὐδε (i.e. ovd εὐ 
B. Supra λαμβανουσῖ eras. ἐσ habet D, 
i.e. ἐστιν, nam eo 1. 28 erasum est. 
l 32 τ p. m. in perarouag, sed Τ' (ut 
videtur) primd. 

494 a. 1. 27 est addit D post accipi- 
unt punctis supra positis improbatum. 
Cf. 493 5. 1. 27. 

494 6. 1. 3 rov supra lineam ante xu 
(sic) C. l 5c supra lineam post emt- 
0erro B. L 6 v proc in avrów, 1. 7 
tnit. € ante λαλοὺυν D. l. 15 punctum 
supra e prim. p. m., forsan casu. 1. 21 
w post e prim. penitus eras., ν etiam in 
acta» p. m., sed o semi-formatum ante ν. 
]. 32 tnit. ἡ (ut conjicere licet) periit om- 
ninà. ll. 431—243 ta corrigit D, mu- 
tatis mutandis. 

wore "mavras "ov. karowovrrag τὴν 

ασιαν 

ακουσαι TO P λογο P TOV Kv 

ore 

ἴουδαιον και erac 
1. 24 7 pro 9 in δε D. l. 31— (ἡ. e. νὴ 
supra ὦ in fine lineae addidit 8. m. 

495 6. 1. 1 rou supra lineam ante xv C. 
l. 9 “supra εξελθειν, 'supra κηρυσσει 8. m. , 
cf. vers. Latin. 1. 10 & supra lineam 
ante εἰπεν D. l 15 € prim. in εἰσχυ- 
σεν obelo abrogat s. m., dialysi etiam 
supra ¢ posud. L 18 » supra lineam 
l 25 


416 


supra lineam δὲ ante των, ra post των B, 
(ra ante epya punctis supra positis no- 
iato). 1. 18 a pro o in συνεψηφισον B. 
1, 29 init. & ante evpov B. l. 31 dia- 
lysis supra v tert. eras. 8. m. ibid. fin. 
To post ἐπληθυνε addit D. 

496 a. 1. 30 lineola. sire macula (,) 
p. m. post c in conual.. 

496 b. 1. 4 » elot. sub Sin eibew p. m. 
Ἰ. 16 ε tm τεχνεταισ eras. 8. m. Supra 
lineam habet B 1. at τὴσ ante aciac, 
l 251 post ye, 1. 26 o supra ve in xur- 
Suvevet, 1. 30 » post μελλει. l 22 rw 
Tore punctis supra positia improbat s. m. 

497 a. l. 17 fin. ec elot. sub c in hac 
p. m. 

497 5. ll. 2, 25 » supra lineam ante 


αρτεμισ D. L 3 exdno laze scriptum 
σ 


super cvvexv, etiam τησυνχυσεωσ pro 
' αἰιἰσχυνησ F: cf. vers. Latin. l.6 a 
pro € secund. in μακεδονεσ D rel H. 
1, 18 προ pro kar (Millius wap p. m. 
minus rectà) in xareBiBacay D vel H. 


l. 29 
l. 30 τ elot. 


l. 27 o ante ἀνθρωποσ eras. s. m. 
tw supra ao in ναοκορον B. 
sub a secund. in avavripp. p. m. 

498 a. l. 13 8 prim. in mississent e 
obelo et puncto improbat s. m. l. 19i 
prin. in iudaeis, ]. 32 t secund. in oportet 
punc'o notat p. m.: forsan casu. 

l. 5 
init. ot eras., sed ot supra lineam, ante 


498 6.1.3 o pro a in θεαν H. 


l. 10 ^ supra lineam. post ex- 
Pro τω 


συν D. 
κλησια B: cf. vers. Latin. 


vouc D postca scripsit ry evop.a. l. 14 
v leviter elot. sub o secund. in avorp. 
p. m. l. 15 » supra lineam post απε- 
Avce D. l. 18 a pro e prim. in παρα- 
κελεσασ D, v (ut conjicere licet) ante aaa 
prorsus deperdito. l. 19 a pro o in 
αποσ-, etiam re supra lineam ante e£- 
n\Gev D, πο in αποσ- punctis etiam 
votato. 


l. 21 παρακαλεσ 


l 20 a pro ἡ tin ekewm D. 
ag avrove pro xpno[ape- 
volo B, literis inter xpno et o prorsus 
l 23 no supra lincam post 
γενηθεισ D. l. 38 o pro v (cf. vers. 
Lat.) post Bep D. l 31 ep pro ov, 
etiam a pro ep in δ υβεριοσ D, € p.m. 
post B deperdito: cf. vers. Lat. l. 33 
ω supra o tn τροαδι B. 

499 b. 1. 8 a elot. sub o in διελεγετο 


erasis, 


-—- a, ee ς΄...» 


' abrogato. 


er o e — — A ——— 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 
p.m. 1.19 οσ prim., 1. 21 καὶ secund., 
l. 23 Tor eras. a. m. 

500 a. ]. 8 a elot. sub e in eis p.m. 
l r3 8 secund. in sedens puncto notat 
p. m., forsan casu. 

500 b. l. § AaB in Badr mutat D. 
l. 7 p in epxouerm cras. 8. m: sic 1. 29 


v secund. in διαμαρτυρουμενοσ. l. ra 
to pro» in ev (praepos.) D. 1], τᾷ η ín 
εκκλησιασ p. m., rcacripsit. & m. l 16 


o pro win ομωσ, t pro v secund. tn av- 
rovc D. ]. 18 a pro e tn e$ D. 
l. 20 init. wora ante wwo eras. s. m. 
Jin. roy halt. D! super ww» erasum 
(eranuit atramentum). l. 21 a pro oc 
in raryroc D?; sed » pro v tn xpovov, 
etiam eyevouny supra lineam ante δου- 
λευων E. 

501 5. l. 5 v pro v in Aoyor D, qui 
exo μοι et ovde 1.6 uncis (*") improbat, 
pov etiam 1. 6 punctis supra positis 
l 6 w supra ov in egavrov 
B. l. 9 init. ἢ prootn ον prim. D. 
1. 11 "ov 8v pro 6v F, (O pro © p. m., 
reso). 1. 13 op elot. sub ἐσθ in oyec- 
θαι p. m. l. 16 fin. 50 μαρτυρομαι 
post «yv addit F. l. 17 F habet vuew 
€ pro ἄχρι ov, etiam ἡμεραοῖ" pro ἡμερασ 
(c in o mutato). l. 19 μη supra lineam 
post rov forsan E. l. 20 U pro ἢ in 
l 28 οὐ pro v prim. in πυμ- 
l. 33 καὶ pro δε D. 

502 a. 1. 33 puncium supra c in nocte 
casu ponit p. m. 

502 b. l. 6 fin. avrow (ut conjicere licet) 
l to 
t supra ac in rac et xpeuag B. l. 11 
πασ (sic) punctis supra positis abrogat 
s.m. l ra fin. και post μου addit B (nisi 
]. 13 init. act p. m. procul. 


nuw D. 
vecou B. 


eras. 8. m. Vix legantur av et c. 


mavis A). 
dubio, sed ¢ scalpello deletur : pro oc B 
habet v". 


των B. 


l. 15 re supra lineam ante 
l. 16 α pro o prim. in ovroc, 
l. 18 
wy Supra ag in eurag. A: avrov ad fin. 
l 19 ¢ 


etiam v pro o in μακαριοσ B. 


lineae. post yovara addit F. 
in σὺν puncto notatum p.m., forsan casu. 
l. 21 7ov punctis supra positis improbat 
s.m. 1. 23 ὦ εἰρήκει supra lineam post 
Aoyu A. 1. 24 eurer eras. s. m. post ort: 
ovow lazà scripsit pro εἰ σοι (ut videtur) 
post μελλ D, (co in σοι p. m. penitus 


deletur). 


-—— — —— — ——Ó 


| 


ante θεωρειν E. ll. 27, 28. Quae re- 
stant p. m. scripta dedimus: 


p= 


. 27 @ 

in xa, B et € tn -Barreo, L 28 πηι. 

(ut videtur) inter $e et ν, scalpello gerors.* 

delentur. Has lineas ita transmutat D: 
wo de eyevero araxÜygrat guias 
awosracberrag απ avrov. 

L 33 v (ut videtur) post $ (cf. 466 b. L το: 

498 b. 1. 38) periit: o pro v D. 

504 a. l. 18 navem [wvAoto» ut ridctar 
Graect] elot. sub invicem p. m., wade 
fluxit error linearum: cf. 264 a. 1. 24. 

504 a, 5040. 1. 33—33. Partem Ao: 
folii inferiorem, jam inde ab Usseri: «t 
Milli temporibus laceram, rescio «qua 
nebulo, ante susceptam  Kiplinga editi 
nem, abscidit. Quas lectiones Usserius, 
Millius, Wetstenius (1716), Dickens- 
nius (circiter A. D. 1733) seerraverunt, ea: 
per literas U, M, ΝΥ, D indicatae, 1s 


᾿ς unum collectae sunt. v. 8. Sequenti cum 


l 25 avrov supra lincam , 


exissemus [deest οἱ wept Tow παυλον U, 
M, W] venimus [yA0oue» Ὁ, M, εἰσπὶ- 
θομεν W 1 caesaream et cum introissemcs 
in domum Philippi (*Afe mutilatur Pa4.7 
Dj...ngelitae...de septem mansimus 
ad eum τ. 9.... fiae 1 virgines [rec- 
capes παρθενοι W]...eam D. [‘* Dcsci- 
rantur caetera horum trium rersuum" D]. 

504 b. l. 3 καὶ pro a» in ἀνελθων, be 


eraso, B. l 7 οἱ supra lineam ante 
ιουδαιοι B. l. 10 e pro a secund. in 
παρακαλ- D. l. 15 our? supra Oc, xr 


supra B in θορυβουντεσ (v secund. etia 
puncto notat.) E. l 20 οἱ (ste » 1. 1s 
Jin.) eras. s. m. l. 22 T in aroro;- 
punctatum p. m., forsan casu, L 24 
Incipit linea p. in. ex xeoa sed aro pro 
ex habet B. Totum hunc locum sic redd:t 
MS. Whitgift. (cf. Prolegomena, p. x.): 
απο Kecapatag συν vue ovrot δε wyayor 
ἡμασ παρ ὦ ξενισθωμεν γενομένων εἰσ «epo- 
σολυμα ασμενωσ εδεξαντο ἡμασ οἱ αδελῴοι 
Τὴ δε ἐπιουσὴ εἰσῆει o παυλοσ our μι; 
προσ ιακωβον παντεσ δε. Serran'wur ctiam 
hae lectiones (cf. 504 a. ll. 33—33). τι 1: 
tepocoNvua M, W. v. 16 συνηλθον δε και 
Twv μαθητων deest p. m. U, M, W ; mar- 
gini ascribitur s. m. Ὁ, M. ex κεσαραιασ 
p. m. ὟΝ. (a secund. eras. D) ovros δε ηγα- 
γον ἡμασ προσ ova [ove p. m. W : προσ... 
M, at rap w U cum Whitgift., “ manus 
recentior wo" D] fencPupev kac rapaycro- 


μενοι εἰσ τινα κωμην εἐγενομεθα παρα U, 
M, W. νασωνι [p. ». W] M,W, D ['*4 su- 
pra: alia verba lacerantur: κω (nam μὴν 
non apparet, nec τινι κυπριω)" D]. μαθητη 
apxaw W, at “" μαθητη. κακειθεν (reli- 
quum paginae laceratum)" M. v. 17 *La- 
ceris Graecis" (M) ad vers. Latin. con- 
fugiunt U, M: ἤἥλθομεν εἰσ cepoo...M. 
vzebetarro Ὁ, M, D (‘‘post νπεδεξαντο in 
laceratá Pag. habetur rn 6e" D): δε quaa 
ασμενωσ pergit Ὁ. Plura, unde unde 
hausta exhibet W: κακειθεν εξιοντεσ ηλθο- 
μεν εἰσι ἐροσολυμα νπεδεξαν re [0e U : cf. 
Latin.] ἡμασ ἀσμενωσ οἱ αδελφοι. ᾿ 

£05 a. l. 33 fin. omnes F, spatio post 
iacobum inferposito. 

505 b. 1.1 rapeyevorro laxé scripsit F 
super σαν δὲ wap avro: cf. 505 a. l. 33. 
l]. 2 kat pro ove, avrovc e£ supra lincam 
ante διηγεῖτο (δι eraso), καθ supra lineam 
ante eva (a eraso B). ]l.3» pro c in 
wo B, sed ev supra lineam ante row A. 
l. 6 e prim. in εἰεισι» punctis supra 
positis improbat 8. m. 
l. 9 x pro x secund., 
l. 11 
“On πανταῦ pro εθνὴ cow, v pro c tert. 


1. 8 τ prim. in 
TOUTOL Eras. 8. m. 
θη supra no in κατηκησαν B. 
T 
tn Ἰουδαιοισ D (iovdacos p. m. Wetst., sed 
l. 13 ὃ pro T in pyre, v in e» 
eras., ν prim. in εθνεσιν obelo delet., o 
l. 15 


errat). 


supra lineam post avrov habet D, 


Desunt. tituli in 1 a, 1 ὃ, 9 a, οὖ: 
adduntur recentiore manu 2 a—8 b. 

Fol 1 b. secundae mands: l $ ἢ in 
5y postea. mutat. in e, eddem manu; 
sic etiam 1.6 v prim. in ποιυυν postca 
mutat. in o. l 10 e in Barrie 
super rasuram scriptum. l. 14 € in 
παραγινεται, |. 15 0 in βαπτισθηναι, 
l. 17 0 én σον (v primó) super rasuram 
rescripta, l. 17 0 in βαπτισθηναι su- 


per τ semi-formatum ; $601.23. 1.24 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


]. τῇ 
l. 22 yo supra p in 


ro supra lineam ante πληθοσ B. 
dividas o cot. 
ξυρωνται, etiam o pro w B. l. 24 σ 
supra lineam ante ov prim. B. ]. 25 
α στοιχεισ καὶ pro ort wopevov D, forsan 
B: sic etiam 1. 28 a pro o in xpec- 
νοντεσ. 

506 b. Supra lineas 1. 6 wo post a 
prim.; l 14 ya supra wy in εἰσηγεν, € 
ante ic, ro ante ιερον B. l. 15 vn in 
ekowwrnaev punctis supra positis abrogat 
8. m. l. 24 καὶ ante ξητουντων (cf. 
vers. Lat.) scalpello prorsus abrasum: 
δε supra lineam post ζητουντων substituit 
D. l a8 o" pro a tert. in exarov- 
ταρχασ B. 

507 b. l. 1 o in ric secund, eras. s. m.: 
“1 5» 

l. 25 


ἢ supra uk in πτεποικωσ A. 
supra lineam post exeAevoe A, 
Kat eras, 8. m. 

508 a. 1. 20 temp elot. sub lus p. m. 
]. 27 punctum supra ἃ in manum p. m., 
forsan casu. 

508 b. 1. 7 ¢ semi-formatum inter πα- 
τρω et ov p. m.: of. Prolegom. p. XIX. 
l. 12 o supra lineam ante ἀρχιερευσ A. 


sito, addit F eyevero δε μοι wropevope ,ω- 
l.19 & tn marg.ante ενγιζοντι F. ibid. 
wept pro de po p. m. eras. (quarum lite- 
rarum ὃ et οἱ (lantum supersunt), y proc 


APPENDIX. 


x primó sub v secund. in ευθυσ. ll. 3, 
17, 23, quinquiea etiam tn marg.; 3 6 1]. 
30, 33 mary.; 55.1. 39; 6 b. marg. sexies; 
8 b. secies; 9 b. 1. 14 quid sibi velit " 
p. m., parum scio, 

2 b. secundae mands, α supra e (quasi 
producendi gratid) ll. 1, 5: supra 9 ll. 9, 
16, 17, 325 3 5. 1]. 6, το; 4 ὃ. ll. 6, 29; 
5 ὃ. ll. 6, 18, 20, 21, 29; 6 5.1. 22, 7 ὃ. 
ll. 15, 24; 8. 1. 18: supra ὦ 3 b. 1. 2, 


7 5.1. 2. l. 6 o primó sub ἢ p. m. in 


---.-.-..... ------ ————— ——M—— — — 


447 


secund. in μεσημβριασ F, τη supra lineam 
ante δαμασκω ponit B. — Postea denique 
“supra περι, ‘supra rn 8. m. (F1), ordine 
verborum mutato, l. 20 ex pro aso (vo 
periit omnind) ante rov B. 1 31 εἴπ 
verbo με (ut conjicere licet) post περιε- 
στραψα rasurá perit: ex lined primá in 
M formatur | s. m. l. 26 με supra 
lineam post εἰ secund, B vel C, w supra 
o prim. in ναζοραιοσ B: cf. Proleg. p. Lv. 
510. ZToc folium, Codicis Bezae nunc 
extremum, madore turpiter foedatum, 
lacunis scatet. Quae, nobis haud viaa, 
edidit Kiplingius, hoc loco notabimus. 
510 a. l 2 t in surrexit et obelo et 
puncto supra posito abrogat s.m. 1. 26 
punctum supra ex tm exi p. m., forsan 
casu. 
510 b. Titul. IIPAXIC Kipl., 1.6 av- 
1. 8 o pro e 
ta 


— 
των, 1. 7 τοιουτον, Kipl. 


in καθηκεν s. m. l. 14 σθαυτον (i.e. 
ανεταΐζεσθαι avrov) pro arerajew avrov 
B: σθ s. m. viz leguntur. 1,23 α 
ante πηγγειλεν B: € p.m. (sic legunt 


Wetst. Kipl. perit omnind. l. 24 


, Jin. o yap post ποιειν, 1. 29 fin. avrw post 
1.18 fin. Spatio post τειμωρηθωσιν interpo- | 


| 


exey BY (evanuit atramentum). 1. 25 
init. o (ut videtur) erasum periit omnind: 
]. 29 και (ut videtur) eras. ante eurer, 
periit: l 32 » secund. in yeyerynpat 
erasum, 


την. Haec etiam supra maculam seri- 
buntur p. m. l. 9 o ín oc, l. 16 0 tn -xoc, 
l 30 v. l 21 y prim. tantum non 
scribitur quasi T esset : (sic passim). 
rasura incidit ante avroww. 


1.24 


1.11 o ultim. 
super rasuram rescript., sic o in σοι]. 21. 


3 ὃ. secundae mans. 


l. I2 v p. m. in ὕμεισ super 0 primo: « 
etiam super rasuram. l. 33 τι ἐστιν a. 
super rasuram, rescriptum, 


4 5.1.7 win orparwwratsuper rasuram 


418 


rescriptum; sec etiam a prim. in. acra 
l. 13, e£1. 28, p in expavy- 1. 32. 1.20 
e supra lineam vel ejusdem scribae rel 
adhuc recentioris: sic etiam σ 5 b, l. 24. 

8 6. l. 3 w secund. et tert. superrasuram 
rescripta; sic etiam E 1l. 4, wl. 18, 9 
ll. 20 (secund.), 28, « ult. 1. 23. 1.8 
ει incept. sub v in ὕμων. 

60.1. 5 u tn lithostrotus tantum non 
o scribitur. 

Tota haec pagina παλίμψηστος est, in 
quam primd inscripta est ab eodem 4a 


ADNOTATIONE8  EDITORIS. 


secundae mands, postea autem elota, A p- 
parent vestigia, quaedam prioris. scrip- 
turae, chemicis adhibitis, viz. ll. 1, 2, 4, 
5, 7—9, τό circa fin, L 17 ferà tota 
(intro tantum 44 sub ihm 6 a latente). 
Praeterea, dit ihs ad fin. 1, 22 sine chemi- 
corum ope cernitur, et si qua sunt alia 
(e. g. 1. 18). 

66. 11. 1,9 op.m., pl.a1 p. m., in 
arctum cogentis: etiam 1. 4 ἢ p. m. 
l 5 en εἴδων eras, p. m., quae. .etiam 
ponit, L 9 ἃ rescript. super rasuram 


(c? prime): sic l. 18 wo tn rwor., l. 20€ 
in κεφαλην, 1. 26 w in avro. l 140 
primà (eras.) pro ἡ ante γραφη. Ϊ. 33 
μίετα δε ra]vr[a] eras. ad fin. Cf. 7 5. 
l. r. 

7 b. 1.1 d super rasuram rescriptum. 

85.1. 9 ὦ s. m., ut videtur: sic forsan 
la22ec. 1. 12 € tn εἰσ super rasuram 
reacript., sic 1. 18 no in Tye. 

9 ὃ. col. t, L 9o in ποιωσιν, L 11 € in 
«σειν (cf. Tabulam 111. 13), puncto supra 
posito abrogat 8. m. 


Sequuntur notae liturgicae per codicis marginem subinde scriptae; eddem ferà, quá sectiones 


Ammonit, manu (1). 


IN S. MaTTHARI EVANGELIO. 


3 6. 11. 22, 23 xv ye ri M, 4 b aub 
titulo ap* L.[Dec. 25: xara ματθαιον 
li, I1—12]. 

4 b. 1. 31 apx» (ut videtur) periit: 
l. 32 fin. rov. payor (lined deletum) M 1, 
6 b. l. 11 fin. redoo ort ναζαροσ xA... 
ws... M [Dec. 26: ii. 13—23]. 

6 b. ll. 12—14 Ti ἐορτισ τον θεοφα- 
γιων + M. [σαββατω προ ruv θεοφανειων : 
iii 1—6]. 

8 b. ll. 4—7 avvayrocpa......... L,1.8 
alia nequaquam legenda  ascripsit M. 
10 b. 1. 12: τελοσ: L [xara ματθαιον 
xupaxy β΄: iv. 18—23]. 

I1 b. ll. 19, 20 πέρι rov σαββατου, 
12 ὁ. 1. 8: reor: L [Sept. 2: εἰσ 
μνημόσυνον Tov ἁγιου (warvov TOV F90- 
revrov Wake 12: v. 14—19]. 

14 5. Il. 29—33 arrayrocpa περι TO. 
caBarov (sic Kipling. σαβ tantum nunc 
superest), τό b. 1. 14 reos: L [ca8Baro 
790 τυροφαγου: vi. I—13]. 

28 b. ll. 13—15 ἀγναγνοσμα wept τοῦ 
κυριακη, 29 ὃ 1. 11 τεέλοσ 1, [Nov. 17: 
Tov ἁγιον γρηγοριον του Oavparoupyou 
κ των ἁγιων αναργυρων Wake 12: x. I— 
10]. 

44 b. 1. 11 apX, 46 b. 1. 21 TO, 1. 25 
TcÀo N carbone scripsit [ἡμερα s/ τησ s 
ἑβδομ.: xii. 44—54; ἥμερα ^ τησ j" 
ἑβδομ.: xiv. 1—13], 

47 b. ll. 18—21 ἀνγαγνοσμα wepn Τὸ 


caBaro, 48 b. 1. 21: redoo: 1, [κυριακὴ 
0': xiv. 22— 34]. 

50b. 1. 17 - a£ N carbone [κυριακη ιζ΄: 
xv. 21—248]. 

53 b. 1. τὸ ..ay....8+N carbone ( ferà 
eras.) [June 29: xvi. 13—19]. 

55 5.1. 3 τελοσ N carbone [ἡμερ. é rae 
ἡ ἑβδομ. : xiv. 24—28]. 

55 b. ll. 1—3 μεταιμορῴοσ αἀνναγνοσ- 
μα, 56 b. 1. a reos 1, [Aug. 6: xvii. 
1—9]. 

56 b. 1l. 13—15 ἀγναγνοσμα περι Tov 
σαββατου, 57 6.1. 10 re L [κυριακη d: 
xvii. 14—23]. 

57 b. ll. 11—13 ἀνραγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
κυριακη, ibid. 1. 31 re Leras., sed 1. 28 
Te N carbone [σαββατω ¢’: xvii. 244—27 
vel xviii. 1]. 

57 5.1. 29 +, 59 5.1. 3 τελοσ N car- 
bone [ἥμερα B' τησ 0' £86op.: xviii. 1—11]. 

60 b. 1. 8 reor. N carbone, tantum 
non erasum omnino... [*uep. B' τησ a’ 
ἐβδομ.: xviii. 10—20 (22 Cod. D)]. 

60 b. 1l. 8—11 a»vocpa wept To σαβα- 
του, 61 b. J. 16: redoo* L [xvpia ca’: 
xviii. 23—35]: etiam 60 b. l. 8 ap* N 
carbone. 

61 b. ll. 16—19 avpayrogua περι To 
κυριακη, 62 b. 1. 25: τελοσ: L [caSBarw 
ιά : xix. [(1 Cod. D) 3—172]. 

62 b. ll. 31-- 4 ἀγνοσμα περι Tov σαβ- 
Barco, 63 b. 1. 32: τελοσ: 1, [xvpuum 
ιβ΄. xix. 16—26]. 


64 b. 1. 17 c ap* marg. 65 b. 1. 32 


Cf. Prolegomena, pp. XXVL—XXVIII. 


redo” N carbone [ἡμερ. δ' τησ θ΄ ἑβδομ.: 
xx. I—16]. 

66 b. IL 9, 10 ar»rayrvocpa tantum, 
67 b. 1. 6: τελοσ: L [i. e. xx. 20—28 
lectio huic codici forsan propria: at xx. 
17—A8 est ἑβδομαδοσ θ΄ ἡμερα €]. 

68 b. ll. 15—19 ἀγναγνοσμα πέρι To 
κυριακη, 70 D. 1. 31: reo: L [xxi. 6— 
27: hoc caput legebant Graeci partim 
κυριακὴ Tu» Baie» (1—17), partim τή 
ἅγια και μεγαλη ἡμερα B' (18—43)]. 

70 b. 1. 31 ap* N ραγδοπε[ ἡμερ. δ' rye 
v ἐβδομ.: xxi. 28— 324]. 

71 b. 1l. 16—18 ἀνναγνοσμα περι Tov 
oaBSars, 72 5.1. 25: τελοσ : L [κυριακη 
ty’: xxi. 33—42]. 

73 b. ll. 4—6 γαγνοσμα περι 78 [xv]. 
pk L [xupeaxy ιδ΄ : xxii. 3—14]. 

74 b. ll. 12—15 ἀγναγνοσμα περι τὸ 
kupxaky, 75 5.1.24: τελοσ: L [caBBaro 
ty’ et ἑβδομ.: ὦ ἡμερ. s’: xxii. 15— 33]. 

755.11. 24—26 ἀνναγνοσμα περὶ Tov 
caBBar8, 76 b. 1. 19 reos: L [κυρ. ce’: 
xxii. 34 (33 Cod. D)— 46]. 

76 b. ll. 19—32 [α]νναγνοσμα []ec 
Tov [x]uptaxy, 77 b. 1, 16 τελοσ L [σαβ- 
Baro ιδ΄: xxiii. r— 12]. 

81 ὃ, 1. 15 ap* N carbone [xxiv. 15: 14 
— 48 est ἡμ. ε΄ rho ta’ ἑβδομ. 

87 b. 1. 9 reor N carbone initio εἰ 
Sine lineae [κυριακη ts’: xxv. 14— 30.] 

87 b. 1l. 8—12 αγναγνοσμα περι τῷ xv- 
ρίακη, 88 b. 1. 28: redoo: 1, [κυριακῇ 
THO aroxpew: XXV. 31—46]. 


91 b. ]. r1 TeXovo : L, ll. 12, 18 avpvay- 
νοσμα εἰσ THY μεγαλὴν πεμπτὴν L minu- 
tioribus literis [xxvi. 29, 30: non ita 
Graeci]. 

95 b. ll 31—23 a»vayvocpa ew τον 
παρασκευγον, L (xxvii. 1—54). 

96 5. 1. 2 τελοσ: L [xxvii. 2, ubi for- 
san εὐαγγελιον ^y τῶν ἁγιων παθὼν ex- 
plicit apud nonnullos]. 

99 51. 11 ὧδε στηκη: (nempà ut inter- 
poletur Luc. xxiii. 39—43), 99 5. 1l. 11— 
13 ἀγνναγνοσμα eu Tw παρασκυγῆν, L. 
[τη ἁγια παρασκευὴ ew THY λειτουργιαν : 
Matth. xxvii. 1—38; Luc. xxiii. 39— 
43; Matt. xxvii. 39—54]. 

ror b. 1. 12 reÀ N carbone [rn dy. rap- 
xxvii. 55—61 (60 Cod. DJ]. 

thd. 11. 29, 30 αἀγναγνοσμα L ferà 
d:perditum [rw dytw καὶ μεγαλω σαβ. 
Barw, ἑσπερασ: xxviii. 1—20]. 


ασκ.: 


In 8. ΦΟΒΛΗΝΙΒ EvAXGRLIO. 


114 b. ll. 5, 6 αἀνναγνοσμα tantum, 
116 b. l 3: τελοσ: L [xara :wasyyy xv- 
ριακὴ εἰ: iv. 5—43 (25 Cod. D)]. 

120 b. 1l. s, 6 [v]ep« avawav ἀμενοσ L 
[ἡμερα 8 τησ B' ἑβδομαδοσ: v. 17 (19 
Cod. D)—24]. 

ibid, 1. 23 aps ll 24, 25 ἀννασνοσμα 


tantum, etiam re 121 b. 1. 15 L [ἡμερα 
« rno B ἑβδομαδοσ v. 34— 30]. 

121 b. Ih. 14, t5 ἀγναγνοσμα tantum, 
122 b. l. 32: reor: L [fuepa τ’ τησ B' 
ἐβδομ.: v. 30—vi. 2]. 

123 b. ll. 31, 32 ἀνγναγνοσμα tantum, 
125 b. 1. 16: τελοσ: 1, [σαββατω rye 
β΄ ἑβδομ.: vi. 14— 27]. 

124 b. ll. 32, 23 a»va-yvocpa tantum, 
126 b. La: reos: 1, [ἡμερα γ᾽ rye γ΄ 
éB8op.; vi. 27 (22 Cod. D)— 33]. 

I26 b. ll 4, 5 a»vayroopa tantum, 
ibid. 1. 33: retoo: L [ἡμερα s' Tuo γ᾽ 
ἐξ δομ.: vi. 35—39 (40 Cod. D)). 

tbid. 11. 14, 15 a»vayvooua tantum, 
L [ἡμέρα εἰ τησ γ΄ éBBop.: vi. 40 (39 Cod. 
D)—44] 

127 ὃ. ll. 11, 13 ἀγναγνοσμα tantum, 
ibid. 1. 34: redoo: L [ἡμερα δ΄ τησ γ᾽ 
éSbou.: vi. 48—54]. 

128 b. ll. 1, 2 ἀγναγνοσμα tantum, 
tbid. 1. 24: redoo: L [ἥμερα 8' rgo 8 
ég8ou.: vi 56—69 (63 Cod. D)]. 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


129 b. 11, 15, 14 ἀνναγνοσμα tantum 
L [3uepa γ᾽ τησ 8 ἑβδομ.: vii. 1—13]. 

130 b. Il. 13, 14 εἰσ τὴν μεσοπεντη- 
koc T3) I [ἱ. e. ἥμερα 9 rno δ΄ éB8ou.: vii. 
14—30]. 

1355.11. 9, 10 ἀγναγνοσμα, 136 5.1.8 
: Tehoc :. L [ἡμερα «' τησ δ΄ ἑβδομ.: viii. 
21 (20 Cod. D)—30]. 

138 ὁ. 1. 26 ap* L [κυριακη s; ix. 1— 
38]. | 

142 b. 1. 25 ap* L, 143 ὃ. 1. 20 roc: 
[x. 7—16, lectionem nullam novimus : 9 
— 16 est S Chrysostomi Nov. 13, etiam 


eu lepap και ὁσιουσ Wake 12]. 

143 ὃ. ll. 19, 20 ἀγναγνοσμα L [ἡμερα 
s' της € ἐβδομ.: x. 17—28]. 

ibid. l. 33, 34 εἰσ τὴν εἐνκηνήουν L 
[x. 22—28. In Cod. Gale. O. 4. 22, 
aliis, ew eykaoua ναον ad v. 17 incipit]. 

145 b. 1. g: τελοσ: 1, [σαββατω rao 
εἰ ἐβδομ.: x. 237—838]. 

fbid. 11. 17.—21 ἀνναγνοσμα περι T8 
caBBarov, l. 11 ap*, 148 b. 1. 32: τελοσ: 
L [σαββατω s' των νηστειων: xi. 1—45]. 

150 b. Ad summam paginam apX L, 
IL. 1—3 avvayrocua περὴ L, + το (τὴ re- 
script, L) kvp«axy των προφδϑτησματων 
ede J, 151 b. L 19: reor: L, sub quo 
(l. 20) τελοσ --J ad Sca» 1. 22 refertur: 
cf. Tabulam III. 12 et Prolegom. p. XxviI 
[xuptaxyn των βαΐων: xii. 1—18]. 

152 b. ll. 1, 2 a»vayrocga, 1535.1. 9 
medio lineae re L: 152 b. ll. 14, 18, 
ayvayvoopa, 154, ὃ. 1. 5: re: L [apud 
Graecos iy. y' tho τ΄ ἑβδομ. est xii. 19— 
36; ἧμ. δ΄ xii. 36—47; ry ἁγια & μεγ. 
ἡμ. 8° eur oppor : xii. 17— 47]. 

154 b. IL 23, 24 ἀνναγνοσμα ew Tw 
μεγαλὴν ceumry: minutioribus literis, 
155 ὃ. 1. 28: τελουσ: L [τη ἁγια καὶ 
pey. €, εναγγελιον του νιπτηροσ: xiii. 
3—17) ς 

157 5.1. 1 ap N carbone [xiii. 33: evay- 
γελιον αἱ των ἁγιων παθων incipit v. 31]. 

157 ὃ, IL 23, 24 ἀνναγνοῦμα, 158 b. 
l 33: reos: L [ἡμερ. τ΄ τησ τ΄ ἑβδομ.: 
xiv. 1— 11 (12 Cod. D)]. 

161 b. ll. 24, 25 ἀγναγνοσμα, 162 b. 
l 24: τελοσ: L [σαββατω τησ γ΄ ἑβδομ.: 
xv. 17—xvi. 1 (1 Cod. D)]. 

165 b. ll. 18, 19 ἀγναγνοσμα, 166 b. 
l. 27: τελοσ : 1, [xvpiak ζ΄ : xvii. 1—13]. 


449 


177 b. 1. 21, 41 P atiend manu, Tor 
απολυσηον L [cf. Suiceri Thesaurum Ec- 
cles. ad voc. απτολυσιμοσ: notandum rerd 
est xx. 19—233 lectionem esse rgo. xevrn- 
κοστησ εἰσ opÜpor]. 


In S. LuUcAE EvaNGELIO. 


185 b. 1. 10 marg. P [Marc. 24: Luc. 
i. 39— 56), aliend manu (forsan J): in 
eddem 

188 b. 1. 9 τ΄ medio lineae [Jun. 24: 
Luc. i. 8o]. 

191 5. 1. 33 ap* ad ro per + refert 
M [Jan. 1: ii. 40]. 

ibid. l 15 fia. t redoo M. [Feb. 2: 
ii. 40], redo” α ad init. lineae eraso. 

197 b. ad cap. ew To veow αἰτοσ I 
[xara λουκαν ἡμερ, 8 τησ a’ ἑβδομ. : iv. 
I—15]. 

199 ὃ, Il. 17—21 ἀνναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
κυριακη, 200 b. 1. 7: τελοσ: L, partim, 
errore: nam 

199 ὁ. 11. 23—26 ἀνναγνδσμα wept τοῦ 
caBBaro", 200 b.1. 29 redoo: L [iv. 31 
—36 est caBR. a’). 

201 6. ll. 1, 2 avvaywoopua περι τοῦ kv- 
praxy, 302 b.1. 2 τελοσ: L [κυριακη a’: 
v. I——II]. 

202 b 1l. 26—29 ἀγναγνοσμα περι To" 
κυριακη, 203 b 1. 28 reos: L [σαββατω 
β΄: v. 17—46]. 

208 b. ll. 1—4 ἀγναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
caBBaro , 1. 22 redoo: L [xuptaxy B': 
vi. 31— 36]. 

310 b. 1. 6 fín. Ἔ τελοσ N carbone [vi. 
49: ἡμερ. 0' τησ γ᾽ ἑβδομ. explicit vii. 1]. 

310 b. 1l. 5—8 ἀνναγνοσμα περι ro" 
caBBaro', a11 b. 1. 1: redoo: 1, [σαβ- 
pare é : vii. 1τ--- 10]. 

211 b. ll 1, 2 ἀνναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
κυριακη, L 18: τελοσ: L [κυριακη y': 
vii. 11--- 16]. 

ibid. 1. 19 ap* 1l. 17—41 ἀνναγνοσμα 
περι το σαββατου, 212 ὃ. 27: τελοσ: L 
[ἡμερ. εἰ roo γ' éBdop.: vii. 17—30 (18 
Cod. D)j. 

213 b. 1. 15 p", 214 b. 1. 25 re N car- 
bone [ἡμερ. B' τησ δ' ἐβδομ. : vii. 36— 
50]. 

215 b. ll. 2—6 ἀνναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
κυριάκη, 216 b. 1. 9 τελοσ: 1, [xvp. 3’; 
viii. 5 (4 Cod. D)—15]. 


a7 


450 


216 b. 11, 7—11 ἀγναγνοσμα περι TO. 
σαββατου, l. 27: reos: 1, [σαββατω τ΄: 
viii. 16—21]. 

218 b. 1. 31 ap*, 11. 29—33 ἀνναγνοσ- 
μα wept TO. κυριακη, 220 b. 1. 10 : τελοσ: 
L [xvp. $^: viii. 41—5 6]. 

220 b. ll. 8—11 a»vayrocpa wept TO 
cafBarov, L 27 τελοσ: L [σαββατω 4": 
ix. 1—6). 

223 b. 1. 13 a £, 2238.1. 15 (ut vide- 
tur) redog (item alia jam deperdita) N 
carbone [ix. 22—33: ἦμερ. y Tro É 
éBboy. est ix. 23—27]. 

223 b. 1. 24 τελοσ N carbone [Aug. 6 
Transfigur. ix. 28—36 (35 Cod. D.)]. 

229 b. ll. 20—25-- ara'yovocw Tis θεω 
TwK τὸ αγουστὸ ιεΐ M4 [Aug. 15 As- 
sumpt. x. 38—42]: cf. Prolegom. p. XXXI. 

236 b. ll. 29—31 ανναγνοσμα wept το" 
κυριακη, L [κυριακὴ 0: xii, 16—21]. 

238 b. l. 5 τελοσ M. per+ad ὕμειν 
refertur [ἡμερ. B' tno 7 ἑβδομ. explicit 
xii. 31]. 

ibid, l. 4—1 ἀνναγνοσμα περι TO. 
σαββατου, |. 33: τελοσ : 1, [σαββατω ta’: 
xii. 33—40]. 

244 b. 11, 2—6 avvayvoopa περι TU 
σαββατου, 245 b. ad cap. pag.: τελοσ: 
1, [σαββατω ey’: xiv. 1—11]. 

245 b. ll. 14—17 ἀνναγνοσμα wept To. 
κυριακη, 247 ὃ. 1. 9 : τελοσ: L [κυρ. ια΄: 
xiv. 16—24 (35 Cod. D), lectione fy. ^' 
τησ θ΄ ἑβδομ. (215—835) tnclusd]. 

247 δ. ll. 13—17 ἀψναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
σαββατου, 248 b. 1. 8: reXoo : L [σαβ- 
βατω προ της awoxpew: xv. 1 (2 Cod. D) 
—10]. 

348 b. ll. 7—11 ἀνναγνοσμα περι τοῦ 
σιββατου, 250 b. 1. 10: τελοσ!: L [xv- 
piaxy πιὸ Τῆς aWoxpew: XV. 11—32]. - 

253 ὃ. 1.11 τελοσ + (ad πιστευσουσιν 
per 4 refertur) Mg [κυριακὴ εἰ: xvi. 19 
— 31}. 

ibid. ll. 17—20 ἀννάγνοσμα wept To" 
σαββατου, 254 b. 1. 10: τελοσ: 1, [σαβ- 
Bare ιε΄: xvii. 3— 10]. 

254 b. ll. 10, 11 αγναγνοσμα περι Tov 
κυριακη, |. 34 reL [xuptaxn ιβ΄: xvii. 12 
(11 Cod. D)— 19]. 


257 b. ll. 31, 32 avwayvooua rept Tov 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


σαββατου, 358 b. 1.25: τελοσ: L [xv- 
ριακη vy: xviii. 18—27]. 

279 b. ll. 13—15 a»vayvocpa eo Tw 
wapackevyny L (cf. Adnotationes p. 437; 
Prolegom. p. xxXvul) [xxiii. 39—43]. 


IN 5. ManBcr EVANGELIO. 


287 b. ll. 27—31 avvayvoopua περι τ 
cafBarov, 288 b. Ll 19 τελοσ: 1, [caf- 
Bare B' rw» νηστειων: i. 35—44 (45 
Cod. D)]. 

288 b. IL 18—22 ἀνναγνοσμα περι 78 
κυριακὴ 1, [κυριακὴ B' των νηστειων : ii. 
I—12]. 

289 b. ll. 22—25 awayvoopa περι τοῦ 
σαββατου, 290 b. 1. 38: τελοσ: 1, [σαββ. 
Ὑ τῶν v9cT. : ii. 14—17 (Cod. D 22, lec- 
tione ny. γ΄ Tyo ιβ΄ ἑβδομ. κατα ματθαιον 
Marc. ii. 16—22 inclusd)]. 

310 b. 1]. 7—11 ar»rvayrocga wept TB 
σαββατου, 1. 28 : τελοσ: L [σαββ. δ΄ των 
γηστ.: vii. 31—37]. 

313 ὃ. ll. 2—6 ἀνναγνοσμα περι 78 
σαββατου, 1. 21 τελοσ: 1, [cafB. e των 
ynor.: viii. 27— 31]. 

ibid. ll, 28—31 avvayvoopa περι TO. 
κυριακη, 314 ὃ. 1. 17: τελοσ L [κυρ. y 
τῶν νηστ.: viii. 34—ix. 1]. 

321 b. ll. 33—35 ἀνναγνοσμα περι T8 
κυριακη, 323 6. 1. 13: redoo: 1, [xvp. ε΄ 
τῶν YNOT.: X. 32—45 ]. 

347 5. IL 11 £790 avakwynpov M, 
[ἡμερ. ovarnpews ew ορθρον: xvi, 9—230]. 


In AcTis ÁPOSTOLORUM. 


416 ὃ, 1. 1; BA, 4185. 1. 11 re, O 
[ἡμερ. B τησ a égbop.: Act. i. r2—26]. 

418 b, ad summam paginam P τι wev- 
rikoott, l 13 ap* +0, 419 b. 1. 17 Te 
M, [xup. τησ πεντηκοστησ: li. 1—11]. 

419 b. 1. 27 ἀρ, τ Os, 420 b. l. 16 τε 
O [ἡμερ. γ᾽ τησ a ἐβδομ.: ii. 14—21]. 

421 b. 1. 19 τελοσ My, errore forsan: 
ἡμερ. τ΄ tho a ἑβδομ. explicit ii. 36, 
non 38. 

423 b. ll 11—15...ayvosua ..pt Tov 
σα... τω τῆης.. ακουνι. μου (1. €. διακινησι- 
μου sive ἐβδομ. α΄, margine abcisso) 1, 


errore: nam caBB. rye διακινησιμον pro 
iectione habet iii. 11— 16, non ii. 46. 

sbid.l. 19 ap%, 424 b. L 13 7* initio 
et fine lineae M, [ἡμερ. € 790 a ἑβδομ.: 
iii. 1—8]. 

424 b. l. a1 ...af^ ap, 425 ὃ. 1. 15 τὸ 
tnitio et fine literae M, [cafB. rnc a’ ἐβ- 
Soy: ili, 11—16]. 

435 b, ad summam paginam : περι Tov 
κυριακη: l 11 ag* L [κυριακη 7: vi. τ 
—1 

440 b. 1. 18 rp” ap*, 441 ὃ. 1. 6 rc 
initio, re fine lineae M, [lectio incerta: 
vii. 30—35]. 

446 b. 1. 21... aexa ap* M, [ἡμερ. ε΄ 
To γ΄ ἑβδομ. : viii, 26—39]. 

455 ὃ. 1. 5. τὸ Ma [ἡμερ. β' τησ δ’ ἐβ. 
δομ.: x. 1—16]. 

ibid. 1, 20 xf [...die in festo paschali] 
M,, errore ut videtur pro xd [i.e. ἡμερ. 
γ᾽ τησ 8 ἑβδομ.: x. 31—33]. 

460 b. 1. 29 nue k0 ap*, 462 b. Lir τ΄ 
initio εἰ fine lineae M, [i. e. xuptaxy €: 
xi. 19— 30]. 

462 b. ll. 12, 13 .. ov aov ...wprytov 
ap* (margine abscisso), 463 ὃ. 1. 31 re, O 
(S. Georgii, Apr. 23: xii. 1—11]. 

465 b. 1. 17 AB ap* (immà potius Xa), 
467 b. 1. 5 τὸ initio et fine lineae M. 
[i.e. ἡμερ. γ΄ tho ε΄ ἑβδομ. : xii, 25—xiil. 
12]. 

467 b. 1. 6 “Ay αρχ (ἱπιπιὸ potius Xz), 
468 b. L 18 τ΄ initio εἰ fine lineae M, 
[7. e. ἧμερ. 9' τησ εἰ ἑβδομ.: xiii. 13—24]. 

472 b. 1. 23 κε ἢ (i.e. apxm, 474 5. 
1. g (verius 1, 8) re M4 [C e. ἧμερ. 0 τησ 
δ΄ ἑβδομ.: xiv. 6—18]. 

474 b. 1. 18 À3 agX (immà potius d+), 
475 b. 1. ro τ΄ initio et fine lineae M, 
[i. e. ἡμερ. € τησ € ἑβδομ.: xiv. 20— 27]. 

482 b. 1. 8 apX my’ As, 484 ὁ. 1. 15 τ΄ 
initio et fine lineae M, [t.¢. xuptaxy τ᾽: 
xvi, 16— 34]. 

488 b, ad summam lineam £ τοῦ a8 
διονυσιον᾽ ἀρεωπαγιτου, ]. 3 Á O [Oct. 3: 
xvii. 16 (το Cod. D)—34]. 

500 b. 1. 8 ap*:, ll. 15, 16 ὑπερβεννη 
(: ad fin, lineae posito), 5ot b. 1. 21 Kae 
Aeyy:, 502 b. 1. 19 : τελοσ: L [xvpras 
P: xx. τό (—18; 28—36 Cod. D)— 38]. 


N.B. Leguntur L cxlixies; N xxvies; M, xxiiiies ; M. fere duodecies; O octies; J quater (Foll. 150. 185. 188. 191); 


I bis (Fol. 130. 197) ; O, semel (Fol. 419). 
Graecorum, lectiones deserit alias ferà duodecies. 


L (ul ridetur) intito. 


Σαββατον pro κυριακὴη L habet octies, κυριακη pro σαββατον sexies; margo usitutas 


Porrd in Fol. 150 b ὦ προφϑτησματων [Epipban.: Jan. 6] pro Baivr hal«t, 


ADNOTATIONES  EDITORIS. 


451 


Sequitur Catalogus notarum ferà duobus scribis (M,, M.) «n Codice scriptarum. Cf. Prolegomena, 


pp. XXVII—XXVIII. 


Ad summam paginam leguntur, M, scriptore. 


28 b. rov θερισμἣ K TOP ἀποστολον 

33 b. ..k γενεασ ὡμνα ἐστιν weduc 

34 b. ..ke..az0...0K ert .Wopiu ἐν 
caBacw 

35 b. ξιραν exorroc χιραν 

37 b. βασιλιασ Tov bu 

38 b. rov Ὕραματεον και φαρισεον 

39 ὃ. παραβολι σε ro πλνὸ 

42 b. παραβολιν παρεθῖκεν αυτυσ λέγο" 
ἢ βασιλία τον ὡρανον ανθροποι σπιροντ + 

43 b. Aw παρβολιν περι ko» σιναπεοῦ 

45 b. ..ὃ 7% βασιλε δ 


41 ὃ, 


48 ὃ. ... ερΐϊπαττοσ to τι» 

40 b. ...$apiceor... 

51b. ...z apr» 

52 b. ...ror φαρΐσεον... 

53 ὃ. 

55 ὃ. 

57 b. των μαθητε.. .λεγου" On" apa 
τισ pi" 

59b. rro p xpoBar" 

Go b. ...-o βασιλωσ nOekioer avvapw 


y 
NET€ apro 
¥ 


P 


σ - οι 
..TLi τινὰ pe λεγῦσιν avOpor 
»» - TALO.. φοσεοσ 


Aoyor pera Toy δολον αὐτοῦ 
61. b. ...00 & Ὕννεκοσ 


63 b. .. πιο" τὸν προσενε exÜevr? τω 
k + 
o * 
64 b. ...vwedvoo παραβολ... 
66 b. ...48 ἀποστολον καὶ To» νων ζεβε- 
δέον 


67) b. ...β rupdo” . 

68 b. eras.: supersunt ad fin....ov 

[69 ὃ. 1. 17 marg. ....xeo ferà periit] 

70 b. (epo Tic arrow ἐν wua etovona 
Tavra "7 

γι b. "weXovoc Tov β Teexvor (e secund. 
eras.). 

73 b. καλεσαντεσ Tove κεκλἴκοτασ + 

75 b. k πιραΐζον avro» Καὶ Aeyor wua 
eyToM + 

[84 5. N carbone IIAPO...] 


Quae sequuntur ferà script M,. 


1174 b. ...T9c capapyrio 
116 b, .. epu T Oepiop® 


eS iL a ρορΔᾺ ᾳᾺὉᾳᾺΛὈὉΓ,-ῦῦ ----.-.----- 
ee et 


117 δ. .... τῇ Baothnon® 
118 ὃ. .. pu r8 wapaduruc® 
122 b. ...p« Tov wevre apro. 


124 b. τι (i.e. wept) τ΄ περιπατουντοῦ 
εν τι θαλασσ- 

128 b. Duae lineae erasae, nec lectu 
fadle. . | — 11 1 .... A... 

129 b. τησ ioxm»orvqa" 

[132 b. τησ πεντικοστισ: scripsit M]. 

138 ὃ. ..... τῇ rog? 

145 b. ,.ρι τοῦ Aafap" 

184 ὃ. αὶ wepi ric wap0ev (Mj). 

190 b. αὶ συμεων (My) K y τισ Tp0- 
φιτιδο (M,): eddem manu καὶ συμεων £1. 
I2 marg.: cf. Proleg. p. XXVIII. 

IQ ὃ, περι τῇ κυ τισ πεδηαῦ ἴω [γ]ε- 
γνομενοσ. 

191 ὁ. ἢ war»! τὸ Barri ert πεντε 
k Sexar" [/nepta quaedam ascripsit recens 
manus, ut et ad caput 193 a]. 

194 b. $ 7p006 To” uv». (r eras. 
ante ἡ). 

197 b. ¥ to πιρασθεισ vir T «o v... (ab- 
scissa. sunt a bibliopego caetera). 


200 b. ,.«τισ...σ τουχῦ o' (partim eras.) 
202 b. $ τὸ παραλντικἥ 
204 b. τῇ rugon® τὸ Aevytró 
205 b. f 5avy wre ἰσηλθεν ἐν To θυ- 
σιασ τιρηῦ Kat φαγιν τὸσ αρτὸσ TiO προσ- 
θεσ 7 

206 b. ᾷ rov μαθητοῦ avr" 

236 b. (ad calcem pag.; +ad l 33 
posito) + περι πολῦσιδ + 

252 b. (marg. 1. 3) # xAovc" K Aaja- 
pov + 

257 b. (marg. l 33) # επεροτισεοσ 
apxovro” K τῇ ἔαχεου + 

Ad calcem paginae per S. Marci Εταη- 
gelium, haec sequuntur, M, (ut videtur) 
scriptore, nisi mavis Ms. 

285 b. αὶ (ie. wpoc) epumia adeo. pi 
φὶλονϊκησὶσ 

286 ὃ. #eppivia το γηνωμενον reMovre 

187 α. $ epuivia οὐκ €wiTvXaPig TOU 
παργμᾶτοσ" 


38; b. $ epunvia τελΐουμενον apaga, + 

288 a. $ epuivia rept (wo 

288 ὁ. $ eppivna TO vaTepor επἴτυχανσ 

289 a. $ eppivia + pi ὡμοσὴσ ear ὡμο- 
dic φανερουτε + 

289 b. Fepunviat τρῆτον παραμα exis 
evi xnpice 

290 a. Peppivija ov δυνὶ ψευσασθ εν 
(rasura. incidit inter 0 et e: forsan Ge 
primo). 

290 b. $ epuiria + λωγοσ fone xai φα- 
cic kaai- 

401 a. $ epuirza +rarivoooy καὶ "yy- 
pere 

291 ὃ. $ epuwia + Óvrapiy μεγαλὶν 
προσδοκα + 

291 d. $ epuevia + XavBavic τιν χαρὶν 
εκ θὺ (a»B super rasuram rescripto). 

291 b. f epyirga + aro Nuria no xa- 
pay 

293 a. $ epuivia + pera Sexa muepag 
vyivere + 

293 b. $ 'epuirga t ro [ric ευρίσκετε 

204 α. $ ερμινῆα + μὲ παρακουσὶσ TOV 
Aoyou + 

294 b. $ eppiviay + ἀκουλουθησον καὶ 
καλον ov yivere+(a secund, super rasu- 
ram rescripto). 

295 a. $ ερμοϊα T ovk exic apapriay 
ἤστω παρομα + 

295 b. Fepuina + μιζον προκωπὶ και 
Xapa γηνεταῖ ἢ 

296 a.  ερμυῖα + Bi σε λανβανὼ τὴν 
xapw t (X rescripto super ὃ primo). 

296 b. ¥ ερμενηαν + τεληουμενον wapy- 
μα kaXor + 

297 a. ᾧ eppivia+ ἀπροσδοκητον παργ- 
μα γηνομενον + ν 

297 b. ϑερμινῖαν + πιστεσον orn τὸ 
παργμα καλον ἐστιν + 

298 a. f ερμινια τ ear ron TovTG TO 
srapapuroy + καὶ evze To Geo 

. 298 b. Fepurpia + dna xopicic ( 4 ep 

super ras. rescript.). 

299 a. ¥ ερμινῖα + aworate καὶ απὸ- 
στρεψον 


452 


299 b. S epyurna 4 δηαλυσὶσ pera τρὶσ 
ἡμέρα "yivere + 
300 a. $ ἐρμηνια + peTrarwyncoy TO 0o 
καὶ ynvere + X 
300 b. f'epuivia-- peravoncov τω 6° x 
ynvere + 
301 a. Peppivi a + τεληουμενον ἐργων 
Kado + 
301 b. Peppivia + redounevoy wapavy- 
pat 
301 a. f$ eppiyi a + amrpoadwxtroy wa- 
ρανγμα + 
302 b  ἐρμὶνῆα + ear ψυση ἐλενχουσὶν 
σεν 
303 α εἰ b. Periit pergamena ad calcem 
folii. 
304 à. $ eppivia + wept δηκὶσ ea» aXi- 
θέυσὶδ᾽ evAvr...... 
304 b. ¥ eppivia + ro Syria λανβανίσ τὶν 
xapu + 
305 a. ¥ eppivia + To ζητὶσ wpopOdyi 
cet 
305 b. € eppivia + rovro ex Bev Boro» 
ἐστιν + 
306 a. $ eppivna+ aworata:+ 
306 b. F ερμῦϊα -- -wepm epicpou pi 
epiac 
307 a. Y epunvia t+ ea» δηκαζῖ virep σου 
aXov πένψων + 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


307 b. βιερμηνῖα Ὁ wept avamavatog x 


κερδουσ + 

308 a. $ eppirma + ro εχὶσ καμὴν κα- 
ne 

308 b. $ eppiviat ea» risrevons xapa 
ov ἐσθω + 

309 a. $ eppivna + πολαστον ηἡθελῖσα 
exunce x ovx εἐδυνίθησ + 

309 b. #éppivna+t καιροσ ἐστὶν iva γη- 
vere oy (iria + 

310 a. $ epppiat ορθίοσ τὴν wior Be- 
Beovre σου ro πραγμα + 

310 b. $ ερμινηα! μυστηρὶον peya γιε- 
yerai kai awexadhugOn 

311 a. PF epuirga + ai προσδοκηταν᾽ κερ- 
Soc + 

311 ὃ. $ epuirqa + κεροσ ἐστὸν iva γεῖνε 
TEO fri 

313 a. $ eo μίνηα + περ πραγματοσ 
KaAó 4- (rasura incidit post ep). 

312 b. f epuirga-- ew avaravoiy epxe- 
T€ wy frio + 

313 a. Peppivia + αποξενῦν epxere αλὶ- 
φασισ + 

313 b. Peppivyat pi axnotions rovro 
καλον ea TU + 

314 a. 9 eppivya καὶ αν ἀαπελθὶσ exirvr- 
Xavio + 

314 b. € ερμίνηα 1 ea» ακουτὶ μὴ bett 
avri + 


315 a. $ eppiy9a + ado πραγμα Syri- 
cot 

318 b. Peppivnat περὶ σωτερηασ aw- 
fera Ὁ 

316 a. ¥ eppivna + Sevrepoce exis ro 
ππραγμα τ (α in pay super rasuram re- 
scripto). 

316 b. ¥ eppirga-- απὸ κίνδυνον σωθη- 
gi τι in ku super v! prim). 

317 a. ὶ epuirqa + περὶ σοτερῖασ και 
xepdou + 

317 b. € epuirqa + pi axapsirg αλλ 
ομολωγῖσον t 

318 a. f$ epunvi a + ἴδε νγησ γεγονασ 
pikeri apapraye+iva pi TU χιρὸον Gv "yi- 
vere + 

318 b. Peppivyaa -- xaXov ἐστὶν ro ep- 
γον To TeXiorri-- (a prim. eloto). 

319 a. 9 eppivya+ καλον wpay...(ab- 
scissa. sunt a bibliopegd nonnulla, ut etiam 
in sequentibus). 

319 b. ὶ ερμῖνηα 4 ro ενθυμῖμα "yijvere 
K (i. €. k) καλον av ἐστὶν 

320 a. ὶ eppivna+ μεταβουλη Kart 

320 b. 3$? epuirya + ακωῃ καλὴ qvrep 
xere To...(und lined abscissd). 

321 d. F eppivy at dy arvire...elot4 
etiam lined antecedente, quae in -ere + de- 
sinit. 


* 


N.B. Leguntur M, xxxiites; Ms xxii ies; (M, et Ms, 190 6); Ms lxixies; M 132 b; N 84 b. 


Editionis Kiplingianae errores typographict. Cf. Prolegomena, p. XI. 


In Praefatione. 


p. xiii. eAQaro et eA0ero, 


In Textu: 63. 


6 b. 1. 13 twarno 

9 b. 1. 13 φροφητον 
12 5. 1. 32 xobparry 
13 a. l. 12 irasitur 
ibid. | 15 fatri 

ibid. 1. 33 quadranté 
13 b. 1. 30 opxovc 

14 b. 1. 4 σιαγωνα 

27 b. 1. 36 yewwoxero 
48 b. 1. 32 deest ra secund. 
29 a. l. 1 nunquam 
30 b. 1. 23 γένηται 


31 a, l. 4 cogitare 

33 a. ].  consommasset 

53 a. 1. 5 manducauerunt 
79 a. 1. 5 domum 

ibid. 1.17 graviora 

83 a. 1. 38 init, e 

89 a. 1. 14 situi 

97 a. 1. 20 completum 

98 b. L 20 γονευπετησαντεσ 
100 b. 1. 31 8. m. Too 
1018.1.23 & 

119 a. 1, 20 calilaeam 
tbid. 1. 24 natorin 
125 a. titul. whan 
130 b. l. 30 Keg C 
131 ὃ. 1. 23 init. ow 
157 b. 1. 1 eve 


jore lineam 


ibid. 1. 27 ετομασαι 
161 b. 1. 1 tape 

163 ὁ. 1. 3 iue 

166 a. 1. 9 deest ἃ ante doo 
182 a. L 17 discipulus 
186 a. 1. 8 aneilla 

196 b. l. 19 ἀσρων 

211 5.1. 5 ηγγιξεν 

215 b. 1. 19 ernpurrwr 
219 a. 1. 24 dismisit 
227 a. 1. 2g domu 

243 a. titul. lucam 

246 a. 1. 24 neccesse 
257 b. 1. 16 οφθααμουσ 
259 b. 1. 21 vw 

468 b. L 4 Grpnwrycay 
274 ^. l. 20 susficit 


283 b. 1. 30 ἴδετε 

290 a. l. 1 de scribis 

1930.1. 33 dele punctum supra m 
secund, 

297 α. |l. τὸ nuqmuid 

297 b. 1. 3 ooray 

298 b. 1. 16 μακαροθεν 

311 b. 1. 22 -γαδα pro -γαιδα 

313 a. l. 18 fragmentorum 

329 a. L 14 fnit. at 

347 b. 1. 13 marg. 8. m. “ψημον 

428 a. 1. 21 petroin 

bid. 1. 24 stubebant 

429 a. 1. 33 dme 

460 a. 1. 26 mandoca 


ADNOTATIONES EDITORIS. 


465 a. 1. 30 caesaream 
475 a. l. 12 isticassent 
506 a. L 17 dicimus. 


In Appendice nostrá: 4. 


Secundae mands 1 b. 1. 22 αφιηεσιν 
2a. 1.13 retorsum. Ϊ. 33 ann illius 
44. 1.13 sedm. 


In Notis: 14. 
43 b. 1. 26 wo pro wo 
69 b. 1. 33 evx pro συκη 
73 a. marg. tres pro -Ir1-, Etmas pro 
Gemas 


' 453 


78 a. 1. 32 es pro est 

81 b. 1, 19 quasi tn textu ἐστοσεν de- 
disset. 

100 b. 1. 31 roo pro roc 

180 5. 1. 25 Tor pro To 

303 5. 1. 20 ἡνίκεν pro ἤνιχεν 

433 b. l. 10 γγαγεν pro ἤγαγον 

435 a. 1. 14 discepiuntur pro discup- 

493 b. 1. 4 ακουσαντεσ pro ακουσαντοσ 

494 b. L 21 aciá pro actay 

504 b. 1, 10 wapoxadouperpro wapax- 


N.B. Kiplingü errores ad puncta- 
(ionem pertinentes quippe satis multos 
taciti correximus, 


Sectiones Ámmonianae per marginem, Cod. Bezae insertae, cum receptis apud. Tregellesir 
N. T. collatae. Cf. Prolegomena, p. xx. 


S. Matth. e cap. ii. 5 prov. 4;  ν. 7 
prov. I1; A V. 44 pro 9. 43; TB x. 8 pro 
v. 7; Q0 x. 33 pro v. 32; pry xiv. 35 pro 
v. 34; βξα xv. 39 pro xvi. τ; ρξβ xvi. 4 
pro v. 2; pty ibid. 6 pro v. 4; ρξδ ibid. 
7 pro 9. 5; pte ibid. 13 pro v. 7; pis 
ibid. 16 pro v. 13; ρὲζ ibid. 20 pro v. 17; 
pt ibid. 22 pro v. 30; p£0 ibid. 24 pro 
v. 22; po ibid. 27 pro v. 24; poa xvii. I 
pro xvi. 27; pof xvii. 9 pro xvi. 28; ρπὸ 
xviii 17 pro 9. 16; oxn xxiii. 5 pro v. 4; 


σκθ ibid. 8 pro v. 5; od ibid. 12 pro- 


v. 8; oda ibid. 13 pro v. 11; oM ibid. 
I5 pro v. 14; ody ibid. 16 pro v. 15; 
σμβ xxiv. τ vinculo operitur; ota xxiv. 
38 pro v. 37; cod xxvi. 2 pro v. 1; σοθ 
ibid. 20 pro v. 21; ruf xxvii. 47 pro 
v. 48; τμγ ibid. 48 pro v. 50; ru8 ibid. 
50 pro 9. 51; Te thid. 51 pro v. 51 
med.; rus ibid. §1 med. pro v. 54; rhe 
ibid. 54 pro v. 55; ru» ibid. 55 pro 
v. 57; THO ibid. $7 pro 9. 59; TP ibid. 
58 pro v. 61; τνα ibid. 61 pro v. 63; 
TvB ibid. 63 pro v. 66. Desunt post 
T»B xxvii. 62 usque ad finem S. Mat- 
thaei. 

S. Johann. Desunt a usque ad ¢ (i. 
1— 16); AO v. 5 pro 9. 11; vs vi. 35 med. 
pro τ. 37; prs xiv. 25 pro v. τό; pub 


XV. 23 pro v. 24; ρμε ibid. 24 pro 9. 25; 
pu» xvi. 15 pro v. 14; py ibid. 20 pro 
v. 23; prB ibid. 32 pro 9. 31; pre xvii. 
26 pro 25 med, wn; »0 Fol. 1685, p bis 
abscisso. Desunt post pty xviii, 13 wsque 
ad fin. Johann. 

S. Lucae. 8i. § e 35, γ i. 36, pro B 
ii. 6, y ii. 8; ef iv. 8 pro v. 14; An v. 26 
gro v. 37 ; μβ vi. 4 med. pro v. 6; pa ix. 
44 med. pro v. 43 med. ; pxs xi. 15 pro 
v. I4; pxt ibid. 15 med. pro 9. 15 init. ; 
pte xii. 14 pro v. 10; pr xiv. 16 pro 
v. 12; pra ibid. 15 pro v. 16; prB ibid. 
28 pro v. 25; pry ibid. 33 pro v. 28; 
pwd ibid. 34 pro v. 33; pre xv. 1 pro 
xiv. 34; par xv. 3 pro v. 1; prj ibid. 6 
pro v. 3; oxa xviii, 29 pro v. 28; exe 
xvii. 43 med. pro xix. 1; (otf inseritur 
xxii. 19, versu suo xxii. 20 penitus omis- 
80); cod xxii. 45 errore pro cw; oxs 
ibid. 47 med. pro v. 48; of ibid. 58 pro 
v. 57; τμ xxiv. 37 pro v. 36. 

S. Marci, x» iii. 12 pro v. r1 med.; 
AB iii. a1 med. pro v. 22; pS iv. 36 pro 
v. 35; » v. 25 pro Yi. 1; νὴ vi. 15 pro 
v. 16; £ ibid. 18 prov, 21; ty ibid. 32 
pro v. 34; ξὸ ibid. 41 pro v. 35; £0 
ibid. 54 pro v. 53; of viii. 10 pro v. 11; 


p. xxxii, 1. 14. (cf. tristega Gen. vi. 16 Vulg) 
p. xlii, 1. 28. We read israel also in Matth. ii. 6; 20; x. 6; 23; xix. 28; Luke i. <4; 68; xxii. 30. 


qa ix. 16 pro v. 17; pa tbid. 48 pro 
v. 44 ; pO xiii. 5 med. pro v. 8 med. ; pt^y 
xiv. 21 pro v. 20; ρὲθ ibid. 27 med. pro 
v. 28; poy ibid. 32 med. pro v. 33; por 
ibid. 37 pro v. 36 med.; pot ibid. 37 
med. pro 37 init. ; pon ibid. 39 pro v. 38; 
ροθ ibid. 40 pro v. 39; pw ibid. 41 med. 
pro v. 41 init. ; pra ibid. 43 med. pro 
v. 43 ini. ; pry ibid. 45 pro v. 46; pre 
ibid. 49 med. pro v. 50; prs ibid. 5o pro 
v. 51; pri sbid. 13 med. pro 9. 53 init. ; 
pay ibid. 63 med. pro v. 64; pat ibid. 
72 med. pro v. 72 inil.; o0 xv. 10 pro 
v. 11; os ibid. 13 pro v. 15. Desunt 
post of xv. 16 usque ad fin. Marci. 

Casu paulum de loco motae sunt pxB 
Matth. xviii. 11; o»0 xxiv. 30; oaf 
XXvi 41; τλα Xxvii. 32; q8 Johann. x. 
16; pxé xiii. 26; ρμΎ xv. 22; e Luc. ii. 
48; £a vi. 44; qa ix. το; 4η ix. 27; pe 
X. 4; pid X. 9; pre xv. 1; pof xiii. 28; 
pg xvii. 3; σιδ xvii. 37; ove xviii. 14; 
σπη xxii. 51; eqa xxii. 54; σης xxii. 67 ; 
red xxiii. 24; Tie xxiii. 26; rey xxiii, 35 
pro v. 36; τὰς xxiv. 1; ¢ Marc. i. 13 
pro 9. 15; 0 i. 14; oe vii. 36; of viii. 
IO; pt X. 29; pry xiii. 14 pro v. 15; 
pao xv. 1. 


To the Addenda, p. lxiv, add the following:— 


PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


BY THE REV. F. H. SCRIVENER, M.A. 


TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE; 


RECTOR OF 8. GERRAN8, CORNWALL. 


A PLAIN INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITICISM OF THE NEW 
Testament. With numerous Facsimiles. For the use of Biblical Students. 8vo. 15s. 
* We must say that it was not without some feeling of wonder that we examined the volume before us, so 


minute and accurate is the detailed information it contains, and so comprehensive and enlarged in the view which 
it takes of the extensive field of Biblical criticism."— ENGLi8H CHURCHMAN. 


NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRACUM, TEXTUS STEPHANICI, 1550. 


Accedunt varise lectiones editionum Bezz, Elzeviri, Lachmanni, Tischendorfii, et Tregellesii. Small 
8vo. 4s. 6d. 


An Edition on Writing-paper, for Notes. 4to.  Half-bound. 12s. 
** One of the admirably printed pocket series of Greek and Latin Texte . . . Those portions of the text of which 


various readings are given at the foot of each page are printed in a thicker character of type, so as to be readily 
perceived," —ENGLISH CHURCHMAN. 


A FULL COLLATION OF THE CODEX SINAITICUS, WITH THE 
Received Text of the New Testament, to which is prefixed a Critical Introduction. Small 8vo. 
5s. 


* Mr Scrivener has now placed the results of Tischendorf's discovery within the reach of all in a charming little 
volume, which ought to form a companion to the Greek Testament in the library of every Biblical student."— READER. 


AN EXACT TRANSCRIPT OF THE CODEX AUGIENSIS, GRZECO- 


Latin Manuscript in Uncial Letters of S. Paul's Epistles, preserved in the Library of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. 'To which is added a full Collation of Fifty Manuscripts containing various portions of the 
Greek New Testament deposited in English Libraries: with a full Critical Introduction. Royal 


8vo. 268. 


A FULL AND EXACT COLLATION OF ABOUT TWENTY GREEK 


Manuscripts of the Holy Gospels (hitherto unexamined) deposited in the British Museum, the Archiepi- 
scopal Library at Lambeth, &c., with a Critical Introduction. 8vo. 62. 


Cambridge: DEIGHTON, BELL, AND CO. 
Hondon: BELL AND DALDY. 


PUBLISHED BY 


DEIGHTON, BELL, & CO., CAMBRIDGE, - 
AGENTS TO THE UNIVERSITY. 


The Greek Testament: with a critically re- 


vised Text; a Digest of Various Readings; Mar- 
ginal References to Vérbal and Idiomatic Usage ; 
Prolegomena ; and a Critical and Exegetical Com- 
mentary. For the use of Theological Students and 
Minister. By HENRY ALFORD, D.D., Dean of 
Canterbury. 

Vol I. Fifth Edition, containing the Four Gos- 
pels. 11. 8s. 

Vol. II. Fourth Edition, containing the Acts of 
the Apostles, the Epistles to the Romans and Corin- 
thians. 12. 45. 

Vol. III. Third Edition, containing the Epistles 
to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 
Thessalonians,—to Timotheus, Titus, and Philemon. 
18s. 

Vol IV. Part I. Third Edition, containing the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, and tbe Catholic Epistle of 
Bt James and St Peter. 185. 

Vol. IV. Part II. Second Edition, containing the 
Epistles of St John and St Jude, and the Revelation. 


148. 


‘The New Testament for English Readers. 


Contsining the Authorised Version, with additional 
corrections of Readings and Renderings ; Marginal 
references ; and a Critical and Explanatory Com- 
mentary. By HENRY ALFORD, D.D., Dean of 
Canterbury. In two volumes. 

Vol. I. Part I. containing the First Three Gos- 
pels. 125. 

Vol. I. Part II. containing St John and the Acts. 
108. 6d. 


Jlints for some Improvements in the Author- 


ised Version of the New Testament. By the late 
J. SCHOLEFIELD, M.A. Fourth Edition. Fep. 
8vo. 48. 


Jerusalem Explored: being a Description of 


the Ancient and Modern City, with upwards of one 
Hundred Illustrations, consisting of Views, Ground- 
plans, and Sections. By ERMETE PIEROTTI, 
Doctor of Mathematics, Captain of the Corpe of 
Engineers in the Army of Sardinia, Architect-En- 
gineer to his Excellency Soorraya Pasha of Jerusalem, 
and Architect of the Holy Land. 3 Vols. imperial 
gto. 5l. 55. 


Nature and Grace. Sermons preached in the 


Chapel Royal, Whitehall, during the years 1862—64. 
By the Rev. W. M. CAMPION, B.D., Fellow and 
Tutor of Queens’ College, Cambridge, Rector of St 
Botolph’s, Cambridge, and one of Her Majesty's 
Preachers at Whitehall. Small 8vo. 62. 6s. 


T'he Apostle Paul and the Christian Church 
of Philippi. An Exposition Critical and Practical of 
the Sixteenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles 
and of the Epistles to the Philippians. By the late 
Rev. J. F. TODD, M.A., Trinity College, Cam 
bridge. 8vo. 9s. 


Wieseler's Chronological Synopsis of the Four 


Gospels. Translated by the Rev. E, VENABLES, 
M.A. 8vo. τῷ. 


This opportunity may properly be taken of es- 
pecially recommending to every thoughtful Student 
this and the treatise on the succession of eventa in 
the Gospel History. A translation of it would be 
a very welcome aid to the general reader.—Bp. 
Ellicott, Lectures on the Life of our Lord. 


Observations on the attempted Application of 
Pantheistic Principles to the Theory and Historic 
Criticism of the Gospels. By W. H. MILL, D.D., 
late Regius Professor of Hebrew in the University of 
Cambridge. Second Edition, with the Author's latest 
notes and additions, Edited by B. WEBB, M.A. 
8vo. 145. 


Commentaries on the Gospels, intended for the 
English Reader, and adapted either for Domestic or 
Private use. By the Very Rev. H. GOODWIN, 
D.D., Dean of Ely. Crown 8vo. 8. Matthew, 125. 
S. Mark, 7s. 6d. 8. Luke, in the Press, 


Messiah as Foretold and Expected. .A Course 
of Sermons relating to the Messiah, as interpreted 
before the Coming of Christ. Preached before the 
University of Cambridge, in the months of February 
and March, 1862. By the Rev. E. HAROLD 
BROWNE, D.D., Bishop of Ely. 8vo. 4, 


A History of the Articles of Religion. To 
which is added a series of Documents from A.D. 1536 
to A.D. 1615. "Together with illustrations from con- 
temporary source, By CHARLES HARDWICK, 
B.D., late Archdeacon of Ely. Second Edition, cor- 
rected and enlarged. 8vo. 128. 


*,"* A considerable amount of fresh matter has 
been incorporated, especially in the two Chapters 
which relate to the construction and revision of our 
present code of Articles. 


Tertulliani Liber Apologeticus. The Apology 
of Tertullian. With English Notes and a Preface, 
intended as an Introduction to the Study of Patris- 
tical and Ecclesiastical Latinity. By H. A. WOOD. 
HAM, LL.D. Second Edition. 8vo. Res. 6d. 


