Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


afck- 


(TisU-,-*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


FKAGMENTS 

OF  A 

SAMARITAN  TARGUM. 


Digitized  by  Google 


By  the  same  Author. 

TWO  TREATISES  ON  VERBS  CONTAINING  FEEBLE 
AND  DOUBLE  LETTERS:  By  R.  Jehuda  Hayug  of 
Fez.  Translated  into  Hebrew  from  the  original  Arabic  by 
R.  Moses  Gikatilia  of  Cordova;  to  which  ia  added.  The 
Treatise  on  Punctuation,  by  the  same  author,  translated 
by  Aben  Ezra;  edited  from  Bodleian  MSS.,  with  an  English 
translation. 

London,  1870,  8vo. 

pp.  xiii,  and  147,  English;  pp.  xv,  and  1S2,  Arabic  and  Hebrew. 

Price  7s.  6(1. 


In  preparation. 

A HEBREW  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH,  by  a French 
Rabbi  of  the  12th  century,  edited  from  a Bodleian  MS.  with 
an  English  translation. 


Digitized  by  Google 


FRAGMENTS 


OF 

A SAMARITAN  TARGUM, 

EDITED  FROM  A BODLEIAN  MS. 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION, 


CONTAINING  A SKETCH  Or 

SAMARITAN  HISTORY,  DOGMA,  AND  LITERATURE, 


BY 

JOHN  W.  NUTT,  M.A., 

PILLOW  OP  ALL  SOCLE’  COLLEGE,  QRIKFIELD  HEADER  ON  TEE  LIT, 
8CB-LIBOARIAN  OP  THE  BODLEIAN  LIBEAET,  OXFORD, 


TRUBNER  AND  CO.,  LONDON. 
1874. 


Digitized  by  Google 


P'-iwji'iiihCA; 

; n-.fi  u 

V-  \ vsjc 
X 

' O XF  0 El)': 

BY  E.  PICKARD  HALL  AND  J.  H.  8TACT, 
PRINTERS  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY. 


Digitized  by  Google 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preface  i 

I.  History  of  the  Samaritans. 

Captivity  of  the  Ten  Tribes,  b.c.  722 2 

Settlement  of  Assyrian  colonists  in  their  place  ...  3 

All  the  Israelites  not  carried  away 5 

The  Jews  return  from  Babylon  in  536 7 

They  refuse  the  Samaritans’  aid  in  rebuilding  the 

Temple 7 

Hostility  of  the  latter  in  consequence 7 

The  territory  of  the  Samaritans 8 

Samaria  or  Sebaste 9 

Shechem,  the  modern  Nablus n 

Temple  built  on  Garizim  in  opposition  to  that  of 

Jerusalem 16 

The  Samaritans  under  Alexander’s  successors  ...17 
Their  apostasy  under  Anttochns  Epiphaues  ....  18 

Destruction  of  their  temple  l>y  John  Hyrcanua  ...  19 

Samaria' under  the  Romans 19 

Fortunes  of  the  people  under  the  emperors  ....  20 

Troubles  in  the  time  of  Zeno  and  Justinian  . ...  22 

The  Mohammedan  conquest  in  636  . . . , . ■ ■ 22 

The  Crusaders  in  Palestine  1090-1244 22 

Little  known  of  the  Samaritans  during  tho  Middle 
Ages 23 


VI 


CONTEXTS. 


PAGE 


Communications  opened  with  them  by  Scaliger . . . 23 

A Pentateuch  procured  from  them  by  P,  della  Valle  . 24 

Their  correspondence  with  Europeans 24 

Present  condition  of  the  people  25 

II.  Doctrines  of  the  Samaritans. 

At  the  first  probably  not  very  definite 28 

Alliance  of  Samaritans  with  certain  Jews  in  the  time 

of  Ezra 30 

Secession  of  Manassch  in  the  following  century  . . 30 

The  Samaritans  borrow  their  theology  from  Jerusalem  30 
Sadducean  teaching  then  prevailing  there  ....  31 

It  is  gradually  ousted  by  Pharisee  doctrines  . ...  33 

Revived  by  the  Karaites 36 


Agreement  of  Samaritans,  Sadducees,  and  Karaites,  in 
opposition  to  the  Pharisees  and  Rahbanites  ...  37 


Jewish  testimony  to  Samaritan  doctrines  ....  42 

Statements  of  the  Fathers 45 

Sects  of  the  Samaritans 46 

1.  Essence 46 

2.  Sebuaeans 47 

3.  Gorthenians 48 

4.  Dositheans 48 

5.  Simon  Magus  and  his  followers 55 

Later  developments  of  Samaritan  doctrine  ....  65 

Its  five  principal  articles 66 

The  Messiah 69 

Feasts  of  the  Samaritans  ; the  JPassover 72 

Their  religious  customs 75 

III.  Literature  of  the  Samaritans. 

The  language  in  which  it  was  written 77 

Samaritan  Hellenists  and  their  works 80 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

PASS 

i.  The  Hebrew-Samaritan  Pentateuch ; ita  discovery  83 
Its  superiority  oyer  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch 

asserted  

Opposition  to  this  view 88 

Criticism  of  it  by  Oescniug 90 

Similarity  of  LXX  to  Samaritan  Pentateuch  . ■ q 1 

Various  explanations  of  the  fact 93 

1.  The  LXX  was  translated  from  the  Samaritan 

Pentateuch 93 

2-  The  Samaritan  Pentateuch  was  corrected 

from  the  LXX 96 

3.  Both  were  derived  from  similar  MSS.  ■ . 2 2§ 

Doubtful  when  the  Samaritans  received  their  Pen- 

tateuch 99 

Tlieir  alphabet  abandoned  by  the  Jews  under  Ezra  roo 
MSS,  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch;  the  Paris  MS.  103 

The  synagogue-roll  at  Nablus 104 

Translations  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch: 

x.  Into  Samaritan;  the  Targum 106 

Similar  translations  among  the  Jews  ■ ■ . 107 

The  Barberini  MS.  of  the  Targum  . . . ■ 1 1 1 

The  Vatican  MS. in 

The  Bodleian  and  other  MSS 113 

z.  The  Samaritan-Greek  version its 

3.  The  Arabic  version  of  Ahusaid 116 

ii.  Samaritan  chronicles xxy 

x.  The ‘book  of  Joshua' nq 

2.  El-Tholidoth 

3.  The  chronicle  of  Abulfath 126 

4.  Agadic  literature 

iii.  Commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch 134 

iv.  Miscellaneous  theology i39 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vlll 


CONTEXTS. 


PAGE 

v.  Liturgies:  prayers  and  hymns 142 

vi.  Calendars 145 

vii.  Grammar  and  lexicography 146 


Appendix  I.  The  Samaritan  MSS,  at  St.  Petersburg  ■ 153 

„ II.  Translation  of  the  Maasekheth  Kutliim  . 168 


Text  of  the  Samaritan  Targcm 1-84 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


More  than  two  centuries  and  a half  have  passed 
away  since  the  discovery  was  made  at  Damascus 
of  a Hebrew  Pentateuch,  written  in  Samaritan 
characters,  and  with  readings  different  from  those 
of  the  Masoretic  text  in  use  among  the  Jews,  and 
also  of  a complete  translation  of  the  same  into 
the  Samaritan  idiom.  The  attention  of  learned 
Europe  was  thus  directed  to  the  literary  remains 
of  a people  now  languishing  and  well  nigh  extinct, 
but  once  the  bitter  and  formidable  religious  oppo- 
nents of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  an  interest  was 
aroused  in  them  which  the  labours  of  De  Sacy,  Gese- 
nius,  and  others  in  the  present  century  have  again 
revived.  The  results,  however,  of  these  enquiries, 
extending  as  they  do  over  so  long  a period,  are 
in  many  cases  buried  in  rare  and  costly  volumes 
or  hidden  away  in  periodicals  and  long-forgotten 
dissertations.  It  has  been  thought,  therefore,  that 
a short  sketch,  embodying  the  latest  information 
attainable  with  regard  to  the  history,  writings, 
and  religious  tenets  of  the  Samaritans,  may  fitly 
^ b 


2 


serve  as  an  introduction  to  the  interesting  and 
important  fragment  of  their  literature  which  is 
here  published. 

I.  The  tide  of  Assyrian  conquest  which  had  begun 
to  overflow  the  land  of  Israel  under  Pul 1 about 
770  B.  c.,  and  had  continued  its  progress  during 
the  reigns  of  Tiglath  Pileser2  and  Shalmaneser3, 
reached  its  height  in  the  time  of  Hosea,  when,  in 
722,  ‘the  king  of  Assyria4  took  Samaria,  and  car- 
ried Israel  away  into  Assyria,  and  placed  them  in 
Halah  and  in  Habor  by  the  river  of  Gozan,  and 
in  the  cities  of  the  Medes  supplying  their  place 


1 1 Chron.  v.  26 ; 2 Kings  xv.  19.  * 2 Kings  xv.  29. 

8 2 Kings  xvii.  3-5. 

4 Ibid.  xvii.  6 ; xvili.  11.  This  appears  to  have  been  Sargon, 
the  successor  of  Shalmaneser.  See  the  article  ‘ Sargon  ’ in 
Smith's  Bible  Dictionary,  iii.  1142,  and  George  Smith's  Ckrono- 
logy  of  the  Reign  of  Sennacherib  (1871),  p.  12.  On  a cylinder 
in  the  British  Museum,  Sargon  is  called  the  ‘ Punisher  of  wide 
Beth-Omri and  in  a bull  inscription  of  Khorsabnd,  ‘ Destroyer 
of  the  city  of  Samaria,  all  Beth-Omri.’  In  the  copy  of  his  annals 
he  says,  ‘The  city  of  Samaria  I besieged  and  captured,  27,290 
people  dwelling  in  it  I carried  captive,  50  chariots  in  the  midst 
of  them  I arranged  and  the  rest  of  them  I took  possession  of, 
my  general  over  them  I appointed,  and  the  taxes  paid  by  the 
former  king  I fixed  upon  them.’  Cf.  Schrader,  Die  Keilin- 
schriften  und  das  A.  T.  (1872),  p.  158  sq. 

1 2 Kings  xvii.  24.  For  an  identification  of  these  places  Bee 
Asahel  Grant’s  Nestorians  (1841),  p.  129  sqq.  Halah  is  pro- 
bably the  Calah  of  Gen.  x.  11,  12,  now  Nitnrud.  The  Habor 
flows  S.  W.  into  the  Tigris  from  the  mountains  of  Assyria  (so 


Digitized  by  Google 


3 


with  colonists  from  ‘Babylon,  and  from  Cutbah, 


Ewald,  Gesch.  (1866),  iii.  658  ; but  according  to  Schrader,  p.  161, 
it  ia  tlie  greater  stream  of  that  name  which  flows  into  the 
Euphrates  near  Carchemish).  Gozan=Zozan,  the  Nestorian 
name  for  pastures : the  high  lands  on  either  side  of  the  great 
Zab  river,  \V.  of  lake  Ooroomiah.  (Rages  also  near  Teheran, 
Nineveh,  and  Ecbatana,  arc  mentioned  in  the  book  of  Tobit  as 
settlements  of  Israelites : Elkosh,  the  home  of  the  prophet 
Nahum,  where  his  tomb  is  Btill  shewn  and  greatly  venerated, 
was  north  of  Nineveh.)  Dr.  Grant  brings  forward  several 
striking  reasons  for  the  identity  of  the  independent  Nestorian 
Christians  inhabiting  this  almost  inaccessible  tract  of  country 
with  some  of  the  ten  tribes.  They  call  themselves  Bene  Israel ; 
the  patriarch  claimed  to  be  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali ; the 
neighbouring  Jews  allow  that  they  are  of  the  same  stock  as 
themselves,  and  speak  almost  the  same  dialect  with  them, 
though  the  two  bodies  hate  each  other  and  will  not  eat 
together.  The  Nestorians  still  offer  peace-offerings,  practise  vows 
of  Nazaritism,  bring  first-fruits,  keep  the  Sabbath  strictly,  have 
a recess  in  their  churches  termed  the  Holy  of  Holies ; children 
may  be  baptized  on  the  eighth  day  after  birth ; the  purification 
of  women  after  childbirth  extends  for  forty  days  in  the  case  of  a 
male,  for  sixty  of  a female  infant ; they  keep  the  Passover,  but 
the  holy  Eucharist  supersedes  the  Jewish  sacrifice;  their  phy- 
siognomy and  names  are  Jewish;  their  patriarch,  both  in  his 
civil  and  religious  capacity,  strongly  resembles  the  ancient 
high-priest ; they  have  ‘ avengers  of  blood,'  the  churches  serve 
as  ‘cities  of  refuge.'  The  ‘Chaldean’  Church  dates  from  A.D. 
1681,  when  the  Nestorian  metropolitan  of  Diarbckir  quarrelled 
with  his  patriarch,  and  had  himself  consecrated  by  the  Pope 
patriarch  of  the  converts  to  papacy  from  the  Nestorian  and 
Jacobite  Churches  who  designate  themselves  by  this  title.  Dr. 
Grant’s  conclusions  are  doubted  by  Ewald,  Ge»ch.  (1864),  iv. 

b 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


4 


and  from  Ava,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  Sephar- 
vaim  V 


lao,  who  however  does  not  bring  forward  reasons  in  support 
of  his  view.  Ho  mentions,  giving  references,  the  journey  of 
Eldad  the  Danite  in  the  ninth  century  in  search  of  the  ten  tribes 
described  by  Josephus  (Ant.  xi.  g.  2)  as  existing  in  great 
numbers  beyond  the  Euphrates,  Benjamin  of  Tudela’s  descrip- 
tion of  them  in  the  twelfth,  and  the  various  attempts  made  to 
discover  them  among  Afghans,  Chinese,  Parthians,  Buddhists, 
and  North  American  Indians.  For  Talmudical  traditions  as 
to  their  position  see  Neubauer,  Geoyraphie  du  Talmud,  p.  372  ; 
for  other  references  to  Josephus,  St  Jerome,  &c.,  Juynboll,  Com- 
ment. in  Uist.  Gent.Sam.  p.  26  sq. ; also  Chwolson’s  A chtzehn  Ilebr. 
Grabschriften  am  d.  Krim  in  Alim,  de  Tacad.  imp.  de  St.  Pelers- 
bourg,  serie  7,  vol.  ix.  7,  for  records  of  the  ten  tribes  in  the 
Crimea  and  (p.  59)  Caucasus ; and  for  their  connection  with  the 
legend  of  Prcster  John,  cf.  Oppert,  Der  Presbyter  Johannes 
(1864),  p.  17.  Benjamin  of  Tudela  has  found  a successor  in 
‘ J.  J.  Benjamin  II,'  who  went  on  the  same  quest  in  1846-1855  ; 
he  corroborates  Dr.  Grant’s  statements ; see  his  ‘ Eight  Years  in 
Asia  and  Africa’  (Hanover,  1863),  p.  124. 

1 For  the  position  of  Cuthah,  sec  below,  p.  9,  note  4.  That 
of  Ava  is  not  known.  Hamath  was  plundered  by  Sargon  in  the 
Becond  year  of  his  reign,  its  inhabitants  carried  off,  und  others 
settled  in  their  place,  Schrader,  pp.  162-6.  Ewahl,  op.  cil.  iii. 
655  (1866),  places  Sepharvaim  and  Ava  near  Hamath.  Sargon 
in  his  first  year  transported  colonists  from  Babylon  to  Samaria : 
cf.  Schrader,  p.  162.  Other  colonists  seem  to  have  joined 
them  later.  Sargon  says  in  715  n.c. : ‘The  Tamudi,  Ibadidi, 
Marsimani  and  Hayapa,  remote  Arabians  [cf.  ‘ Geshem  the 
Arabian,’  Neh.  ii.  19,  iv.  7]  dwelling  in  Bari  whom  the  Akku 
and  Sapiru  knew  not  of ...  in  the  service  of  Assur  my  lord 
I destroyed  them,  and  the  rest  of  them  I removed,  and  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


5 


It  has  been  much  debated  to  wbat  extent  this 
depopulation  was  carried  out l.  In  the  later  con- 
quest of  Judah  it  is  especially  mentioned  that  the 
‘poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the  land2’  were  left 
behind,  and  only  the  nobles,  warriors,  and  artisans 
carried  away.  And  it  seems  most  probable  that 
such  had  been  the  case  with  Israel  also,  for  Josiah, 
in  630,  puts  down  idolatry  in  ‘Manasseh  and 
Ephraim,  and  Simeon,  even  unto  Naphtali3,’  and  a 
little  later  repairs  the  temple  with  money  collected 
for  the  purpose  from  ‘ Manasseh  and  Ephraim  and 
all  the  remnant  of  Israel4,’  as  well  as  from  Judah 
and  Benjamin.  Again,  after  the  ruin  of  Judah, 
in  588,  worshippers  from  Shechem  and  Shiloh  and 
Samaria  are  represented  as  coming  with  offerings 


the  city  of  Samaria  I placed  . . .’  Vid.  George  Smith,  op.  cit. 
p.  14,  and  Schrader,  p.  163.  Other  tribes  also  arc  mentioned 
in  Ezra  iv.  9,  10,  as  having  been  brought  over  by  Asnapper 
and  settled  in  Samaria,  (for  their  position  see  Ewald,  iii.  727): 
in  iv.  2,  the  Samaritans  ascribe  their  settlement  to  Esarliaddon. 
Makrizi’s  account  of  this  shifting  of  populations  is  to  be  found 
in  De  Sacy,  Chrestoinalkie  A robe,  i.  302. 

1 For  a reference  to  varying  opiuions  on  the  subject  see  the 
article  ‘Samaria’  in  Smith’s  Bible  Diet.  iii.  1105. 

2 2 Kings  xxiv.  14.  3 2 Chron.  xxxiv.  6. 

* 2 Chron.  xxxiv.  9.  The  invitation  of  Hezekiah  to  the  pass- 
over  in  2 Chron.  xxx.  seems  to  have  extended  principally,  if  not 
only,  to  the  parts  untouched  by  Assyria : the  reference  therefore 
appears  to  be  of  no  value  for  determining  the  question  of  what 
Israelitish  population  was  left  behind  by  the  conquerors. 


Digitized  by  Google 


6 


to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  In  all  likelihood, 
therefore,  a considerable  population  of  Israelites 
remained  behind,  who  were  recruited  after  the 
withdrawal  of  the  Assyrian  armies  by  returning 
fugitives 2 and  fresh  drafts  of  foreign  popula- 
tions from  the  various  countries  which,  in  their 
turn,  came  beneath  the  yoke  of  the  kings  of 
Assyria 3. 

At  first  the  worship  of  Jehovah  seems  to  have 
been  entirely  overlooked  amid  that  of  the  numer- 
ous deities4  introduced  by  the  new  settlers,  but 
in  consequence  of  the  country  being  visited  by  a 
plague  of  lions,  it,  or  some  modification  of  it 5,  was 
established  by  an  Israelite  priest"  at  Bethel,  the 

1 Jer.  xli.  5. 

* Cf.  Jcr.  xl.  7-12  for  the  similar  case  of  Judah. 

1 The  term  (iAAoyo'ijs  as  applied  to  a Samaritan  in  Luke  xvii. 
1 8 cannot  fairly  be  pressed  so  as  to  exclude  the  notion  of  there 
being  an  Israclitish  element  among  the  Samaritan  population. 

* 2 Kings  xvii.  30,  31.  Succoth-benoth,  the  deity  of  the 
Babylonians,  cannot  be  traced.  Nergal  signifies  the  ‘ lion-god,’ 
mentioned  in  cuneiform  inscriptions  as  worshipped  by  the  people 
of  Cutha.  This  source  gives  no  information  as  to  Ashima, 
Nibhas,  and  Tartak.  The  burning  of  children  by  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Sepharvaim  may  have  been  connected  with  their  wor- 
ship of  the  sun,  the  name  signifying  the  ‘city  of  the  sun.’ 
Schrader,  166-168. 

* Possibly  the  old  calf-worship  was  restored  again,  Bethel 
having  been  the  seat  of  it.  Ewald,  iii.  729. 

0 The  priests,  as  being  an  educated  and  important  class  of  the 
community,  would  naturally  have  been  among  the  captives. 


Digitized  by  Google 


7 


former  centre  of  state  idolatry  under  Jeroboam  and 
his  successors  ; each  nationality  meanwhile  retain- 
ing its  own  peculiar  divinity  and  religious  rites. 
Although,  therefore,  the  influence  of  the  sanctuary 
at  Bethel  seems  in  time  to  have  spread  through- 
out the  new  immigrants  and  to  have  expelled  the 
various  deities  and  rites  introduced  by  them  *,  still 
Zerubbabel  and  his  returning  brethren  may  have 
had  good  reason  for  declining  the  co-operation  of 
the  ‘ lion-converts 2 ’ in  the  work  of  restoring  the 
ancient  ritual  and  temple  at  Jerusalem.  This 
refusal  roused  the  deep  hostility  of  the  Samari- 
tans, and  from  this  time  the  relations  between  the 
two  people  became  continually  more  and  more 
embittered,  till  an  absolute  separation  ensued  be- 
tween them.  Even  now,  when  one  common  ruin 
has  for  so  many  centuries  involved  them  both, 
they  hold  no  intercourse  with  each  other.  From 
this  time  forward  one  thought  alone  presented 
itself  to  the  Samaritans’  mind,  to  depress  by  every 
possible  means,  fair  or  foul,  their  hated  rivals  of 
Jerusalem,  to  represent  themselves  as  the  true 
disciples  of  the  great  prophet  of  Israel  and  Gari- 
zim  as  the  sanctuary  chosen  of  God  on  which  the 
first  temple  was  at  His  command  built  by  Joshua, 
while  Eli,  Samuel,  David,  and  Solomon  were  held 


1 Ezra  iv.  2. 


* Bab.  Baba  Kama,  38  b. 


Digitized  by  Google 


8 


up  to  reprobation  as  the  apostate  leaders  of  a 
national  and  religious  schism l. 

By  the  possession  of  a tract  of  country  remark- 
able for  its  fertility,  and  venerable  for  its  religious 
associations,  the  Samaritans  were  well  qualified  for 
maintaining  an  opposition  to  the  rival  state2.  It 
extended,  according  to  Josephus3,  from  Ginaea  or 
En-Ganniin,  on  the  south  side  of  the  great  plain 
of  Jezreel,  to  the  borders  of  Benjamin,  thus  includ- 
ing the  old  territory  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim. 
Its  principal  towns  were  Bethshan 4,  famous  for  its 
fertility,  known  later  under  the  name  of  Scytho- 
polis ; Abelmeholah 6,  the  home  of  Elisha ; Jezreel 6, 
the  residence  of  Ahab ; Tirzah 7,  proverbial  for 
its  beauty,  where  dwelt  the  kings  of  Israel  from 


1 Yet,  when  it  suited  them,  the  Samaritans  would  deny  all 
connection  with  the  Jews  and  assert  their  heathen  extraction  : 
thus  in  the  time  of  Darius  Hystaspes  they  claim  to  he  Persians 
(Josephus,  Ant.  xi.  4.  9),  under  Alexander  the  Great,  Sidonians 
(ib.  xi.  8.  6 ; xii.  5.  5). 

s The  old  tribe  of  Ephraim,  whose  territory  they  possessed, 
had  been  of  great  political  importance  under  the  Judges  ; under 
Abimelech  it  gained  the  royal  power,  and  later  opposed  Ishbo- 
sheth  to  David  and  Jeroboam  to  Keboboam,  always  bearing  with 
great  unwillingness  the  supremacy  of  Judah:  the  Samaritans 
assumed  exactly  the  same  position. 

5 B.  J.  iii.  3.  4 ; but  in  the  next  chapter  he  makes  Anouath 
or  Burkin  the  frontier.  Cf.  Neubauer,  Geographic,  p.  57. 

* 1 Sam.  xxxi.  10.  6 1 Kings  xix.  16. 

* 1 Kings  xviii.  46.  1 Cant.  vi.  4. 


Digitized  by  Google 


9 


Jeroboam  to  Zimri ; Shiloh,  the  resting-place  of 
the  ark 1 ; Bethel,  the  scene  of  Jacob’s  visions 2. 

But  the  principal  events  of  Samaritan  history 
gather  round  the  two  centres  of  Samaria  and 
Shechera.  Built  originally  by  Ornri  in  a com- 
manding position  of  great  fertility,  strength,  and 
beauty,  on  a hill  some  six  miles  north-west  of 
Shechem 3,  Samaria  continued  till  the  Assyrian 
captivity  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel, 
the  centre  of  Ahab’s  Baal- worship,  the  scene  of 
many  of  the  miracles  of  Elijah  and  Elisha  dis- 
played in  famines  brought  upon  the  land,  in  the 
sudden  return  of  plenty,  and  in  deliverance  from 
Syrian  invasions ; the  object  of  the  bitter  denun- 
ciations of  Hosea  and  other  prophets  for  luxury, 
idolatry,  and  oppression.  Taken  in  722,  after  a 
three  years’  siege 4,  the  city  must  have  sunk  for  a 

1 Josh,  xviii.  1.  1 Gen.  xxviii.  19.  3 1 Kings  xvi.  24. 

4 2 Kings  xviii.  9,  10.  For  further  references  cf.  Robinson, 
Palestine  (1867),  ii.  304,  and  Winer,  Bibl.  Real-W'orterbuch 
(1847),  p.  369.  The  term  DUIDC4  is  once  (2  Kings  xvii.  29) 
used  in  the  Old  Testament  for  the  ‘ inhabitants  of  Samaria.’  In 
later  times  the  Samaritans  designated  themselves  as  D,"'D6i, 
which,  by  a play  upon  the  word,  they  interpreted  4 observers  ’ of 
the  Law  or  Sabbath,  or,  according  to  others,  ‘guardians’  of  the 
land,  senses  recognised  by  Origen  (Comm,  in  Joan.  p.  355  ; Horn, 
in  Eztch.  ix.  1),  Eusebius  (C/iron.  ii.  ad  aim.  Abraluimi  1270), 
Hieronymus  ( Onomastica , ed.  Lagarde,  p.  66,  cf.  also  p.  197), 
Epiphanius  (Ilaeres.  i.  9) ; cf.  also  De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  xii. 
p.  175.  They  were  termed  by  the  Jews  D’DO,  from  Cutha,  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


10 


while  into  ruin,  for  it  does  not  reappear  in  history- 
till  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  when  it  was 
captured  by  him,  part  of  the  inhabitants  put  to 
the  sword,  others  removed  to  Shechem,  and  a new 
colony  introduced.  Some  frontier  towns  also  were 
lost  to  Judaea  at  this  time It  appears  soon  after 
to  have  been  rebuilt  by  Perdiccas,  but  in  31 1, 
during  the  wars  of  Antigonus  and  Ptolemy  Lagi,  it 
suffered  the  demolition  of  its  walls  : restored  again 
in  a short  time,  it  continued  to  exist  till  about  b.  c. 
1 29,  when  it  was  taken  and  utterly  destroyed  by 
John  Hyrcanus,  the  Jews  retaining  possession  of 
the  site2.  It  was  restored  by  Pompey  to  its  former 

district  in  Asia  of  doubtful  locality,  whence  colonists,  perhaps 
the  most  important,  had  been  transplanted  to  Samaria  by  the 
king  of  Assyria  (cf.  2 Kings  xvii.  24).  Abulfath,  in  his  Chro- 
nicle (ed.  Vilinar,  p.  lix),  expluins  that  in  a persecution  under 
Darius  some  Samaritan  exiles  fled  from  the  Jews  to  the  valley  of 
Cutba,  hence  the  name  was  fixed  upon  them  in  order  to  deprive 
the  nation  of  that  of  ‘Israelites.’  On  the  position  of  Cutha,  cf. 
De  Sacy,  Chrest.  Arabe,  i.  331 ; Herzfeld,  Geschichte,  i.  473, 
iii.  598;  Ewald,  Gesch.  (1866),  iii.  727;  Neubauer,  Geogr. 
p.  379.  According  to  Schrader,  p.  164,  it  must  be  sought  for 
in  Mid-Babylonia.  , 

1 Eusebius,  Chron.  ad  ann.  Abrahami  1684  ; cf.  Munk,  Pales- 
tine, p.  483.  This  was  in  revenge  for  the  murder  of  Androma- 
chus,  the  Macedonian  governor  of  Coelesyria.  Herzfeld,  ii.  120. 

* The  25th  of  Marheshwan  was  kept  in  memory  of  this  ; the 
15th  and  1 6th  of  Si  wan  in  memory  of  the  annexation  of  Beth- 
eban  and  the  plain  of  Jezreel;  Meg.  Tu'anith,  3,  8;  Gratz, 
Gesch.  (1863),  iii.  422. 


Digitized  by  Google 


11 


owners,  and  rebuilt  by  Gabinius  a few  years  B.  c., 
and  somewhat  later  again  fortified,  colonised,  and 
magnificently  adorned  by  Herod  the  Great,  receiv- 
ing the  name  of  Sebaste,  in  honour  of  Augustus, 
to  whom  a splendid  temple  was  erected  within 
the  city.  A Roman  colony  was  planted  there  by 
Septimius  Severus  early  in  the  third  century,  and 
coins  are  found  extending  from  Nero  to  Geta,  the 
brother  of  Caracalla '.  At  what  time  Herod’s  mag- 
nificent erections  were  laid  waste  is  not  known. 
A bishop  of  Sebaste  was  present  at  the  council 
of  Nicaea  in  325,  and  another  at  the  synod  of 
Jerusalem  in  536.  When  the  place  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Crusaders,  a Latin  bishopric  was 
established  there  about  1155,  the  title  of  which 
was  still  kept  up  by  the  Roman  Church  till  the 
fourteenth  century.  A small  Arab  village  now 
occupies  the  site  of  the  old  town,  traces  of  whose 
former  grandeur  are  still  visible  in  the  stately 
remains  of  the  church  of  St.  John  Baptist1 * 3  and 
long  rows  of  broken  columns. 

But  more  interest  attaches  to  Shechem,  the 


1 Or  perhaps  somewhat  later  to  Alexander  Severus,  222-235. 
Cf.  De  Saulcy,  Numiemalique  de  la  Terre  Sainte  (1874),  p.  281. 

’ St.  Jerome  gives  Sebaste  as  the  burial-place  of  St.  John 

Baptist,  as  also  of  Elisha  and  Obadiah  : later  a tradition  sprang 
up  that  it  had  been  the  scene  of  the  Baptist's  imprisonment  and 
death  also,  whereas  Josephus,  followed  by  Eusebius,  places  these 
at  Maehacrus,  on  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Robinson,  ii.  306. 


Digitized  by  Google 


12 


modern  Nablus ',  the  principal  centre  of  Samaritan 
life  after  the  decline  of  Samaria,  where  still  lingers 
on  the  feeble  remnant  of  the  last  Samaritan  com- 
munity. Built  upon  a gentle  slope  at  the  foot 
of  Mount  Garizim,  at  a point  where  the  mountain 
and  the  opposite  height  of  Ebal  enclose  a valley 
of  some  500  yards  in  breadth,  Shechem,  with  its 
bright  streams  and  luxuriant  vegetation,  has  always 
drawn  forth  the  warmest  admiration  of  travellers 
Its  associations  were  especially  sacred.  Near  it 
stood  the  oak  of  Moreli  (Gen.  xii.  6),  the  resting- 
place  of  Abraham  ; in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
which  was  the  parcel  of  ground  (xliii.  22)  bought 
by  Jacob  from  Hamor  and  given  bv  him  as  a pos- 
session to  Joseph ; it  is  marked  still  by  Jacob's 
well  and  Joseph’s  tomb.  Here  dwelt  the  patriarch 
till  compelled  to  leave  in  fear  of  the  consequences 


1 There  seems  to  he  no  good  reason  for  the  identification  of 
Shechem  (in  LXX,  2v\<fx  and  SUifia)  with  the  of  John, 

iv.  5.  Kusebius  and  the  Bordeaux  pilgrim  expressly  distinguit-h 
them  : see  the  reft’,  in  Smith’s  Bib/.  Diet.,  art.  ‘ Sychar,’  iii.  1395  ; 
Robinson,  ii.  291  ; Neubauer,  169  ; Barges,  Les  Samarilaine  de 
Xaplouae,  10  sqq.  Raumer  identifies  the  latter  with  Askar, 
half  an  hour  east  of  Nablus,  whence  apparently  were  named  the 
plain  and  fountain  Sahl-el-Asgar,  and  Aiu-el-Asgar  mentioned 
by  Berggren  (in  which  case  the  derivation  from  ipc,  the  ‘city 
of  lies,’  cf.  Hab.  ii.  18,  suggested  by  Reland,  or  Lightfoot’s  from 
"lots'  ‘of  drunkards,’  cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  1,  will  fall  through):  but 
Robinson  (iii.  133)  demurs  to  this. 

1 See  the  interesting  quotations  in  Smith’s  Diet.  iii.  1236. 


Digitized  bv  Google 


13 


which  might  ensue  from  the  vengeance  taken 
upon  Shechem  by  Levi  and  Simeon  for  the  insult 
offered  to  their  sister.  Under  the  same  oak  which 
gave  shelter  to  Abraham  he  buried  the  gods 
brought  by  his  family  from  Mesopotamia  (xxxv. 
1-4).  By  the  same,  in  all  probability,  was  Abi- 
meleeh  made  king1.  Near  Shechem  Joseph  and 
his  brethren  fed  their  flocks 2 ; from  Ebal  and 
Garizim  were  pronounced  the  curses  and  blessings 
of  the  Law 3 ; on  Ebal  Joshua  built  an  altar  and 
set  up  stones  on  which  were  written  the  words  of 
the  Law 4 ; at  Shechem,  which  had  been  appointed 
a city  of  refuge  and  possession  of  the  Levites,  he 
gave  his  last  warning  to  the  assembled  congre- 
gation of  Israel,  setting  up  as  a witness  a great 
stone  ‘ under  an  oak  which  was  by  the  sanctuary 
of  the  Lord5 on  Garizim  was  delivered  Jotham’s 
parable  after  Abimelech’s  slaughter  of  his  brethren, 

1 Judg.  ix.  6.  * Gen.  xxxvii.  12. 

3 Deut.  xxvii.  11.  For  tlie  account  of  an  interesting  ex|>eri- 

rnent  as  to  the  acoustic  capabilities  of  the  spot,  see  Mills,  Nablus 

(1864),  p.  57.  The  voice  of  a reader  can  with  ease  be  heard 

from  one  mountain  to  another,  and  there  is  ample  space  for  the 
accommodation  of  a crowd  like  tho  Israelites. 

* Josh.  viii.  30.  The  Samaritans  charge  the  Jews  with 
having  altered  Garizim  to  Ebal  in  Deut.  xxvii.  4 out  of  spite 
to  them,  in  order  to  rob  Garizim  of  its  honours.  In  the 
neighbourhood  of  Sicheni  they  shew  the  tomb  of  Eleazar, 
Ithamar,  I’hinehas,  Joshua,  Caleb,  the  Seventy  Elders,  &c. 
Barges,  p.  1 5.  6 Josh.  xxiv.  26. 


Digitized  by  Google 


14 


the  connivance  of  the  inhabitants  of  Shechem  in 
this  deed  of  blood  soon  after  returning  on  their  own 
heads  in  the  destruction  of  their  city  by  Abimelech ; 
hither  came  Rehoboam  to  receive  the  kingdom  1 ; 
and  here  for  some  time  dwelt  Jeroboam  after  his 
accession 3.  The  city  no  doubt  suffered  like  others 
during  the  Assyrian  invasion,  but  is  mentioned 
as  existing  about  588  3.  It  gained  in  importance 
by  the  erection  of  a temple  on  the  neighbouring 
height  of  Garizim  in  opposition  to  that  of  Jeru- 
salem, which  lasted  from  about  the  time  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great  to  b.c.  129,  when  it  was  destroyed 
by  John  Hyrcanus1.  Later  it  acquired  the  name  > 
of  Mabortha5  or  Mamortha',  and,  apparently 
under  Vespasian,  that  of  Flavia  Neapolis 7,  whence 


' 1 Kings  xii.  1.  3 1 Kings  xii.  25.  5 Jer.  xli.  5. 

4 The  2ist  of  Kliislew  (or,  according  to  Bab.  Yuma,  69  a,  the 
25th  of  Tebeth)  was  long  kept  by  the  Jews  in  memory  of  this. 
Meg.  Ta'anith,  cap.  9. 

5 Josephus,  B.  J.  iv.  8.  1. 

4 Pliny,  II.  N.  v.  1 3.  Olshausen  suggests  Nn"OytD  as  the  deri- 
vation of  the  name,  Nablus  being  a halting-place  between  Jeru- 
salem and  Galilee;  Neubauer,  p.  172,  ttnyGD.  Cf.  ‘Torberie,’ 
the  ‘blessed,’  as  a name  of  Garizim  mentioned  by  Masudi  and 
Makrizi,  De  Sacy,  Chrexl.  Arab e,  i.  303,  343. 

T Robinson  (ii.  292)  thinks  the  old  city  may  have  extended 
further  eastwards  than  Neapolis  (hence  Eusebius’  statement 
that  Sichem  was  «r  irpoau-motr  N las  rroXtas),  and  now  have  dis- 
appeared entirely : to  the  same  effect  Ewald  in  Gutting.  Gel. 
Anz.  1865,  p.  1671.  Coins  of  the  city  are  found  from  Titus 


Digitized  by  Google 


15 


its  modem  name  of  Nablus  is  derived.  Here  our 
Lord  made  many  converts  *,  and  here  in  all  pro- 
bability was  founded  a Church  in  apostolic  times 2 : 
Justin  Martyr,  who  suffered  at  Rome  about  163, 
was  a native  of  the  place.  A bishop  of  Neapolis 
was  present  at  the  council  of  Ancyra  and  Neo- 
caesarea  in  314,  of  Nicaea  in  325,  and  at  the  synod 
of  Jerusalem  in  536  s.  After  this  brief  survey  of 
the  country  occupied  of  old  by  the  Samaritan 
people,  it  is  time  to  return  to  their  history. 

Disappointed  in  their  wish  to  unite  with  the 


(or  Domitiuu)  to  Volusiauus  (a.d.  251-4),  or  Gallicnua  (253-68). 
The  year  7 2 was  termed  the  ‘era  of  Neapolis,’  probably  in 
consequence  of  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem  and  Judaea  in  70-1.  In 
the  time  of  Hadrian  a representation  of  Garizim  first  occurs 
on  coins  of  the  city,  the  temple  having  heen  rebuilt  by  him 
( Chron . Sam.  cap.  47).  The  mountain  is  of  conical  shape, 
with  two  summits  : on  the  one  to  the  left  appears  a temple 
with  columns  in  front  and  a long  flight  of  steps  leading  up 
to  it,  as  described  by  the  Bordeaux  pilgrim  in  333 ; that  on 
the  right  has  a smull  edifice  on  it,  without  columns.  Neapolis 
had  received  the  ‘jus  Xtalicum’  under  the  Flavian  family,  hence 
its  name  of  1 Aurelia  Flavia  Neapolis.’  Of  this  it  was  deprived 
hy  Septimius  Severus  (1 93-211)  for  supporting  the  cause  of 
Pescennius  Niger.  Under  the  Emperor  Philip  (244-9)  be- 
came a Latin  colony,  receiving  the  title  of  ‘Colonia  Julia  Scrgia 
Neapolis.’  Dc  Saulcy,  p.  244  sq. 

1 John  iv.  39-42.  3 Acts  viii.  25,  ix.  31,  xv.  3. 

3 Robinson,  ii.  293.  The  portal  and  other  remains  of  the 
cathedral,  which  was  dedicated  to  St.  James  the  Less  and  is  now 
converted  into  a mosque,  arc  still  to  be  seen.  Barges,  p.  93. 


Digitized  by  Google 


16 


Jewish  exiles  on  the  return  of  the  latter  from 
captivity  in  536,  the  Samaritans  succeeded  in 
preventing  the  erection  of  the  Temple  for  twenty 
years,  and  offered  the  same  unrelenting  opposition 
to  Nehemiah  when,  in  445,  he  set  about  rebuild- 
ing the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  which  till  now  had 
lain  in  ruins.  They  welcomed  with  open  arms 
any  refugees  from  Jerusalem  who,  for  crime  or 
to  escape  the  strict  Mosaic  rule  there  established, 
might  wish  to  leave  their  country No  doubt 
the  stern  reforms  introduced  by  Nehemiah  on  his 
second  visit  (chap,  xiii)  were  highly  distasteful  to 
many  who  preferred  the  laxity  which  had  crept 
in  during  his  absence,  and  to  these  an  asylum  was 
always  open  at  Shechem.  The  alienation  between 
the  two  nations  was  finally  completed  when  the 
Samaritans  at  last  succeeded  in  erecting  a rival 
temple1 2  on  Garizim  and  endeavoured  to  transfer 
thither  the  prestige  of  the  older  one  of  Jerusa- 
lem. The  immediate  occasion  of  the  undertaking 
was  the  refusal  of  Manasseh,  brother  of  Jaddua  the 


1 Josephus,  Ant.  xi.  8.  7. 

2 The  date  of  the  erection  is  doubtful.  Josephus  (Jnt.  xi. 
8.  4)  seems  to  place  it  in  the  reign  of  Darius  Codonmnnus  (335- 
330),  the  last  king  of  Persia,  but  if  the  Sanballat  he  mentions  is 
the  same  as  in  Noli.  xiii.  28,  the  event  should  be  placed  under 
Darius  Nothus  (413-10);  cf.  Winer,  op.  cit.,  art.  ‘Nehemias.’ 
Jost  ( Gesch . i.  48,  note  2)  thinks  the  temple  must  be  much 
earlier  than  Alexander. 


17 


high-priest  and  son-in-law  to  Sa'nballat  the  Sama- 
ritan governor,  to  dissolve  his  irregular  marriage 
in  obedience  to  the  admonition  of  the  Jewish 
elders.  To  reward  him  for  his  constancy,  San- 
ballat  exerted  himself  to  erect  a rival  sanctuary, 
and  there  established  him  in  the  high-priesthood1. 

On  the  troubled  scene  of  politics  which  opened 
after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Samaritans  suf- 
fered equally  with  the  Jews  from  the  cruelty  and 
ambition  of  their  ever-changing  masters.  They 
unfortunately  served  as  the  battle-field  as  well 
as  the  prize  of  victory  to  the  holders  of  Syria 
and  Egypt,  and  passed  from  the  dominion  of  one 
sovereign  to  that  of  the  other  according  as  the 
tide  of  victory  rolled  hither  or  thither.  From 
the  peaceful  rule  of  Laomedon,  the  governor  of 
Syria,  they  passed  into  the  hands  of  Ptolemy  Lagi 
in  320,  to  fall  under  the  dominion  of  Antigonus 
of  Syria  in  314.  Three  years  later,  by  a sudden 
incursion,  Ptolemy  repossessed  himself  of  his  former 
conquest,  but  being  compelled  almost  immedi- 


1 Tliis  temple  the  Jews  termed  DUD7D  ( Bereschith  Baiba, 
c.  81),  signifying,  according  to  Reland  (Garizim,  c.  3),  m 
i>ads,  but  tho  word  is  probably  connected  with  irlarmos,  i.e.  the 
of  Gen.  xxxv.  4 ; cf.  Frankel,  Kinfluss  d.  palcistin.  Exegcse, 
p.  248.  The  Samaritans  in  turn  stigmatised  that  of  Jerusalem 
as  n'3  or  ttTDQ  '2 : by  a play  upon  they  called 

it  oi’E'  mix  ‘ the  cursed  Salem.’  Neubauer’s  Chronicle,  Joum. 
Asial.  (1869),  p.  402;  see  below,  p.  125. 

C 


Digitized  by  Google 


18 


ately  to  retire,  endeavoured  to  do  as  much  mis- 
chief as  possible  to  his  enemy,  and  consequently 
before  his  departure  razed  the  walls  of  Samaria 
and  other  fortified  towns.  In  301  he,  by  treaty, 
entered  again  into  peaceable  possession  of  the 
country,  but,  in  298,  it  underwent  a cruel 
ravaging  at  the  hands  of  Demetrius  Poliorcetes, 
the  son  of  Antigonus.  Thenceforth,  for  many 
years,  Palestine  enjoyed  a respite  from  trouble 
under  the  mild  and  beneficent  rule  of  Egypt,  and 
nothing  more  is  heard  of  Samaria  except  petty 
squabbles  with  the  neighbouring  Jews  during  the 
sway  of  the  feeble  and  avaricious  high-priest 
Onias  II,  till  the  reign  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
when  a determined  effort  was  made  by  this 
monarch  to  root  out  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and 
establish  the  ritual  of  Greece  throughout  his  do- 
minions. The  conduct  of  the  Samaritans  at  this 
juncture  formed  a marked  contrast  to  the  noble 
independence  of  the  Jews  in  maintaining  the  faith 
of  their  fathers:  they  abjured  all  connection  with 
Israel  or  its  God,  claimed  to  be  Sidonians  by 
origin,  and  requested  that  their  temple  might 
be  dedicated  to  Zeus  Hellenios'.  To  one  prin- 
ciple of  conduct  however,  with  rare  exceptions, 
they  always  remained  constant,  to  take  the  oppo- 
site side  to  the  Jews  and  injure  them  to  the 


1 Josephus,  Ant.  xii.  5.  5. 


Digitized  by  Google 


19 


utmost  of  their  ability.  This  at  last  drew  down 
upon  them  the  vengeance  of  John  Hyrcanus,  and 
the  destruction  of  their  temple  about  129  b.  c., 
followed  by  that  of  Samaria  a few  years  later. 
The  Samaritans  responded  by  all  the  means  of 
annoyance  at  their  command,  killing  Galilean  pil- 
grims on  their  way  to  Jerusalem,  and  lighting 
sham  beacon-fires  in  opposition  to  those  kindled 
by  the  Jews  as  a signal  to  their  distant  brethren 
that  the  Paschal  new  moon  had  appeared.  On 
one  occasion  it  is  related  how  a Samaritan  suc- 
ceeded in  polluting  the  Temple  on  the  eve  of  the 
Passover  by  scattering  human  bones  over  the 
pavement1.  The  Gospel  narrative  shews  that  in 
our  Lord’s  time  there  was  a complete  estrange- 
ment between  the  two  nations:  the  very  name 
of  Samaritan  had  now  become  a term  of  abuse3. 
When  the  independence  of  Judaea  declined  and 
Palestine  passed  under  the  Roman  rule,  matters 
began  to  look  brighter  for  the  Samaritan  people. 
Pompey  freed  them  from  the  Jewish  yoke ; Ga- 
binius  rebuilt  and  fortified  Samaria ; the  national 
worship  was  restored,  exiles  suffered  to  return,  and 
government  by  a council  of  elders  established  : the 


’ See  reff.  in  Neubauer,  Geogr.  p.  166. 

s John  viii.  48.  Cf.  also  Ecclus.  1.  25,  26  (whero  ‘Scir’  is 
possibly  to  be  read  for  1 Samaria’)  and  Testamentum  XII  Patrum, 

p.  564  : "Karat  yip  cirro  (rrjptpop  'S.ixijp  A tyoptvrj  iroAtr  dtrvwTur. 

C 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


20 


reign  of  Herod  the  Great  also,  one  of  whose  wives 
was  a Samaritan,  was  marked  by  the  execution 
of  great  public  works  for  the  embellishment  of 
Samaria. 

But  the  unquiet  spirit  which  had  distinguished 
the  old  tribe  of  Ephraim  in  former  times,  and  is 
said  even  now  to  mark  the  modem  inhabitants 
of  Nablus1,  would  not  suffer  the  Samaritans  to 
rest.  Their  history  is  a constantly  recurring  tale 
of  insurrections,  massacres,  and  bloody  reprisals 
taken  on  them  by  the  conquerors.  The  severity 
with  which  Pilate  put  down  a tumultuous  rising 
occasioned  his  recall 2.  Under  Vespasian  a revolt 
was  quelled  with  the  loss  of  1 1 ,600  persons 3 4,  and 
Sichem  received  a garrison  and  new  name  from 
the  conqueror.  It  is  uncertain  whether  they  took 
any  part  in  the  Jewish  revolt  under  Trajan  * : in 
the  terrible  insurrection  which  a few  years  later 
burst  out  with  such  desperate  violence  under  the 


1 Juilg.  via.  1-3,  xii.  1-6,  2 Sam.  xix.  43;  cf.  Robinson, 
ii.  301. 

s Josephns,  Ant.  xviii.  4.  1,  2 : a certain  man  promised  to 
show  tliem  the  sacred  vessels  hidden  by  Moses  (or  the  high-priest 
Usi,  who,  according  to  the  Samaritan  book  of  Joshua,  chap. 
42,  hid  them  261  years  after  the  entry  into  Canaan)  under 
Garizim.  The  legend  is  borrowed  from  2 Macc.  ii.  5,  where 
the  prophet  Jeremy  does  the  same  on  Ncbo. 

5 Josephus,  Ji.  J . iii.  7.  32. 

4 Juynboll,  Comment,  in  Ilist.  Gent.  Sam.  p.  129. 


Digitized  by  Google 


21 


leadership  of  Bar  Cocheba  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian 
the  Samaritans  apparently  at  first  aided  the  Jews, 
hut  afterwards  deserting  their  allies  assisted  the 
Romans  in  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  being 
rewarded  at  the  hands  of  their  conqueror  by  the 
restoration  of  their  temple  on  Garizim  With 
the  rest  of  the  empire  they  benefited  from  the 
gentle  rule  of  the  Antonines.  Under  Commodus, 
Septiinius  Severus,  Constantine  and  Constantins,, 
their  condition  was  unsatisfactory,  but  quieter 
times  fell  to  their  lot  under  Julian,  Valentinian, 
and  Yalens  ; their  fortunes  varied  under  the  later 
emperors.  Laws  unfavourably  affecting  their  posi- 
tion were  passed  by  Honorius  in  404  and  418; 
Theodosius  II  in  426  took  from  them  testamentary 
rights,  aud  in  439  forbade  them  to  exercise  any 
office  which  dealt  with  the  affairs  of  Christians  ; 
new  synagogues  also  might  not  be  erected2. 

The  hatred  with  which  they  had  formerly 
regarded  their  Jewish  rivals  began  to  coneen- 
trate  itself  upon  the  Christians,  now  that  the  new 


' Juvnboll,  Chron.  Sam.  cup.  47  ; Iiurgefl,  p.  10 1 ; Ewald, 
vii.  (1868),  p.  409.  Bettar  is  said  to  have  fallen  by  Samaritan 
treachery:  as  to  its  position  sec  Neubauer,  Geoyraphic,  p.  ) 05. 
In  Jer.  Kidduschin,  iv.  1,  it  is  said  that  thirteen  places  were 
merged  among  the  Samaritans  in  the  time  of  ‘the  destruction,’ 
i.e.  under  Hadrian:  this  was  done  by  them  in  order  to  avoid 
the  fate  of  the  Jews. 

* Jost,  Gtsch.  i.  76  ; Juvnboll,  Comment,  p.  50. 


Digitized  by  Google 


22 


faith  had  become  that  of  the  empire.  In  the  year 
484  while  under  the  rule  of  Zeno  they  attacked 
the  church  at  Nablus,  maimed  the  bishop,  and 
murdered  many  of  the  worshippers,  committing 
the  like  atrocities  at  Caesarea  also.  UndePAnasta- 
sius  and  Justinian  fresh  troubles  broke  out1.  In 
529  a general  revolt  of  the  Samaritans  took  place 
against  the  Christians,  whole  villages  were  burnt, 
churches  destroyed,  and  the  worshippers  tortured 
to  death.  The  severity  with  which  this  was  put 
down  by  Justinian,  followed  by  the  enactment  of 
severe  laws  against  them,  completely  crushed  the 
Samaritan  people2.  Many  fled  to  Persia,  many 
became  Christians 3.  Henceforth  they  appear  but 
little  in  history.  In  636  they  fell  under  Moham- 
medan rule  when  the  conquest  of  Palestine  was 
effected  by  the  Khaliph  Omar.  After  the  capture 
of  Jerusalem  in  1099  by  Godfrey  de  Bouillon  and 
his  allies,  Nablus  and  the  surrounding  country 


1 Petermann,  in  Herzog’s  lieal-Encyclojiadie,  xiii.  p.  369. 

! They  were  rendered  incapable  of  holding  public  employ- 
ments, or  of  acquiring  property  by  inheritance  or  gift  among 
themselves : their  synagogues  were  to  be  destroyed  and  no  new 
ones  erected.  Some  of  these  provisions  were  relaxed  a few 
years  later  : some  time  after  again,  they  were  ordered  to  under- 
take civic  offices  with  duties  attached  to  them,  without  however 
acquiring  any  of  the  corresponding  rights.  Their  testimony 
against  Christians  could  not  be  received.  Jost,  i.  78. 

* Robinson,  ii.  294,  295. 


23 


came  into  the  power  of  the  Crusaders,  and,  with 
the  exception  of  some  temporary  occupations 
by  the  Saracens1,  remained  Christian  till  1244, 
when  it  again  became  subject  to  Mohammedan 
rule  by  the  complete  and  utter  rout  of  the 
Christian  forces  at  the  fatal  battle  of  Gaza. 
Brief  notices  .of  the  Samaritans  and  their  country 
appear  in  the  works  of  Benjamin  of  Tudela 
(twelfth  century)  and  Christian  pilgrims  and 
traveller's2,  but  little  was  known  of  them  till 
the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  when  Joseph 
Sealiger  first  opened  communications  with  them, 
addressing  a letter  to  the  congregations  at  Nablus 
and  Cairo3.  Answers  arrived  in  1589,  but  not 


1 As,  for  instance,  when  Nablus  was  plundered  during  a 
temporary  incursion  of  the  Saracens  in  1113,  again  by  Saladin 
in  1184  after  his  repulse  from  Kerak,  and  in  1187  after  his 
victory  at  Tiberias. 

2 Bargds,  pp.  10  sq.,  33  sq.;  Kobinson,  ii.  297.  Arabian 
writers  often  confound  them  with  the  Jews.  Ibn  Batuta  (1326), 
while  describing  Nablus,  does  not  mention  them. 

3 A careful  deseqiption  of  the  correspondence  of  the  Samaritans 
with  Europeans,  from  Sealiger  to  Dc  Sacy,  is  given  by  the  latter 
in  Notices  et  Extraits  ties  MSS.  de  la  Bibl.  du  Hoi,  vol.  xii.  (1831), 
together  with  the  original  texts  and  a translation  of  most  of  the 
letters : two  (to  Ludolf)  were  published  by  Ccllarius,  1 688  ; 
others  arc  to  be  found  in  Eichhorn’s  Reperlorium , vols.  ix. 
and  xiii.  One  more  has  since  been  published  by  Heidenheim 
in  his  Vierteljahresschrift  (vol.  i.  p.  88),  that  of  Meschalmah  ben 
Ab  Sechunh  to  the  Samaritans  of  Europe,  coming,  as  is  supposed 


Digitized  by  Google 


24 


till  after  Scaliger’s  death,  and  these  passing  into 
other  hands  the  correspondence  ceased.  But  in 
1616,  Pietro  della  Valle  having  in  vain  endeavoured 
at  Cairo,  Gaza,  and  Nablus,  then  centres  of  Sama- 
ritan life,  to  carry  out  the  injunctions  of  De  Sancy, 
then  French  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  and 
procure  a Samaritan  Pentateuch,  succeeded  at  last 
in  purchasing  one  at  Damascus,  as  also  a transla- 
tion of  it  into  the  Samaritan  dialect.  The 
publication  of  these  excited  great  interest  and 
provoked  angry  disputes  as  to  their  intrinsic 
value  among  the  learned  of  Europe,  but  no  further 
communications  appear  to  have  been  opened  with 
the  Samaritans  till  1671,  when  Huntington,  the 
learned  bishop  of  Raphoe,  whose  Oriental  MSS. 
form  part  of  the  treasures  of  the  Bodleian  Library, 
paid  a visit  to  Nablus,  while  holding  the  office 
of  chaplain  to  the  English  factory  at  Aleppo. 
He  found  there  a small  community  of  thirty 
families,  procured  from  them  a Pentateuch,  and 
in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Marshall,  Rector  of  Lincoln 
College,  Oxford,  earned  on  a correspondence  with 


by  the  editor,  between  the  correspondence  of  Scnligcr  and 
Huntington.  Emendations  of  the  text  are  suggested  by  Geiger 
in  the  Zeilachr.  d.  D.  if.  G.  xvi.  725,  and  by  Vilmar,  ibid. 
xvii.  375.  The  letters  are  written  partly  in  Arabic,  and  partly 
in  Hebrew  marked  by  Samaritanisms  and  Arabistns;  they 
display  the  most  complete  ignorance  of  all  history  and  of  every- 
thing outside  the  little  community  of  Nablus. 


Digitized  by  Google 


25 


them  which  lasted  with  intervals  till  the  latter’s 
death  in  1685.  About  this  time  a few  letters 
also  passed  between  them  and  the  celebrated 
Aethiopic  scholar  Job  Ludolf,  and  then,  with  the 
exception  of  one  letter  addressed  in  1790  to  their 
‘ Samaritan  brethren’  in  France ',  nothing  more  is 
heard  of  them  till  1808,  when  the  bishop  and 
senator  Gregoire  set  about  making  enquiries  with 
regard  to  them  by  means  of  the  French  consular 
agents  in  Syria.  The  information  thus  acquired 
and  the  communications  which  subsequently  en- 
sued between  Salameh  the  high-priest  and  De 
Sacy  himself  are  contained  in  the  memoir  drawn 
up  by  the  latter.  They  give  the  same  picture  as  is 
presented  by  later  travellers  of  a small  community 
despised  and  ill-treated  by  Jew  and  Mahommedan 2, 
from  the  very  fact  of  their  present  depressed  con- 


1 Published  by  Hamaker  in  Archief  voor  Kerkelijke  Ges/'hie- 
denis,  v.  p.  56.  Heidenheim,  i.  82. 

2 A touching  picture  of  the  miseries  undergone  by  the 
Samaritans  during  the  first  half  of  the  present  century  from 
the  cruelty  and  avarice  of  their  ever-changing  governors  is  given 
in  the  autobiography  of  Jacob-esh-Shelaby,  London,  1855.  He 
came  at  that  time  to  England  to  collect  funds  for  his  impoverished 
countrymen  and  to  intercede  with  the  government  on  their  behalf. 
A translation  of  his  petition  may  be  seen  at  p.  50.  Another,  to 
the  government  of  Louis  Philippe,  is  given  with  a translation  in 
Bargfes,  p.  65  sq.  See  also  his  letter  in  the  Times  of  April  3, 
1874.  The  congregation  is  now  reduced  to  135  persons,  nud 
grievously  oppressed  by  the  Mohammedans. 


Digitized  by  Google 


26 


dition  clinging  with  all  the  greater  obstinacy  to 
their  lofty  traditions  of  the  past  and  to  the  hope 
of  future  restoration  to  the  Divine  favour ; with 
little  or  no  education ; depending  for  their  his- 
tory upon  legendary  mediaeval  chronicles  drawn 
in  great  measure  from  Jewish  sources ; for  their 
religious  knowledge,  upon  the  successive  gleanings 
of  centuries  from  their  Jewish  rivals  ; yet  interest- 
ing as  the  possessors  of  what  they  assert  to  be 
an  independent  revision  of  the  Pentateuch,  and 
as  the  sole  remaining  representatives  of  the  people 
who  have  now  for  more  than  2500  years  claimed 
to  be  the  chosen  Israel  of  God  *.  The  correspond- 


1 Formerly  there  were  flourishing  communities  of  Samaritans 
in  other  countries  besides  Palestine.  Alexander  the  Great  is 
said  to  have  settled  his  Samaritan  auxiliaries  at  the  siege  of 
Tyre  in  Egypt  (Josephus,  Ant.  xi.  8.  6) : Ptolemy  Lagi  carried 
off  considerable  numbers  with  him  (i6.  xii.  i),  other  colonists 
probably  followed  during  the  troublous  times  of  John  Hyrcanus  : 
a dispute  between  the  Alexandrian  Jews  and  Samaritans  is  said 
( ib . xiii.  3.  4)  to  have  taken  place  before  Ptolemy  Philometor 
(181-146)  : here  the  Samaritan-Greek  version  of  the  Pentateuch 
in  all  probability  and  the  Arabic  of  Abu-Said  were  composed.  A 
sect  of  Dositheans  is  mentioned  there  in  the  sixth  century  A.  D., 
and  some  remnants  of  the  people  lingered  on  there  till  the  seven- 
teenth. A colony  of  Samaritans  was  found  by  Edrisi  in  the 
twelfth  century  in  islands  in  the  fled  Sea,  where  they  are  said 
to  have  taken  refuge  after  the  Arab  invasion  of  Egypt  in  638. 
Meshullam  ben  llenaliem  of  Volterra  (rn’O^ll  or  m'D^O,  not 
iTD^D,  Malta  or  Toledo,  as  Heidenheim  supposes,  cf.  Biscioni, 
Calal.  Medic,  p.  1 28,  aud  Zunz  in  Asher's  Benjamin  of  Twiela 


Digitized  by  Google 


27 


ence  is  of  high  value  for  the  light  it  throws  on 
the  later  developements  of  Samaritan  doctrine, 


(1841),  ii.  267)  found  fifty  Samaritan  families  in  Egypt  on  the 
occasion  of  his  visit  there  in  1480.  They  hold,  he  says,  partly 
to  the  written  Law,  but  are  idolaters  ; their  writing  is  different 
to  tljat  of  the  Jews,  and  they  have  no  ft,  n,  V,  X,  3,  n (cf.  as  to 
this  last  statement  Benjamin  of  Tudela,  i.  67  ; Isaac  Helo,  A.  D. 
1344,  in  Carmoly’s  Itineraires,  p.  252,  and  Makrizi,  in  De  Sacy, 
Chrett.  Arabe,  i.  303) ; they  go  in  pilgrimage  thrice  each  year  to 
Garizim,  where  a golden  dove  may  be  seen  on  the  altar  ; they  live 
apart  from  the  Jews,  having  a separate  synagogue  ; the  Sabbath 
they  observe  only  to  mid-day.  See  his  letter  in  Heidenhcim,  iii. 
354.  He  was  probably  the  same  that  Obadiah  of  Bertinoro  met 
on  his  journey  to  Jerusalem  seven  years  later,  cf.  Neubauer’s  Zwei 
Briefe  Obadiah's  in  Jahrb.fiir  d.  Gesch.  d.  Judea.  (1863),  iii.  198, 
229.  The  latter  (ibid.  241,  243)  gives  much  the  same  account : 
he  found  fifty  Samaritan  families  in  Cairo,  employed  chiefly  as 
cashiers  and  agents  for  the  principal  officials,  occupations  in  which 
they  acquired  considerable  wealth.  The  anonymous  traveller  of 
1 495,  whose  narration  is  given  ibid.  p.  271  sq.,  visited  Sichem, 
but  makes  no  mention  of  the  Samaritans,  his  whole  mind  being 
apparently  taken  up  with  endeavours  to  avoid  the  extortions  of 
custom-house  officials.  In  the  third  and  following  centuries 
they  seem  to  have  been  widely  scattered  in  both  East  and  West, 
employing  themselves  chiefly  as  merchants  and  money-changers  : 
in  the  time  of  Theodoric  (493-526)  they  had  a synagogue  in 
Rome.  A colony  of  Samaritans  is  mentioned  as  existing  in  the 
fourth  century  at  Babylon  (Git tin,  45  a).  Benjamin  of  Tudela 
in  the  twelfth  century  found  communities  in  Caesarea,  Nablus, 
Askelon,  and  Damascus  : tho  great  numl>er  of  MSS.  written  at 
the  last-named  place  shews  that  it  must  have  been  All  important 
centre  for  them.  The  chronicle  El-Tholidoth  (see  below,  p.  126) 


Digitized  by  Google 


28 


and  also  of  interest  as  shewing  the  intellectual 
condition  of  this  once  numerous  and  powerful  but 
now  nearly  extinct  religious  sect.  The  later 
descriptions  of  modern  travellers,  such  as  Robinson, 
Petennann,  and  others,  shew  that  few  changes 
have  since  passed  over  the  little  community. 

II.  In  the  preceding  historical  sketch  the  reader 
will  no  doubt  have  observed  the  extreme  paucity, 
or  rather  the  almost  total  absence,  of  any  trust- 
worthy information  derivable  from  the  Samaritans 
themselves  as  to  the  circumstances  of  their  origin 
and  early  condition ; and  for  this  reason  will  ex- 
pect no  very  exact  account  of  the  tenets  held  by 
them  in  the  earlier  aces  of  their  national  existence. 
Even  with  the  fullest  details  at  our  disposal, 
nothing  very  definite  or  distinctive  in  the  way  of 
religious  belief  would  in  all  probability  have  been 
found  existing  among  them.  For  it  must  be  re- 
membered  that  they  were  a population  consisting 
of  the  poorest  Israelites,  who  had  been  left  behind 
by  their  conquerors  as  politically  too  insignificant 
to  be  worth  the  trouble  of  removing  from  their 


gives  the  names  of  many  families  settleJ  in  Damascus,  Palestine, 
anil  Egypt.  Cf.  Robinson,  ii.  293,  300  ; Rasnage,  Hist,  den  J uif« 
(1716),  ii.  140-142,  152;  Juynboll,  Comment,  pp.  37-54  ; in 
the  Inst  very  full  references  will  be  found.  In  a prayer  given  by 
Heidenheim  (Vierteljahresschr.  i.  418)  supplications  are  offered 
for  the  .Samaritan  congregations  in  Damascus,  Gaza,  Philistia, 
Egypt,  Aleppo,  Hamath,  Sefad,  and  Haserim. 


Digitized  by  Google 


29 


land ; they  had  moreover,  after  long  centuries  of 
corruption  by  means  of  state  idolatry  and  devotion 
to  the  cruel  and  licentious  rites  of  Baal,  Ashtoreth, 
and  other  monstrous  deities,  afterwards  been  re- 
cruited from  time  to  time  by  the  arrival  of  fresh 
parties  of  foreign  idolaters.  The  nation  had  in- 
deed, under  the  influence  of  fear,  partially  abjured 
their  idolatry  and  professed  the  worship  of  Je- 
hovah, so  much  so  as  to  be  anxious  to  unite  with 
the  returning  Jews  in  rebuilding  the  Temple  at 
Jerusalem,  in  all  probability  however  their  re- 
ligious views  had  at  this  time  gained  no  great 
depth  or  distinctness.  But"  the  refusal  of  the 
national  party  among  the  Jews  to  recognise  them 
as  in  any  way  belonging  to  Israel  must  have  com- 
pelled the  Samaritans  to  consider  their  religious 
position,  to  test  the  validity  of  the  claims  put 
forth  by  them,  and  to  shew  both  by  their  faith 
and  practice  that  they,  and  not  their  rivals  of 
Jerusalem,  were  the  true  disciples  of  Moses.  By 
themselves  however  they  were  unable,  from  lack 
of  the  necessary  learning,  to  carry  out  their  pur- 
pose, and  it  will  be  seen  from  several  instances 
which  will  be  brought  forward,  that  the  Samari- 
tans, powerless  to  invent,  wore  compelled  to  borrow 
the  doctrines  and  usages  then  in  vogue  at  Jeru- 
salem. 

No  one  will  be  surprised  at  this  who  considers 
the  intimate  relations  which  were  from  the  first 


30 


maintained  between  their  leaders  and  a powerful 
section  of  the  Jews.  It  was  in  vain  that  Ezra, 
aided  by  such  as  had  ‘separated  themselves’  from 
the  heathen  of  the  land,  dissolved  by  force  the 
marriages  which  had  taken  place  between  the 
latter  and  numberless  priests  and  rulers  of  Jeru- 
salem. A few  years  later  the  mischief  had  not 
abated  : Nehemiah  complains  that  his  plans  were 
betrayed  bv  the  nobles  of  Judah,  who  had  allied 
themselves  with  the  enemy ; his  last  work 
was  to  purify  the  Temple  from  the  presence  of 
Tobiah  the  Ammonite  who  had  established  him- 
self there  with  the  assistance  of  Eliashib  the 
high -priest,  and  to  expel  the  grandson  of  the 
latter  for  his  marriage  with  Sanballat’s  daughter. 
These  temporary  checks  caused  by  the  zeal  of 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  being  removed,  no  doubt 
such  alliances  became  frequent  as  before,  and 
although  the  influence  of  the  national  party  at 
Jerusalem  was  sufficient  to  prevent  a complete 
fusion  of  the  two  nations,  yet  a most  intimate 
connection  must  have  been  kept  up  between 
certain  members  of  each,  and  thus  the  Law  and 
the  prevailing  interpretation  of  it  have  readily 
passed  from  Jerusalem  into  the  opposite  camp. 
More  especially  after  the  secession  of  Manasseh 
and  his  establishment  as  rival  high-priest  in  the 
Temple  of  Garizim,  must  all  the  then  existing 
Jewish  learning  have  been  at  the  disposal  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


31 


the  Samaritans.  To  understand  their  position 
therefore  it  will  be  necessary  to  enquire  what 
was  the  state  of  religious  parties  and  what  the 
tone  of  thought  which  after  the  return  from  the 
exile  prevailed  in  Jerusalem. 

It  was  not  apparently  till  the  pontificate 
of  John  Hvrcanus,  about  B.  C.  130,  that  the  two 
rival  factions  of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees1  made 
their  appearance  under  these  names  in  history. 
But  they  must  have  existed  long  before : there 
was  nothing,  as  far  as  we  know,  in  the  special 
circumstances  of  the  time  which  could  have  then 
produced  them : the  principles  which  actuated 
their  conduct  must  have  been  at  work  in  the 
nation  in  the  preceding  centuries  as  well.  The 
government  had  all  along  been  in  the  hands  of 
the  high-priest  and  the  other  sacerdotal  families 
to  whom  he  was  related ; to  these  would  naturally 
ally  themselves  the  other  wealthy  classes  in  the 
state.  In  the  hands  of  this,  the  Sadducee  party, 
would  be  all  judicial  and  administrative  posts,  the 
arrangement  of  the  calendar  on  which  all  the  feasts 
of  the  year  depended,  the  conduct  of  the  services 
of  the  Temple,  the  authoritative  exposition  of  the 


1 Derenbourg  ( Palestine , i.  78,  452)  thinks  that  Pharisee  and 
Sadducee  were  nicknames,  invented  long  after  the  qualities  of 
Peruhouth  and  Sedaqah  had  become  the  characteristics  of  the 
two  parties.  Sec  also  Gratz,  Gexch.  (1863),  iii.  454,  sq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


32 


Law.  Whatever  might  be  the  merits  of  individual 
members  of  the  body,  such  as  Jaddua  and  Simon 
the  Just,  still  the  tendency  of  a privileged  and 
wealthy  class  always  would  be  to  take  life 
quietly,  to  content  themselves  with  following  the 
requirements  of  the  Law  as  far  as  the  letter  and 
ancient  tradition  required  them  (in  other  words  to 
comply  with  Sedaqah),  but  not  to  invent  rigorous 
observances  which  would  interfere  with  the  in- 
dulgence of  those  tastes  which  their  wealth  and 
position  enabled  them  to  enjoy.  Their  interpre- 
tation of  the  Law  was  characterised  by  the  same 
spirit.  Though  not  always  consistent  in  carrying 
out  the  principle,  still  as  a rule  they  clung  to 
the  literal  meaning,  allowing  the  authority  of  no 
tradition  unless  some  ground  was  apparent  for 
it  in  Scripture  *.  The  official  sanctity  of  the 
priesthood,  as  distinguished  from  the  personal 
purity  of  its  members,  and  the  maintenance  of 
its  emoluments  and  privileges  were  eagerly  con- 
tended for  by  them.  Their  disbelief  in  the  re- 
surrection of  the  body,  which  is  expressly  affirmed 
of  them  by  all  ancient  testimony2,  was  due  pos- 

* Jost,  Gesch.  i.  214. 

Matt.  xxii.  23;  Mark  xii.  18 ; Luke  xx.  27;  Acts  iv.  2,  xxiii. 
8;  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  90b ; Josephus,  Ant.  xviii.  I.  4 ; Origen,  In 
Mali.  pp.  467,  81 1 ; Epiphunius,  Haeres.  xiv,  &e.  The  celebrated 
Antigonus  of  Socho  is  said  to  liavc  taught  that  ‘men  should 
serve  God  without  any  claim  for  reward from  this  doctrine 


— ~ ' Piafeed-bv-Gooqle 


33 


sibly  to  the  almost  exclusive  attention  which 
their  principles  led  them  to  give  to  the  Penta- 
teuch (in  which  this  doctrine  less  clearly  stands 
forth)  in  preference  to  the  later  books  of  the 
canon,  and  also  to  the  easy  circumstances  of  life 
in  which  most  of  this  party  found  themselves. 

The  Pharisees,  or  ‘ Separatists,’  were  of  a different 
spirit.  They  were  the  descendants  and  repre- 
sentatives of  the  national  party  who  at  the  bidding 
of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  had  ‘ separated’  themselves 
from  the  heathen  of  the  land,  while  many  of  the 
priests  and  rulers  had  not  scrupled  to  ally  them- 
selves with  the  ancient  and  deadly  foes  of  Israel. 
Though  differing  in  no  very  important  particulars 
from  the  Sadducees  either  in  doctrine  or  practice, 
they  found  themselves  outside  the  pale  of  an 
official  and  priestly  aristocracy,  and  were  thus 
compelled  to  throw  themselves  for  support  and 
sympathy  upon  the  middle  and  lower  classes  of 
the  community.  Having  no  official  character  for 
sanctity  on  which  to  depend,  they  laid  especial 


his  scholars  Sadoq  and  Boethus  developed  the  further  result 
that  ‘ no  reward  is  to  be  expected  from  God,’  and  this  was 
naturally  followed  by  a disbelief  in  the  resurrection  and  future 
judgment.  The  Boethusians  first  appear  as  an  offshoot  from, 
but  united  with,  the  Sadducees,  about  the  time  of  Herod  the 
Great;  the  exact  points  of  difference  between  the  parties  are 
difficult  to  distinguish.  Geiger,  Urschrift,  105,  149;  Jost, 
Gtsch.  i.  215. 

d 


Digitized  by  Google 


34 


stress  upon  personal  purity,  avoiding  contact  with 
any  person  or  thing  which  might  interfere  with 
it ; by  means  of  brotherhoods 1 and  minute  regu- 
lations endeavouring  continually  to  reach  higher 
degrees  of  it,  extending  their  care  even  to  all 
vessels  used  in  the  Temple  service,  on  the  plea 
that  they  might  have  been  defiled  by  the  touch 
of  an  unclean  priest*.  In  imitation  of  the  grave 
and  reverend  banquets  held  by  the  priests  at 
which  their  portion  of  the  sacrifices,  the  tithes 
and  offerings  were  consumed,  the  Pharisees  es- 
tablished brotherhoods  for  taking  solemn  meals 
together,  hallowed  by  special  prayers,  especially 
on  sabbaths  and  feast-days 3 : in  the  same  spirit 


* Jost,  Geseh.  i.  197. 

s ThU  circumstance  shews  that  some  priests  must  have  be- 
longed to  the  party  of  the  Pharisees,  though  these  probably 
were  few  as  compared  with  those  who  joined  the  Sadducees. 
The  touching  of  the  Law  rendered  any  one  unclean : Deren- 
bourg,  i.  1 33.  On  one  occasion  a Sadducee  seeing  them  bathing 
the  golden  candlestick,  exclaimed,  ‘ See'!  the  Pharisees  will  at  last 
purify  the  sun  !’  Jost,  i.  217.  Cf.  Mark  vii.  4. 

3 The  device  by  which  the  Pharisees  evaded  the  two  prohibi- 
tions of  not  going  more  than  2000  cubits  from  home  and  of 
not  carrying  anything  out  of  their  houses  on  the  Sabbath,  was 
worthy  of  the  legal  ingenuity  of  a more  civilised  age.  By  placing 
some  food  on  the  eve  of  the  Sabbath  at  a spot  2000  cubits 
from  their  real  home,  they  created  there  a fictitious  domicile, 
whence  they  might  move  in  any  direction  2000  cubits  more. 
Each  of  the  brethren,  moreover,  at  the  same  time  placed  some 


Digitized  by  Google 


35 


of  rivalry  they  endeavoured  to  curtail  the  emolu- 
ments and  privileges  of  the  priesthood Their 
interpretation  of  the  Law  was  marked  by  a 
reverence  for  tradition  and  by  an  absence  of  the 
strict  adherence  to  the  letter  which  distinguished 
their  rivals s.  Their  method  of  life  was  rigorously 
simple,  spent  in  carrying  out  the  minute  ob- 
servances of  religion : they  held  the  doctrine  of 
the  resurrection  and  of  a future  reward  mid 
punishment3.  This  zeal  was  roused  to  fury  by 
witnessing  the  disgraceful  pontificates  of  Jason 
and  Meuelaus,  when  the  rites  of  Zeus  Olympius 
were  celebrated  in  the  Temple  itself,  and  a 
determined  attempt  made  by  these  apostates  to 
trample  down  obedience  to  the  Law  of  Moses, 
and  in  its  place  to  introduce  the  sensuous  ritual 
of  Greece.  By  an  energetic  exercise  of  the  in- 
fluence which  they  possessed  over  the  people  they 
must  have  greatly  contributed  to  the  success  of 
the  Maccabees  in  their  war  of  independence  ; but 
when  the  victory  was  once  gained,  there  was  but 
little  place  for  them  in  the  Court  of  the  Asmo- 


fooil  in  the  common  hall,  thus  a sort  of  community  of  houses 
was  imagined,  and  by  joining  the  ends  of  the  streets  with  beams 
and  ropes  the  whole  city  was  made  as  it  were  one  house.  This 
was  termed  the  'Erubh.  Dercnbourg,  i.  143. 

1 For  instances  see  ibid.  135.  1 Ibid.  138. 

3 For  Josephus’  account  of  them  see  Ant.  xviii.  1.3;  also  xiii. 
5.  9 ; xvii.  2.  4;  B.  J.  ii.  8.  14  i.  5.  2. 

d 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


36 


nean  princes,  filled  as  it  was  with  warriors  and 
priestly  allies ; so  they  retired  to  their  old  and 
simple  life  among  the  people.  The  struggle 
between  the  two  parties  went  on  till  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem,  the  Pharisees  continually  gaining  more 
and  more  advantages  over  their  rivals : with  the 
ruin  of  the  Temple  and  the  cessation  of  its  services 
the  Sadducees  disappear  from  history,  all  the 
teaching  and  interpretation  of  the  Law  falling  into 
the  hands  of  the  Pharisees,  or  Rabbanites  as  they 
were  afterwards  termed.  Thus  matters  went  on 
till  a.d.  754,  when,  at  the  very  moment  when  the 
labours  of  the  two  schools  of  the  Geonim  appeared 
to  have  established  Rabbinism  on  a firmer  basis 
than  ever,  the  celebrated  A nan  ben  David  raised 
his  voice  against  the  system  then  in  vogue,  utterly 
denying  the  right  of  tradition  either  to  supplement 
or  interpret  the  written  word,  asserting  the  sole 
authority  of  the  Law,  the  unchanging  character 
of  its  precepts,  and  the  necessity  of  seeking  the 
explanation  of  it  in  the  book  itself1.  Thus  after 
the  lapse  of  nearly  seven  centuries  was  the  old 
method  of  interpretation  revived,  and  the  obsolete 


1 Jost.  ii.  294.  Here  is  to  be  found  a very  full  account  of 
the  literature  and  dogmas  of  the  Karaites.  See  also  Neubaucr, 
Awt  der  Petersburger  Bibliolhek,  88  sqq.  They  assumed  the 
name  as  being  skilful  ' readers  ’ or  interpreters  of  the  ‘ literal 
meaning’  of  the  Law. 


Digitized  byGoogle 


37 


teaching  of  the  Sadducees  and  Samaritans  repeated 
in  the  Karaite  school  of  Bagdad. 

A few  instances  may  he  of  interest,  though  the 
subjects  in  dispute  were  not  such  as  modem 
theology  takes  much  account  of.  The  fruit  of  a 
young  tree  in  the  fourth  year  belongs,  according 
to  the  old  interpretation  of  Lev.  xix.  23,  24,  to 
the  priest,  from  whom  it  must  be  redeemed  by  the 
owner ; in  this  both  Samaritans  and  Karaites 
agree,  while  a later  explanation  directs  that  the 
fruit  or  the  value  of  it  be  consumed  by  the  owner 
in  person  at  Jerusalem '.  According  to  the  ancient 
interpretation  of  Lev.  xxvii.  30;  Deut.  xiv.  22; 
xxvi.  12  and  xiv.  28,  two  tenths  of  the  fruit  of 
trees  and  fields  must  every  third  year  be  given 
to  the  Levites  and  poor,  a third  consumed  by  the 
owners  in  Jerusalem ; this  last  direction  is  not 
maintained  by  later  doctors,  only  by  Samaritans 
and  Karaites2.  Samaritans,  Sadducees,  and  Kara- 
ites agree  in  deducing  from  Lev.  iii.  9 that  the 
tail  part  of  sheep  belongs  to  the  priest  alone, 
and  may  be  consumed  by  no  one  else,  whereas 
the  Rabbanites  make  no  such  restriction 3.  When 
in  Exod.  xl.  31  priestly  functions  are  attributed 
to  Moses,  the.  Samaritans  alter  the  text  so  as  to 
ascribe  them  to  Aaron  alone,  and  thus  heighten 
the  dignity  of  the  latter4.  For  fear  of  irrever- 

1 Geiger,  Urichrifl,  1 8 r . * Ibid.  176. 

3 Ibid.  467.  4 Ibid.  381. 


ud  by  Google 


38 


ence,  the  term  ha-Shem  was  in  reading  sub- 
stituted by  early  doctors  for  the  sacred  name 
Jehovah  whenever  it  occurred  ; this  custom  was 
afterwards  given  up,  and  later  again  the  name 
Adonai  substituted ; the  Samaritans  still  cling  to 
the  old  habit,  employing  the  term  ShemA,1.  In 
order  to  avoid  anything  approaching  to  an  in- 
delicacy of  expression,  the  Samaritans  interpret 
in  Exod.  xx.  26  (neither  shalt  thou  go  up 
‘ by  steps’  unto  my  altar),  * with  craft,’  as  if  from 
by®,  and  this  rendering  has  been  revived  by  the 
Karaites2.  The  Samaritans  allow  the  directions 
in  Deut.  xxv.  5 to  be  carried  out  only  in  the  case 
of  a betrothed,  not  actually  married,  brother’s  wife, 
and  with  them  agree  the  Karaites 3.  The  decision 
as  to  the  exact  moment  at  which  the  new  moon 
appeared,  on  which  depended  the  time  of  all  the 
other  feasts,  was  formerly  in  the  hands  of  the 
Sadducees.  Gradually  the  Pharisees  wrested  this 
power  from  them,  and  out  of  spite  the  Samaritans 
and  Boethusians  endeavoured  by  false  signals  and 
suborned  witnesses  to  stultify  the  official  intima- 
tions of  their  antagonists.  The  Samaritans  and 
Karaites  imitate  the  Boethusians  in  counting  for- 
ward to  Pentecost  in  Christian  fashion,  not  from 
the  Sabbath  following  the  first  day  of  the  Pass- 
over,  but  from  the  day  after  the  Sabbath,  in  oppo- 


1 Geiger,  Ursclirift,  262.  * Ibid.  395.  3 Ibid.  235. 


Digitized  by  Google 


39 


sition  to  the  Pharisee  rule1.  The  same  agree- 
ment between  Samaritans  and  Karaites  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  Pharisees  is  to  be  found  in  their  use 
of  the  skin  of  a properly-killed  animal  only,  not 
of  an  unclean  one  or  of  carrion 2 ; in  allowing 
no  fire  to  bum  through  the  Sabbath 3 ; nor  any 
one  to  move  from  home  on  that  day4;  nor  any 
cooking  to  be  done  on  festivals 5 : they  do  not 
permit  a dying  animal  to  be  killed  and  eaten, 
and  hold  that  the  unborn  young  found  in  a slain 
animal  has  a separate  existence  and  so  must  be 
properly  slaughtered  : the  high-priest  may,  accord- 
ing to  them,  marry  only  a virgin  (not  widow)  of 
priestly  family6. 

In  other  and  more  important  points  also  the 


1 Geiger,  Urachrifl,  137. 

2 Geiger,  in  Zeitschr.  d.  D.  it.  G.  xvi.  718.  Peterman  11,  in 
It erzoij's  Real -Ency clop.  xiii.  383,  mentions  that  when  they  go 
iu  procession  to  Garizim  they  only  use  shoes  made  of  leather 
from  lambs  killed  by  themselves ; bo  the  famous  copy  of  the 
Law  at  Nablus  is  said  to  be  written  on  skins  of  rams  which 
have  served  as  thank-offerings. 

5 Zeitschr.  d.  D.  it.  G.  xx.  532.  For  their  later  practice,  cf. 
Eichhorn,  Repertorium,  ix.  32  ; De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Exlr.  xii.  124. 

4 Zeitschr.  d.  D.  it.  G.  xx.  535.  As  to  the  Pharisee  rule,  see 
above,  p.  34. 

s Zeitschr.  d.  D.  it.  G.  xx.  536. 

4 Ibid.  561.  Fraukel  ( Einfluss , 252)  believes  that  some  prac- 
tices of  the  Samaritans  were  borrowed  directly  from  the 
Karaites. 


gitized  by  Google 


40 


Samaritans  seem  to  have  borrowed  Sadducean 
theology;  for  instance,  a denial  of  the  resurrec- 
tion is  expressly  affirmed  of  them  in  the  Siphre 
and  Massekheth  Kuthim,  a testimony  borne  out 
by  the  evidence  of  the  Fathers  as  well Whence 
or  at  what  time  they  adopted  a belief  in  a coming 
Messiah1 2  is  not  clear,  possibly  from  their  Jewish 
neighbours ; as  however  he  was  to  be  a son  of 
Joseph,  not  of  David,  it  is  more  probable  that 
the  idea  had  its  origin  among  the  Samaritans 
themselves,  and  was  due  to  their  anxiety  to  exalt 
the  tribe  of  Joseph  at  the  expense  of  Judah3. 
There  was  but  one  point  in  which  they  could  not 
accept  the  creed  of  their  neighbours,  and  that  was 
the  choice  by  God  of  Judah  as  the  ruling  tribe  and 
Jerusalem  as  the  centre  of  the  national  religion4 * * *. 
For  this  reason  probably  they  were  compelled  to 
reject  all  the  later  books  of  the  canon,  and  retain  only 


1 Siphre  (on  Numb.  xv.  31)  ; Massekheth  Kuthim,  see  below, 
p.  172;  Derenbourg,  i.  130.  Cf.  R.  Klieser  in  Bah.  Sanitedrin, 
90  b ; Epiphanius,  Haeres.  ix  and  xiv  ; Leontius,  De  Seeds,  viii ; 
Gregorius  Magnus,  Moral  i.  15,  &c. 

2 John  iv.  25.  8 See  below,  p.  69. 

* They  could  not  admit  the  assertion  of  the  Psalmist  that  the 

Lord  ‘ refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph  and  chose  not  the  tribe 

of  Ephraim,  but  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  even  the  hill  of  Sion 

which  He  loved  : and  there  He  built  His  Temple  on  high,  and  laid 

the  foundation  of  it  like  the  ground  which  He  hath  made  continu- 

ally. He  chose  David  also  His  servant  ....  that  he  might  feed 
Jacob  His  people,  and  Israel  His  inheritance.’  Ps.  lxxviii.  68-72. 


L. ' Dicjilizerihy  Cioogle 


41 


the  Pentateuch  and  a mutilated  portion  of  Joshua1. 
In  these  there  was  little  to  wound  their  suscepti- 
bilities : Ephraim  was  still  an  honoured  and  power- 
ful tribe,  the  place  which  God  would  ‘choose  to 
put  His  name  there  ’ was  still  left  undetermined 2 : 
nothing  was  needed  but  a few  slight  alterations 
which  should  depress  the  hated  sanctuary  of 
Moriah  and  establish  the  glory  of  its  rival  of 
Garizim 3. 

From  the  foregoing  sketch  therefore  it  appears 

1 Jost  ( Gesrh.  i.  53,  note)  thinks  tlie  Samaritans  rejected  all 
but  the  Pentateuch  from  ignorance  of  them  as  being  written  in 
a character  they  did  not  understand.  Loewe  (in  Allgem.  Zeitung 
d.  Judenlhum n for  April  18,  1839)  asserts  that  he  found  the  books 
of  Kings  and  Song  of  Songs  among  them.  The  anonymous  com- 
mentary described  below,  p.  1 34,  quotes  from  the  prophets,  &c. 

* But  in  Deut,  xii.  14  they  rend  *in3  for  m3' ; cf.  Ex.  xx.  24. 

3 In  Gen.  xxxiii.  18  the  Samaritans  read  for  D^t?,  ‘Jacob 
came  in  peace  to  the  city  of  Shechem,’  instead  of  ‘ to  Salem  a 
city  of  Shechem,’  in  order  to  bar  the  Jewish  interpretation  of 
Jerusalem  being  here  intended.  The  place  is  identified  by 
Robinson  (ii.  279)  with  Salim  near  Nablus.  In  Deut.  xxvii.  4 
they  read  ‘ Garizim  ’ for  ‘ Ebal,’  inserting  vv.  2-8  and  xi.  30  as 
an  additional  commandment  after  Exod.  xx.  17  and  Deut.  v.  21, 
and  adding  in  xi.  30  the  words  ‘ opposite  Shechem,’  to  make 
certain  of  its  identification,  the  Jews  having  asserted  that  the 
Garizim  and  Ebal  mentioned  in  the  Pentateuch  were  not  those 
belonging  to  the  Samaritans:  (Sola,  33  b;  Jer.  Sola,  vii.  3;  and 
Siphre  on  Deut.  xi.  30).  For  other  examples  of  changes  made  by 
the  Samaritans  see  Kohn,  De  Pent.  Sam.  1 1 sqq.  That  ‘ Ebal  ’ 
must  be  the  true  rending  of  Deut.  xxvii.  4 is  well  maintained  by 
Friedrich  (Z)e  Christologia  Samarilanorum,  57)against  Keunicott. 


itized  by  Google 


42 


to  be  abundantly  evident  that  the  Samaritans 
were  in  no  degree  the  inventors  of  any  part  of 
their  theology,  that  they  borrowed  it  wholly  from 
their  neighbours,  merely  rejecting  such  parts 
as  did  not  square  with  their  prepossessions,  and 
that  they  doggedly  held  on  to  the  old  traditional 
interpretations,  when  these  had  been  left  by  their 
rivals  centuries  behind.  They  did,  it  is  true, 
modify  and  enlarge  their  creed,  and  that  in  im- 
portant particulars,  at  a later  period  of  their 
history,  but  then,  as  before,  by  the  same  process  of 
absorption ; it  was  in  no  sense  a development  of 
the  religious  feeling  of  the  people. 

The  statements  of  Jewish  writers  throw  but 
little  light  upon  Samaritan  theology,  nor  are  they 
by  any  means  uniform  in  their  tenour.  In  some 
passages  of  the  Talmud,  for  instance,  the  Sama- 
ritans are  looked  upon  as  Israelites  by  reason  of 
their  religious  observances,  and  credited  with  even 
greater  conscientiousness  in  carrying  them  out 
than  the  Jews  themselves 1 : on  account  indeed 
of  their  misinterpretation  of  Deut.  xxv.  5 mar- 
riage with  them  is  forbidden,  and  their  slavish 
adherence  to  the  letter  of  Scripture  is  reprehended, 
but  their  orthodoxy  is  extolled  with  regard  to 
unleavened  bread,  slaughtering  of  cattle”,  pollu- 

1 Holin,  4 a. 

s Holin,  3 a.  So  in  John  iv.  8 the  disciples  do  not  scruple  to 
buy  food  of  the  Samaritans. 


Digitize^  by  Google 


43 


tion  from  dead  bodies  or  graves,  and  purifications  ; 
their  testimony  also  is  to  be  admitted  in  matters  of 
divorce1 : while  in  other  passages  they  are  excluded 
altogether  from  the  community  of  Israel  and  their 
very  bread  forbidden.  It  is  uncertain  when  this 
change  of  feeling  took  place  and  to  what  it  was 
due 2.  No  charges  of  any  weight  are  made  against 
them,  merely  vague  statements  such  as  these ; 
‘Formerly  the  Kuthim  were  plunged  in  false 
beliefs,  though  they  observed  the  Mosaic  law  ; 
now  they  have  no  idea  of  it3.’  R.  Elieser  ben 
Arakh  relates  at  full  length  how  a curse  was 
pronounced  upon  them  with  all  solemnity  by 
Ezra,  Zerubbabel,  the  high -priest  Joshua,  and 
six  hundred  of  his  attendant  priests : no  Israelite 
was  to  eat  with  them ; to  do  so  would  be  as  if 


1 Neubauer,  Geagraphie,  165 ; Frankel,  Vorstuclien,  197  ; 
Einjluss,  245,  where  are  very  full  Talmudical  references ; Winer, 
Ileal-  W.-B.  ii.  371,  372. 

J Frankel  ( Einjlass , 248)  attributes  it  to  the  influence  of 
R.  Simon  ben  Elie9er  (Jer.  Yebam.  i.  6),  perhaps  the  same  as 
Elieser  ben  Simon  (Sola,  vii.  3),  who  reported  to  R.  Meir,  in  the 
second  century  a.  d.,  the  Samaritans’  falsification  of  the  Penta- 
teuch, whereupon  the  latter  excommunicated  them.  R.  Simon 
ben  Gamaliel,  a contemporary  of  his,  held  the  Samaritans  in 
great  respect,  but  his  son  R.  Jchuda  ha- Nasi  considers  them  as 
heathen,  and  is  borne  out  in  this  by  his  friend  R.  Ismael  ben 
Jose.  After  the  time  of  Diocletiau  they  seem  to  have  been  quite 
excluded  from  Israel. 

’ R.  Simon,  in  Jer.  Pesahim,  i.  1.  ■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


44 


he  ate  swine’s  flesh : no  Samaritan  was  to  be 
received  as  a proselyte : none  would  have  a share 
in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead The  ground  of 
this  exclusion  is  variously  stated  : generally  they 
are  charged  with  the  worship  of  a dovea,  an 
accusation  which  originated  as  early  as  the  second 
century  A.D.,  is  repeated  again  in  a commentary  of 
Rashi1 * 3,  revived  by  Maimonides4 5,  and  reasserted 
as  late  as  1808,  though  repudiated  with  horror 
by  the  Samaritans  themselves6.  Or  it  is  alleged 
against  them  that  in  the  time  of  Diocletian  they 
denied  their  Jewish  origin  and  offered  libations 
to  heathen  deities,  a charge  which  must  be  re- 
ceived with  considerable  caution  9.  Similar  accu- 
sations and  apparently  equally  destitute  of  proof 
are,  that  they  worshipped  one  of  the  idols  hidden 
by  Jacob  under  the  oak  by  Shechem 7,  or  those 


1 Pirke  R.  Elieser,  cap.  38.  Cf.  Beer,  Gesch.  Lehrrn,  &c.,  i.  35. 

3 Ilolin,  f.  6,  et  al. 

3 On  Bab. 'Aboda  Zara,  26b;  ‘The  Samaritans  circumcise  in  the 
name  of  the  image  of  a dove,'  quoted  in  Drusius,  Observatl.  xiii.  24. 

* On  Minima  Berakhoth,  viii.  8,  in  Reland,  Dr.  Samaritanis, 
iii.  So  Obadiah  de  Bertinoro,  on  Mishna  Rerakhoth,  vii.  1. 
Cf.  Friedrich,  op.  cit.  pp.  80  sq.,  and  above,  p.  27. 

5 De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  19,  43,  70,  sqq.  Cf.  Herzfeld, 
iii.  596.  Josephus  knows  nothing  of  it.  The  colonists  may 
have  brought  the  worship  of  a dove  with  them  from  Nineveh  ; 
see  references  in  Herzfeld. 

• Jost,  i.  61,  from  Jer.  ’Aboda  Zara,  v.  4. 

7 Jer.  ’Aboda  Zara,  v.  4 ; Gen.  xxxv.  4. 


Digitized  by  Google 


45 


of  the  Samaritan  colonists  which  were  buried 
under  Garizim 1 ; or  that  they  circumcised  in 
honour  of  Mount  Garizim 2,  or  that  they  wrote 
Ashima  for  Elohim  in  Gen.  i.  i 3 4,  or  that  they  were 
no  genuine  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  only  lion- 
converts*:  charges  which  the  Samaritans  were 
not  slow  in  retorting,  accusing  their  adversaries 
in  turn  of  anthropomorphism  and  anthropopathism 
because  they  left  untouched  such  passages  in  the 
Pentateuch  as  seem  to  ascribe  human  acts  and 
feelings  to  the  Deity 5. 

The  testimony  of  the  Fathers  with  regard  to 
the  Samaritans’  disbelief  in  the  resurrection  of 
the  body  has  been  already  quoted ; from  the 
same  source  we  also  learn  their  denial  of  the 
existence  of  angels,  and  of  the  immortality  of  the 


1 Epiphanius,  Haeres.  ix. 

2 R.  Jehuda,  in  Masseklieth  Kuthim  ; see  below,  p.  169. 

* Aben  Ezra,  in  Introduction  to  Comment,  on  Esther.  It  was 
probably  from  some  Jewish  legend  that  Mohammed  relates  in 
the  Koran  (Sura,  20)  how  a certain  Sameri  (Samaritan)  made 
the  golden  calf  in  the  wilderness  and  was  punished  by  Moses  with 
having  to  cry  la  mesdsa  (touch  me  not)  to  the  end  of  his  life. 
Masudi  and  Biruni  say  the  Samaritans  still  used  these  words  in 
their  time  (tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  a.  d.)  ; De  Sacy,  Chrest. 
Arabs,  i.  304,  343;  cf.  Abulfath,  Ann.  p.  175. 

4 Bab.  Baba  Kama,  38  b. 

6 They  themselves  were  careful  to  change  them ; see  below, 
P-  135 


Digitized  by  Google 


46 


soul 1 ; and  also  gain  some  information  with  regard 
to  the  several  sects  w'hich  made  their  appearance 
among  them ; these  notices  are  supported  by  the 
statements  of  Mohammedan  writers  and  of  the 
Samaritans  themselves.  It  may  be  as  well  in  this 
place  to  say  a few  words  about  them  before  noticing 
the  later  developements  of  Samaritan  theology. 

The  most  important  information  on  the  subject 
is  derived  from  St.  Epiphanius  in  the  fourth  cen- 
tury a.d.  He  mentions8  four  different  sects,  the 
Essenes,  Sebuaeans,  Gorthenians,  and  Dositheans. 
With  regard  to  the  first  of  these  bodies  nothing 
further  is  known,  it  is  however  possible  that 
there  may  have  been  separatists  known  under 
the  name  among  the  Samaritans.  If  so,  they  were 
probably  an  offshoot  from  the  Dositheans,  just  as 
the  Jewish  Essenes  were  from  the  Pharisees ; for 


' Origen,  In  Mali.  p.  8 1 1 ; Leontius,  Be  Seclie,  8 ; cf.  Acts 
xxiii.  8,  as  to  the  Sadducean  disbelief  in  angels.  Makrizi,  in 
De  Sacy,  op.  cit.  p.  306,  sayB,  ‘ the  Zanadiqata  (i.  e.  Sadducees) 
are  of  the  nation  of  the  Samaritans,  sprung  from  the  Sadducees ; 
they  deny  angels  and  the  resurrection  after  death,  and  all  pro- 
phets hut  Moses.’ 

2 Ilaeres.  i.  p.  28  : he  is  followed  by  St.John  Damascenus,  Be 
II acres,  p.  79,  and  Nicetas,  Thesaur.  i.  35.  For  the  whole  sub- 
ject Bee  Basnago,  livr.  ii.  chap.  13;  Juynboll,  Chron.  Sam.  112. 
Epiphanius  strangely  asserts  ( Haeres . p.  469)  that  in  his  day  a 
feast  was  held  in  the  summer  at  Sebaste  in  honour  of  Jephthah’s 
daughter,  to  whom  divine  honours  were  paid  : a statement  which 
he  repeats  (p.  1055)  with  reference  to  Neapolis. 


Digitized  by  Google 


47 


as  the  tenets  of  the  latter  were  a protest  against 
the  literal  interpretation 1 and  negative  teaching 
of  the  Sadducees,  so  the  Dositheans  appear  to 
have  had  much  in  common  with  the  Pharisees, 
and  to  have  in  like  manner  entered  the  lists  in 
opposition  to  the  Sadducean  teaching  which,  as 
we  have  seen  before,  prevailed  in  their  nation. 
Nor  is  the  information  with  regard  to  the  Sebu- 
aeans 2 more  satisfactory : they  are  said  to  have 


1 Abulpliaraj,  a Christian  writer  who  died  in  1286  (Hist. 
Dyn.  p.  1 16),  makes  the  Samaritans  a Jewish  sect  who  received 
the  Law  alone  and  interpreted  it  in  its  literal  sense.  Juynboll, 
Chron.  Sam.  1 1 1 . 

’ The  origin  of  their  name  has  been  sought  in  '3D , who, 
according  to  the  Tanhuma,  sect.  Wayyeschebh,  and  the  Yalqul, 
ii.  234,  was  one  of  the  two  Israelite  priests  sent  by  the  king  of 
Assyria  to  instruct  the  Samaritans  at  the  time  of  the  lion-plague. 
Scbuaeans  are  mentioned  in  the  Chronicle  of  Abulfath  as  oppo- 
nents of  Baba  Rabba,  the  Samaritan  reformer  about  250  a.d. 
Sabbaeus  was  a name  in  use  among  the  Egyptian  Samaritans 
(Josephus,  Ant.  xiii.  3.  4).  Cf.  Herzfeld,  iii.  599,  for  another 
explanation  and  an  account  of  these  sects.  Herzfeld  connects 
the  name  with  their  peculiar  keeping  of  Pentecost.  Ewald, 
Gesch.  (1868),  vii.  135,  identifies  them  with  the  Masbothaei  of 
Hcgesippus,  the  Basmothaci  of  Const.  A post.  vi.  6.  1,  the  Fasqu- 
tai  of  Abulfath.  He  derives  their  name  from  the  stress  they 
laid  upon  the  number  ‘ seven,’  as,  for  instance,  in  the  observance 
of  that  number  of  feasts.  Petennann  (in  Herzog,  Real-Encycl. 
xiii.  387)  could  gain  no  information  from  the  modern  Sama- 
ritans with  regard  to  any  of  the  foregoing  sects.  From  the 
subscription  of  a MS.  dated  1513  it  has  been  supposed  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


48 


distinguished  themselves  by  commencing  the  year 
in  the  early  autumn  : soon  after  this  they  held 
the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  Pentecost  later, 
and  that  of  Tabernacles  in  the  spring,  when  the 
Jews  were  celebrating  their  Easter  : these  changes 
were  made  by  them  out  of  animosity  to  Ezra, 
and  to  avoid  quarrels  with  the  Jewish  pilgrims 
who  were  passing  through  Samaria  on  their  way 
to  Jerusalem.  Of  the  Gorthenians,  termed  Soro- 
thenians  by  Nicetas,  nothing  whatever  is  known  *. 
With  regard  to  the  last  of  the  four  sects  and 
their  leader  Dositheus,  it  is  impossible  to  recon- 
cile the  discordant  testimony  of  Jewish,  Chris- 
tian, Mohammedan,  and  Samaritan  writers 2. 


a sect  of  Musawi  existed  at  Damascus,  and  that  they  may  have 
been  connected  with  Mesawi  of  Baalbek  who  lived  in  the  twelfth 
century,  whose  tenets  bore  some  resemblance  to  those  of  the 
Druses.  Cf.  Jost,  i.  68.  But  it  is  more  probable  that  the  name 
signified  orthodox  Samaritans,  'followers  of  Moses.'  Cf.  Juyn- 
boll,  Chron.  Sam.  p.  37  ; Comment,  p.  60. 

1 Hegesippus  (in  Eusebius,  Ilisl.  iv.  22)  makes  them  post- 
Christian  heretics,  deriving  their  name  from  a certain  Gortheus  : 
Theodoret  ( Haer . Fab.  i.  1)  considers  them  followers  of  Simon 
Magus. 

2 At  least  three  Dosilhei,  if  not  more,  are  mentioned  by  other 

writers  besides  those  cited  in  the  text.  (1)  Dostai  the  son  of 
Jannai,  sent  to  Samaria  by  Sennacherib,  with  Sabbai  another 
Israelite  priest,  at  the  time  of  the  lion-plague.  Tan/iuma,  l.  c.  ; 
YaltjUt,  l.  c.;  Pirke  Elieser,  cap.  38.  (2)  Also  B.  c.  Philas- 

trius  (Uaeres.  4)  says  he  was  a Jew,  the  teacher  of  Sadoq.  He 


Digitized  by  Google 


49 


St.  Epiphanius  relates  of  them  that  they  were 
believers  in  the  resurrection,  and  austere  in  their 

held  the  Law  was  to  be  obeyed  only  according  to  the  flesh, 
denied  the  resurrection,  Holy  Spirit,  angels,  and  last  judgment. 
(3)  A post-Christian  heretic  mentioned  by  Hegesippus  (in 
Eusebius,  Hist.  iv.  22)  and  Hippolytus  (ibid.  vi.  22  ; Photius, 
Biblioth.  121).  According  to  the  Clementine  Recognitions,  ii.  8, 
Horn.  ii.  24,  he  was  the  teacher  of  Simon  Magus,  to  whom  he 
had  to  resign  his  claim  to  be  the  Messiah.  The  testimony  of  the 
Apost.  Const,  vi.  8,  and  Theodoret,  ffaeres.  i.  I,  is  to  the  same 
effect.  Eulogius,  patriarch  of  Alexandria  in  608,  was  called 
upon  to  settle  a dispute  between  the  Dositheans  and  other 
Samaritans  of  his  day.  Photius  ( Biblioth . 230),  in  describing 
this,  also  makes  him  coeval  with  Simon  Magus ; he  calls  him  an 
insulter  of  God’s  prophets,  especially  of  the  patriarch  Judah. 
His  followers  held  him,  the  other  Samaritans  held  Joshua,  to 
be  the  prophet  promised  by  Moses.  He  denied  the  resurrection, 
corrupted  the  Mosaic  Octateuchus  [so],  applied  the  prophecies  to 
himself,  &c.  Origen  (Adv.  Cels.  i.  57,  vi.  it  ; in  Matt.  p.  851, 
and  in  Joann,  xiii.  27)  says  Dositheus  made  himself  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  God.  His  followers,  who  were  almost 
extinct  in  Origen ’s  time,  still  had  his  writings,  and  believed  him 
to  be  alive.  He  ridicules  the  sect  (De  Princip.  iv.  17)  for  their 
excessive  strictness  in  observing  the  Sabbath.  Tertullian  (De 
Praescript.  Haeret.  45)  says  Dositheus  was  the  first  who  dared 
to  reject  the  prophets.  St.  Jerome  (Adv.  Lucif.  p.  19;)  follows 
him  ; but  whether  they  are  speaking  of  (2)  or  (3)  is  doubtful  : 
probably  of  (2),  as  they  make  the  Sadducees  an  off-shoot  of  the 
Dositheans. 

So  much  for  Jewish  and  Christian  testimony ; that  of  Moham- 
medan writers  is  not  more  satisfactory.  According  to  Masudi 
(who  died  in  956  A.  d.  ; cf.  De  Sacy,  Chrestom.  Arabe,  i.  305), 
there  were  two  sects  of  Samaritans,  Couschan  and  Bouschan 

e 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


manner  of  life,  avoiding  animal  food,  some  marry- 
ing but  once,  others  not  at  all : as  to  the 
observance  of  circumcision,  the  Sabbath,  avoid- 
ing contact  with  others,  fasting  and  penance, 
they  were  not  distinguishable  from  the  other 
Samaritans.  Their  founder  was,  he  continues,  a 
Jew  who  for  his  learning  aspired  to  be  chief 
among  his  party,  but  being  disappointed  in  his 
ambitious  schemes,  went  over  to  the  Samaritans 
and  founded  a sect : later  he  retired  to  a cave 
and  there  starved  himself  to  death  out  of  affected 


(corrected  by  De  Sacy  to  Cuthana  and  Dust&na ; but  according 
to  Juynboll,  Chron.  Sam.  112,  the  former  word  signifies  ‘truth- 
telling,’  not  Cutbite) ; one  of  these  held  the  world  for  eternal, 
i.  e.  uncreated.  Sharastani  (ed.  Haarbrtlcker,  Th.  i.  p.  *57),  two 
centuries  later,  also  divides  the  Samaritans  into  Dusitanija  or 
Ilfanija  (‘  lying  separatists  ’)  and  KfisSnija  (‘  true  people  ’),  the 
latter  believing  in  a future  life  and  rewards  and  punishments, 
the  former  confining  them  to  this  world  : the  two  parties  differed 
in  their  legal  rules  and  ordinances.  Al-Ilfan  said  he  was  the 
prophet  foretold  by  Moses,  the  * Star  he  lived  about  too  years 
before  the  Messiah.  (The  name  Ilfan  probably  signifies  that  he 
was  a millenarian  ; cf.  Vilmar’s  Abulfath,  p.  lxxii,  note  : or  ‘a 
strict  observer  ’ [i_il&.]  of  the  Law.)  To  the  same  effect  is  the 
testimony  of  Abulfeda,  two  centuries  later,  in  De  Sacy,  op.  cit. 
p.  344.  He  mentions  Dostani  or  Fani  and  Cousani,  the  former 
denying  future  rewards  and  punishments,  the  lntter  admitting 
them.  The  quotation  by  Abraham  Ecchellcusis  from  an  Arab- 
Samaritan  Chronicle  in  Cardinal  Mazarin's  library,  to  be  found 
in  De  Sacy,  op.  oil.  337,  is  probably  from  Abulfath.  Cf.  Vilmar’s 
Abulfath,  p.  xvii. 


Digitized  by  Google 


piety.  This  account,  it  will  be  noticed,  mentions 
but  one  Dositheus  and  one  party  named  after  him. 
But  as  the  preponderance  of  evidence  is  in  favour 
of  there  having:  been  at  least  two  heresiarchs  of 
the  name,  and  two  sects  taking  their  title  from 
them,  it  will  perhaps  be  best  to  acquiesce  in  this 
conclusion,  more  especially  as  it  agrees  with  the 
account  transmitted  to  us  by  the  native  Samaritan 
chronicler  Abulfath.  He  relates  that  (apparently 
about  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes)  a sect 
appeared  calling  themselves  Dost&n  or  * the 
friends,’  who  varied  in  many  respects  the  hither- 
to received  feasts  and  traditions  of  their  fathers. 
Several  of  their  peculiarities  are  mentioned.  They 
held  for  impure  a fountain  into  which  a dead 
insect  had  fallen 1 : altered  the  time  for  reckoning 
the  purification  of  women  and  commencement 
of  feasts : forbade  the  eating  of  eggs  which  had 
been  laid,  allowing  those  only  to  be  eaten  which 
were  found  inside  a slain  bird  : considered  dead 
snakes  and  cemeteries  as  unclean,  and  held  any 
one  whose  shadow  fell  upon  a grave  as  impure 
for  seven  days.  They  rejected  the  expression 
* blessed  be  our  God  for  ever 2,’  and  substituted 


1 It  is  similarly  alleged  of  all  the  Samaritans  in  the  Masne- 
Icheth  Kuthim  (sec  below,  p.  170),  that  they  held  oil  to  be  unclean 
into  which  a mouse  had  fallen. 

* In  Mishna  Berakhoth,  9,  5,  it  is  stated  that  the  expression 
‘for  ever  and  ever'  was  introduced  as  a protest  against  the 


52 


Elohim  for  Jehovah 1 : denied  that  Garizim  had 
been  the  first  sanctuary  of  God  : upset  the  Sama- 
ritan reckonings  for  the  feasts,  giving  thirty  days 
to  each  month,  rejecting  the  feasts  and  order  of 
fasts  and  depriving  the  Levites  of  their  portions 
of  the  offerings2.  They  counted  the  fifty  days 
to  Pentecost  from  the  Sabbath,  the  day  after 
the  first  day  of  the  Passover,  like  the  Jews  (i.  e. 
the  Pharisees),  not  from  the  Sunday  like  the  other 
Samaritans.  According  to  them  a priest  might, 
without  becoming  impure,  enter  a house  suspected 
of  infection,  as  long  as  he  did  not  speak.  When 
a pure  and  impure  house  stood  side  by  side,  and 
it  was  doubtful  whether  the  impurity  extended 
to  the  former  as  well,  the  question  was  decided 
by  watching  ■whether  a clean  or  unclean  bird 
first  settled  upon  it.  On  the  Sabbath  they  might 
only  eat  and  drink  from  earthen  vessels,  which,  if 
defiled,  could  not  be  purified3:  they  might  give 
no  food  or  water  to  their  cattle;  this  must  be 
done  on  the  previous  day.  Their  high-priest  was 
a certain  Zar’a,  who  had  been  turned  out  of  his 
own  community  for  immorality  of  life. 


‘ sectarians  ’ (D'3'D)  for  their  disbelief  in  the  resurrection.  Dosi- 
theus’  reason  seems  to  have  been  the  same. 

1 See  above,  p.  38. 

* Cf.  the  account  of  the  Pharisees  given  above,  p.  35. 

* That  they  might  not  be  tempted  to  break  the  Sabbath  by  . 
dipping  them  in  water  to  cleanse  them.  Herzfeld,  op.  cil.  iii.  602. 


Digitized  by  Google 


53 


At  a later  period  lived  a Jew,  a certain  Dusis 1 : 
beiDg  condemned  to  death  for  immorality  he  was 
respited  on  the  promise  of  sowing  dissension 
among  the  Samaritans  by  founding  a new  sect. 
Accordingly  he  went  to  Nablus  and  formed  a 
friendship  with  a Samaritan  distinguished  for  his 
learning  and  piety.  Compelled  however  to  fly 
for  his  life  on  account  of  a false  accusation  which 
he  had  brought  against  his  friend,  he  took  shelter 
with  a widow-woman,  in  whose  house  he  composed 
many  writings  ; but  finding  that  a hot  pursuit  after 
him  was  still  maintained,  he  retired  to  a cave, 
where  he  perished  of  hunger  and  his  body  was 
eaten  by  dogs.  Before  his  departure,  however, 
he  left  his  books  with  his  hostess,  enjoining  her 
to  let  no  one  read  them  unless  they  first  bathed 
in  the  tank  hard  by.  Accordingly,  when  Levi 
the  high-priest’s  nephew,  a pious,  able  man,  arrived 
with  seven  others  in  search  of  him,  they  all  bathed, 
one  after  the  other,  in  the  tank,  and  each,  as  he 
emerged  from  the  water,  exclaimed,  ‘ I believe  in 
Thee,  Jehovah,  and  in  Dusis,  Thy  servant,  and  his 

' He  is  mentioned  just  after  n certain  Germon,  whom  Juju- 
boll  ( Chron . Sam.  p.  347)  takes  for  Gernmnus,  bishop  of  Nablus 
in  323,  and  therefore  puts  them  both  at  this  time:  Petcrmann 
(Herzog,  R.  E.  xiii.  391)  in  the  first  or  second  century  A.  n. 
The  Chron.  El-TIwJidoth  (p.  58),  see  below,  p.  124,  appears  to 
place  him  near  the  time  of  Zeno,  towards  the  end  of  the  fifth 
century  a.  d. 


Digitized  by  Google 


54 


sons  and  daughters Levi  adding,  when  his  turn 
came,  ‘ Woe  to  us,  if  we  deny  Dfisis  the  prophet 
of  God.’  Whereupon  they  took  the  writings  of 
Dfisis  and  found  that  he  had  made  many  alterations 
in  the  Law,  more  even  than  Ezra.  But  this  they 
concealed  on  their  return  to  Nablus,  saying  only 
that  Dfisis  had  disappeared  before  their  arrival, 
they  knew  not  whither.  At  the  next  Passover 
Levi  had  to  read  out  Exod.  xii.  22  in  the  syna- 
gogue, but  for  ‘hyssop’  he  substituted  ‘thyme.’ 
Corrected  by  the  congregation  he  still  persevered, 
crying,  ‘ This  is  right,  as  God  hath  said  by  His 
prophet  Dfisis,  on  whom  be  peace ! Ye  are  all 
worthy  of  death,  for  denying  the  prophetic  office 
of  His  servant  Dfisis,  altering  the  feasts,  falsifying 
the  great  name  of  Jehovah,  and  persecuting  the 
second  prophet  of  God  whom  He  hath  revealed 
from  Sinai ! Woe  unto  you  that  you  have  rejected 
and  do  not  follow  him!’  Whereupon  Levi  was 
stoned.  His  friends  dipped  a palm-leaf  in  his 
blood,  and  ordained  that  whoever  would  read  his 
writings  and  see  the  leaf  must  first  fast  seven  days 
and  nights.  They  cut  off  their  hair,  shaved  their 
beards,  and  at  their  funerals  performed  many 
strange  ceremonies.  On  the  Sabbath  they  would 
not  move  from  their  place,  kept  their  feasts  only 
on  this  day,  during  which  they  would  not  remove 
their  hands  from  their  sleeves.  When  one  of  their 
friends  died,  they  would  gird  him  with  a girdle, 


— Digitized  -by  Google 


55 


put  a stick  in  his  hand  and  shoes  on  his  feet, 
saying,  ‘ if  we  rise,  he  will  at  once  get  up,’ 
believing  that  the  dead  man,  as  soon  as  ever  he 
was  laid  in  the  grave,  would  arise  and  go  to 
Paradise. — Of  the  later  fortunes  of  the  Dositheans 
we  have  no  information  : they  existed  however  in 
Egypt  early  in  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  when 
Eulogius  patriarch  of  Alexandria  was  called  upon 
to  mediate  between  them  and  the  rest  of  the 
Samaritan  community  settled  there l. 

This  part  of  the  subject  would  be  incomplete 
without  some  mention  of  the  person  and  teaching 
of  the  celebrated  Simon  Magus,  though  a complete 
enquiry  into  his  system  and  an  examination  of  the 
sources  whence  he  drew  it  would  far  exceed  the 
limits  of  the  present  sketch.  He  appears  early  in 
the  Apostolic  history  as  practising  magic  arts  in 
Samaria,  and  giving  himself  out  as  ‘some  great 
one,’  or,  as  it  is  otherwise  expressed,  ‘ the  power  of 
God  which  is  called  great2,’  i.e.  the  Supreme  Deity 
himself,  as  opposed  to  angelic  powers,  the  creators 
of  the  world.  Converted  by  the  preaching  and 


1 See  above,  p.  26,  note.  Dr.  Beer,  in  his  Buck  der  Jubilaen 
und  sein  Verhdlfnist  zu  den  Midrcuchim,  considers  that  it  wag 
compiled  in  the  interests  of  Dositheanism  for  the  use  of  Egyptian 
Jews  ; it  is  said,  on  the  authority  of  modern  travellers,  still  to 
maintain  its  influence  among  the  Falascha  (Jews)  of  Abyssinia. 
Jost,  Gesch.  i.  66,  note. 

2 Qvtos  tarty  fj  bvvapis  to C Qtov  fj  *oA ovfityrj  ^tydXrj.  Acts  viii.  IO. 


Digitized  by  Google 


56 


miracles  of  the  deacon  Philip,  he  suffered  himself 
to  be  baptized,  but  the  unworthy  character  of  his 
motives  in  so  acting  was  soon  displayed  in  his 
attempt  to  bribe  the  apostles  to  communicate  their 
supernatural  gifts  to  him,  hoping  thus  to  acquire 
greater  powers  for  his  own  ends.  His  answer  to 
the  indignant  rebuke  of  St.  Peter  betokens  rather 
apprehension  than  contrition, and  tradition  associates 
his  name  with  the  first  entry  of  Gnostic  teaching 
into  the  Christian  Church.  The  most  trustworthy 
particulars  of  his  life  are  given  us  by  his  fellow- 
countryman  Justin  Martyr  in  the  middle  of  the 
following  century.  According  to  his  account 
Simon  was  born  at  Gitton,  a Samaritan  village, 
and  making  his  way  to  Rome  in  the  time  of 


’ Apol.  i.  26,  56,  ii.  1 5 ; Tryph.  120.  A stone  was  found  on 
the  island  of  the  Tiber  in  1574  with  the  inscription  ‘ Semoni  | 
Sanco  | Deo  Fidio  | Sacrum  | Sex.  Pompeius  Sp(urtt)  F(ilius)  | 
Col(/ina,  sc.  trihu)  Mussianus  | Quinquennalis  | Decur(io)  Bi- 
dentalis  | Donum  Dedit’  (Orel!,  i860,  Wilmanns  1300,  Gruter 
96.  5 ; the  similar  one  in  Orcll.  1861,  Gruter  96.  6,  is  suspected 
by  some  critics);  and  Jnstin  Martyr  has  been  accordingly 
charged  with  having  mistaken  this  for  a dedication  to  Simon 
Magus.  The  question  is  discussed  in  the  preface  to  his  works 
published  in  Migne's  Bibl.  Patrum,  p.  141.  It  is  singular  that 
the  deity  to  whom  the  inscription  refers,  the  Sabine  Semo- 
Hercules,  is,  according  to  Banr’s  view  ( Christliche  Gnosis,  1835, 
p.  308),  to  be  identified  with  the  Tyrian  Horcules,  and  that  the 
legend  of  the  latter  and  of  Astarte  probably  gave  rise  to  the 
Simon  and  Helena  myth. 


• — Digitizcxfby  Google 


57 


Claudius  gained  so  great  an  influence  with  both' 
senate  and  people  by  the  aid  of  his  magic  arts 
that  they  honoured  him  as  god,  and  erected  a 
statue  to  his  honour  in  the  island  of  the  Tiber. 
As  time  goes  on,  more  minute  and  full  particulars 
of  his  life  are  given  by  ecclesiastical  writers.  The 
author  of  the  Clementines,  for  instance,  knows  the 
names  of  his  parents,  and  describes  him  as  having 
received  instruction  in  Hellenic  literature  and 
magic  at  Alexandria l.  Later  in  life  he,  with  his 
companion  Helena,  was  among  the  thirty  disciples 
of  John  the  Baptist,  this  number  having  been 
chosen  by  the  master  as  representing  the  days  of 
the  month,  with  a woman  among  them  to  signify 
its  incompleteness,  as  twelve  apostles  had  been 
selected  by  our  Lord  in  correspondence  with  the 
twelve  months  of  the  year.  On  the  death  of  the 
Baptist,  Dositheus,  in  the  absence  of  Simon, 
succeeded  to  the  headship,  but  after  a while  was 
compelled  to  succumb  to  the  superior  powers  of 
his  rival.  Simon  now  travelled  about  in  company 
with  Helena  (a  dissolute  woman  whom  he  had 
picked  up  at  Tyre),  practising  magical  arts,  and  by 
their  aid  making  statues  to  walk,  rolling  without 
hurt  in  the  fire,  changing  into  a snake  or  kid, 
displaying  two  faces,  &c.  But  St.  Peter  con- 
tinually throws  himself  in  his  path  ; at  Caesarea 


1 Recogn.  ii.  7 ; Epit.  25. 


Digitized  by  Google 


58 


Stratonis  they  have  a disputation  which  lasted 
three  days ; flying  hence  he  is  pursued  by  his 
triumphant  antagonist  to  Phoenicia,  Antioch, 
Laodicea,  and  at  last,  according  to  further  ac- 
counts, is  brought  to  bay  at  Rome,  where,  in  order 
to  regain  his  wavering  credit  with  his  disciples, 
he  suffers  himself  to  be  buried  alive,  promising  to 
rise  again  on  the  third  day,  but  instead  miserably 
perishes.  In  another  version  he  attempts  to  fly, 
but  failing  in  the  undertaking  owing  to  the  prayers 
of  the  Apostle,  he  falls  headlong  and  loses  his  life 
on  the  spot ; or  being  horribly  maimed,  he  flings 
himself  in  shame  and  anguish  from  a rock  and  so 
perishes 

However  unsatisfactory  many  of  these  details  of 
his  history  may  be,  a very  complete  description 
of  his  doctrinal  system  has  descended  to  us  in  the 
works  of  early  ecclesiastical  writers,  among  which 
are  to  be  found  long  extracts  from  the  heresiarch’s 
own  treatise,  the  * Great  Apophasis,’  or  Declaration, 
in  which  he  unfolds  all  his  wisdom  and  theories  of 
creation1 2.  He  explains  that  there  are  six  original 
‘ roots’  or  principles  whence  all  things  were  derived  ; 


1 The  various  modifications  of  the  story  are  well  described  by 
Miiller  in  Herzog,  Keal-Encycl.  xiv.  392,  who  also  gives  a careful 
account  of  his  system.  Cf.  also  Ewald,  Gesch.  (1868),  vii.  124  ; 
Baur,  op.  tit. ; and  the  art.  ‘ Gnosticismus  ’ in  Ersch  and  Gruber, 
p.  278. 

2 Hippolytus,  II aeren.  vi.  9,  x.  12. 


Digiti2edby  Google 


59 


in  the  intellectual  world  these  are  voo?  and  iirlvota, 
tpmvt)  and  ovo/xa l * * * *,  \oyt<r/x6t  and  ; and  cor- 

responding to  them  in  the  world  of  sense  are 
heaven  and  earth,  sun  and  moon,  air  and  water ; 
but  as  his  whole  system  is  based  solely  upon  the 
relation  of  the  sexes,  all  of  these  ‘roots’  are 
arranged,  as  will  have  been  noticed,  in  pairs, 
representing  the  male  and  female  principle  of 
thought,  speech,  and  reflection8  respectively.  These 
however  by  themselves  are  incapable  of  production  : 
for  this  they  need  the  help  of  the  seventh,  the 
highest  and  first  principle  of  all,  the  unlimited 
Power  (anepavTot  Suva/xis).  This  exists  indeed  in 
all  the  six,  but  only  in  potentiality,  not  in  realisa- 
tion (Swduti  owe  evfpyda).  For  its  nature  is  two- 
fold, it  is  both  hidden  and  manifest,  apparent  to 
the  intellect  and  to  the  senses  (voijto'i/  and  aiaQqrov)  ; 
it  is  described  as  a supercelestial  fire,  the  treasure- 
house  (dtja’avpdi,)  of  both  alcrOtird  and  i loip-d,  or,  to 
use  a Biblical  image,  it  is  the  tree  seen  in  Nebu- 
chadnezzar’s vision  whence  all  flesh  was  nourished. 
Now  if  this  fire  remain  only  in  potentiality  it 
will  vanish,  like  geometry  or  grammar  from  the 
mind  of  man,  but  if  it  be  realised,  assume  sensible 


1 In  Theodoret,  llaeret.  Fab.  i.  i,  tvroia.  I do  not  venture  to 

translate  these  terms,  being  doubtful  whether  they  can  be  ren- 

dered accurately.  Ewald  gives  them  as  Verstand  and  Verstand- 

lichkeit,  Sprachsinn  and  Sprache,  Gcdankc  and  Ucberlcgung. 

8 Or,  ‘ understanding.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


60 


shape  (e^etKovlcrOri),  take  art  (rixyi j),  then  it 
becomes  the  light  of  all  generation  (c pws  run*  yiyvo- 
fxtvwv).  Again,  it  may  be  described  as  past,  present, 
and  future 1 (e<mo?,  cm!?,  o-T»/<rJ/i«'o?) : it  stands  on 
high  in  ungenerated  potentiality  («V  ayew/ntp  Swd/uet), 
it  stood  beneath  ‘on  the  face  of  the  waters’  in 
generated  form  (ei>  ei/c6n  yevvqOels) ; it  will  stand  on 
high,  if  it  be  realised,  by  the  side  of  the  blessed 
unlimited  Power.  The  first  principle  did  take 
form  in  the  person  of  Simon  himself : and  by  the 
aid  of  him,  who  is  the  incarnation  of  it,  all  men  can 
think  and  speak  and  reflect  rightly ; heaven  and 
earth,  sun  and  moon,  air  and  water  can  each 
perform  their  appointed  task  in  union  with  each 
other. 

So  far  possibly  the  system  as  taught  by  Simon 
himself  extended,  but  a further  development  of 
it,  which  may  have  been  due  to  the  imagination 
and  enthusiasm  of  his  scholars,’  has  also  come 
down  to  us,  and  in  this  his  companion  Helena 
plays  a conspicuous  part2.  According  to  this  he 
is  the  highest  Power,  the  Father  who  is  above  all, 
who  suffers  himself  to  be  called  among  men  by 
what  name  they  please,  the  Supreme  Mind ; Helena 


1 An  idea  borrowed  from  the  Jehovah  of  Exod.  iii.  14  ; the 
a oiv  Ka'i  6 t/v  xai  6 ip^optvos  of  Rev.  i,  4. 

1 Hippolytus,  op.  cit.  vi.  19  ; Irenaeus,  Uaeres.  i.  23  ; Theo- 
doret,  he.  cit.;  Tcrlullian,  Anim.  34;  Epiphanius,  Uaeres.  21. 


61 


is  the  female  principle  corresponding  to  him,  his 
Intelligence,  the  universal  Mother,  through  whom 
he  first  conceived  the  idea  of  creating  angels  and 
archangels.  She  springing  down  into  the  lower 
regions  produced  angels  and  powers  who  created 
the  world,  and  afterwards  detained  her  out  of 
envy,  wishing  to  be  thought  self-produced.  Him 
they  ignored  entirely,  her  they  subjected  to  all 
contumelious  usage,  making  her  pass  from  one 
woman’s  body  to  another  that  she  might  not  re- 
turn to  the  Father.  Thus  she  was  once  the  Helen 
for  whom  Greeks  and  Trojans  fought  at  Ilium, 
and  who  after  many  transmigrations  found  her- 
self at  last  in  a brothel  at  Tyre.  Then  it  was 
tliat  the  supreme  Power  came  down  from  on  high 
to  rescue  this  his  ‘lost  sheep:’  he  passed  through 
all  the  angel-spheres,  assimilating  himself  to  each, 
till  he  appeared  as  man  on  earth,  among  the  Sama- 
ritans as  the  Father,  among  the  Jews  as  Son, 
where  he  suffered  death  in  appearance  only, 
among  the  Gentiles  as  Holy  Ghost1.  He  over- 
came the  powers  of  the  world,  each  of  them  ruling 
unrighteously  and  striving  for  the  mastery,  freed 
his  Intelligence,  brought  salvation  to  mankind, 
and  likewise  delivered  them  from  the  bondage 
of  the  spirits  who  created  the  world.  It  was 


1 So  Jerome  on  Matt.  xxiv.  g.  ‘ Ego  sum  Semio  Dei,  ego  sum 
speciosus,  ego  Paracletus,  ego  omnipoteus,  ego  omnia  Dei.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


62 


they  who  inspired  the  prophets,  consequently  their 
words  are  not  regarded  by  those  who  believe  on 
Simon  and  Helena  ; these  may  act  as  they  please  : 
they  can  do  no  wrong,  for  nothing  is  evil  in  itself, 
only  by  ordinance ; certain  things  have  been  de- 
clared to  be  so  by  the  creating  angels  who  thought 
thus  to  enslave  mankind.  The  result  of  such  a 
doctrine  upon  the  lives  of  Simon’s  disciples  may 
be  easily  imagined  *. 

Greek  mythology  was  also  pressed  into  the 
service  of  Simon  in  order  to  illustrate  the  re- 
lationship of  him  and  Helena : their  admirers 
were  fond  of  representing  them  under  the  form 
of  Zeus  and  Athena  (she  according  to  the  legend 
having  sprung  fully  formed  from  the  brain  of 
her  sire),  and  of  making  offerings  before  images 
and  paintings  so  depicting  them.  Such  was  the 
strange  mixture  of  Judaism,  Christianity,  Oriental 
legend,  and  Greek  mythology  which  took  such 
deep  root  in  Samaria,  that,  according  to  the  testi- 
mony of  Justin  Martyr,  nearly  the  whole  nation  in 
his  days  had  given  in  their  adherence  to  it.  One 
circumstance  no  doubt  powerfully  contributed  to 
this  end,  that  the  vanity  of  the  people  was  flattered 
by  the  idea  of  possessing  a Messiah  of  their  own 
whose  high  pretensions  should  equal  those  of  the 
Christ  of  Nazareth.  The  sect  however  had  no 


1 Eusebius,  Eccl.  ii.  13. 


Digitized  by  Google 


63 


great  vitality,  and  had  almost  ceased  to  exist  in  the 
time  of  Origen '. 

Roused  to  emulation  by  the  success  of  Simon, 
one  of  his  disciples,  Menander  of  Capparetaia1  2, 
another  Samaritan  village,  endeavoured  to  im- 
prove upon  his  system.  His  pretensions  were 
more  modest.  Unlike  his  master,  he  made  no 
claim  to  be  considered  as  the  highest  Power, 
teaching  that  this  is  unknown  ; it  had  however 
by  means  of  the  divine  ewola  produced  the  angels, 
and  by  them  the  world  had  been  created  ; his  own 
mission  was  to  set  man  free  from  the  dominion  of 
these  powers,  and  give  them  immortality ; this 
he  promised  he  would  do  for  all,  even  in  this 
life,  who  believed  and  were  baptized  in  his  name. 
He  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any  great  following 
among  his  countrymen,  the  ground  having  been 
too  completely  occupied  by  his  master : he  con- 
sequently migrated  to  Antioch  on  the  Orontes 
and  there  founded  a school : some  of  his  disciples 
were  still  to  be  found  there  in  Justin  Martyrs 
day. 


1 Origen,  Celt.  i.  57,  vi.  n. 

1 Justin  Mart.  Ap.  i. 26,56.  In Theodoret,  op.  cil.i.  2, his  birth- 
place is  called  CbabraL  His  teaching  is  described  by  Irenaeus, 
loc.  cit. ; Hippolytus,  JIaeres.  vii.  28  ; Eusebius,  op.  cit.  iii.  26. 
In  Hippolytus  it  is  said  to  have  resembled  that  of  Saturnilus, 
but  it  is  not  clear  how  much  of  the  description  given  of  the 
latter  will  apply  to  him. 


Digitized  by  Google 


64 


Another  disciple,  Cleobius,  though  founding  a 
school  of  his  own,  appears  to  have  kept  so  close 
to  his  master’s  teaching  as  to  have  been  looked 
upon  as  an  apostle  of  his.  Nothing  is  known 
of  him,  but  that  he  imitated  Simon  in  his  hos- 
tility to  Christianity,  forging  and  circulating  books 
in  the  name  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  *. 

To  return  after  this  digression  to  the  question 
of  the  religious  belief  of  the  Samaritans  ; — it  would 
appear  from  the  foregoing  sketch  that  their 
original  creed  was  wholly  borrowed  from  their 
neighbours  of  Judaea  at  a time  when  Sadducean 
opinions  prevailed  among  them,  and  that  the  later 
Pharisaic  views  which  gradually  ousted  the  former 
beliefs  did  not  for  centuries  obtain  any  hold  in 
Samaria.  Thus  matters  continued  till  the  fall 
of  Jerusalem.  This  event  must  have  greatly 
altered  the  tone  of  mind  with  which  the  Sama- 
ritans regarded  their  old  enemies.  The  sight  of 
the  Jews’  humiliation  and  dispersion  over  the 
face  of  the  earth  must  have  greatly  modified  the 
repugnance  with  which  they  would  naturally  have 
repelled  any  acceptance  of  their  rivals’  views. 
Accordingly  when  next  we  receive  any  information 


1 Const.  Ap.  vi.  1 6.  Ewald  identifies  his  followers  with  the 
'Evru^irai  of  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  vii.  1 7,  ascribing  the  name  to  the 
importance  ascribed  by  them  to  solemn  1 supplications : ' they 
arc  however  termed  Ev-nixirai  in  Theodoret,  Uaer.  i.  1,  and 
distinguished  from  the  KXfojSanm. 


^Digitized  by  Google 


65 


with  regard  to  the  creed  of  Samaria,  we  find  it 
greatly  changed  and  many  of  the  Pharisaic  articles 
of  faith  now  forming  part  of  it,  to  the  exclusion  of 
those  Sadducean  doctrines  which  had  formerly 
prevailed.  Moslem  influence  also  was  later 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  Samaritans,  when  in 
636  a.d.  they  passed  under  the  rule  of  the 
Saracens,  and  it  is  no  doubt  to  this,  or  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Druses ',  — that  strange 
eclectic  sect  which  borrowed  its  principles  alike 
from  the  Law,  the  Gospel,  and  the  Koran, — that 
they  owe  many  Koranic  expressions  and  ideas, 
for  instance,  the  passionate  assertion  of  the  unity 
of  God,  the  high  and  peculiar  honour  paid  to 
Moses  as  the  one  prophet,  and  the  notion  that 
the  Law  was  created : ideas  all  of  which  find 
their  counterpart  in  Mohammedan  theology. 

Our  information  with  regard  to  the  later  de- 
velopements  of  Samaritan  faith  is  very  full : the 
sources  from  which  it  may  be  obtained  are  the 
hymns  and  other  religious  documents  published 


1 The  Beet  was  founded  by  Hakim,  the  sixth  khaliph  of  the 
house  of  the  Fatimites  that  ruled  in  Cairo,  in  opposition  to  the 
Abbasides  of  Bagdad.  In  1017  a.  d.  he  gave  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Syria  liberty  of  conscience  and  leave  to  rebuild  their  syna- 
gogues. Hamza  his  disciple  taught  that  God  had  manifested 
Himself  by  prophets,  last  of  all  by  Mohammed  and  Hakim.  The 
latter  had,  in  1020,  disappeared  to  return  later.  Juynboll, 
Chron.  Sam.  1 16  ; De  Sacy,  Expose  de  la  Religion  Jen  Druses. 

f 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


by  Gesenius  and  Heidenbeim,  the  earliest  of  them 
dating  possibly  from  the  seventh  century,  the  book 
of  Joshua  and  Chronicle  of  Abulfath,  composed  in 
the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth,  the  Samaritan  cor- 
respondence with  Scaliger  and  others  from  the 
sixteenth  century  downwards,  and  lastly  the  very 
complete  information  afforded  by  modem  travellers. 

From  a combination  of  these  various  documents 
it  would  appear  that  the  Samaritans,  like  the 
Mohammedans l,  had  five  principal  articles  of 
faith 2 : they  hold  that — 

1.  God  is  One,  without  partner  or  associate, 
without  body  and  passions,  the  cause  of  all  things, 
filling  all  things ; His  nature  is  inscrutable : His 
powers  were  hidden  in  Him  before  the  creation, 
and  by  it  His  majesty  and  magnificence  were  dis- 
played : He  is  knowable  by  reason,  by  His  works 
and  revelation : from  the  kindness  He  formerly 
shewed  to  His  own  people  in  continually  pro- 
tecting them  a return  of  the  Divine  favour  may 
be  expected : to  them  alone  was  His  great  Name 
revealed  on  mount  Garizim. 

2.  Moses  is  the  one  messenger  and  prophet  of 
God,  for  all  time  : all  other  prophets  are  as  nothing 


1 The  five  points  of  the  Mohammedan  creed  are  belief  in  the 
unity  of  God  and  the  mission  of  Mohammed,  prayer,  alma,  fast- 
ing, and  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  Cf.  Weil,  Mohammed,  288. 

* Cf.  the  letter  of  Meschalmah  in  Heidenheim,  Viertel- 
jahretschr.  i.  100. 


Digitized  by  Google 


67 


compared  with  him  : he  is  the  glory  of  prophecy, 
the  end  of  revelation,  the  friend  and  familiar 
servant  of  God,  the  head,  the  sun,  the  crown  of 
the  world,  above  all  kings  and  priests ; none  will 
arise 1 like  him  : he  is  superior  even  to  the  Messias  : 
after  ascending  into  heaven  he  dwelt  in  the  splen- 
dour of  God. 

3.  The  Law  is  perfect  and  complete,  destined 
for  all  time,  never  to  be  supplemented  or  abrogated 
by  later  revelation  : it  was  created  in  the  six  days, 
before  all  other  creatures ; by  the  study  of  it  men 
become  partakers  of  eternal  life. 

4.  Garizim  is  the  one  abode  of  God  on  earth,  the 
home  of  eternal  life,  the  ‘ mount  of  blessing 2 * 4 its 
higher  eminence  is  most  sacred,  it  is  the  ‘ ever- 
lasting hill  V the  ‘ house  of  God  * its  lower  one 
is  ‘Jacob’s  pillar*,’  the  ‘stone  of  Israel*:’  there 
the  Tabernacle  was  placed,  there  Joshua  built  the 
first  altar ; there  does  God  manifest  Himself  by 
His  presence  : over  it  is  Paradise,  thence  comes  all 
rain  : they  can  shew  where  Adam  and  Seth  raised 
their  several  altars,  and  the  seven  steps  leading  to 
that  of  Noah : they  know  where  Abraham  offered 


1 The  Sam.  Targum  in  Deut.  xxxiv.  10  reads  Dip'  for  the  Dp 
of  the  Masoretic  text:  cf.  also  the  Sam.  text  in  Ex.  xviii.  7. 

J Deut.  xi.  29;  sec  above,  p.  14,  note  6. 

a Gen.  xlix.  26;  Deut.  xxxiii.  15;  where  the  Sam.  Pent, 
reads  nj?33. 

4 Gen.  xxviii.  19.  * Ibid.  xxxv.  14.  * Ibid.  xlix.  24. 

f 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


68 


up  Isaac 1 * : there  still  remain  the  twelve  stones  on 
which  is  written  the  Law  (Deut.  xxvii.  4),  the  site 
of  the  former  temple8:  below  it  stood  the  high- 
priest’s  house  not  far  from  the  cave  of  Makkedah  : 
Garizim  was  alone  spared  by  the  flood  when  every 
other  mountain  was  covered 3. 

5.  There  will  be  a day  of  retribution,  when  the 
pious  will  rise  again ; false  prophets  and  their 
followers  will  then  be  cast  into  the  fire  and 
burnt 4 * *. 

Other  points  in  their  creed  may  be  noticed.  The 
world  is  twofold,  one  apparent  to  the  senses,  the 
other  spiritual,  the  abode  of  angels ; it  has  not 
always  existed,  it  was  created.  Man  was  formed 
from  the  dust  of  Mount  Safra,  that  is  Garizim, 
in  the  image  of  the  angels,  not  of  God.  The 
Sabbath  is  to  be  rigidly  observed ; great  rewards 
await  those  who  honour  it.  Angels  are  the  powers 

1 Cf.  Petermann  in  Herzog,  xiii.  377.  The  claim  of  Garizim 
as  the  place  of  sacrifice  in  opposition  to  Moriah  in  Jerusalem  is 
upheld  by  Dr.  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine  (1866),  p.  251,  but 
controverted  by  Ewald,  Gotting.  Gel.  Am.  (1863),  p.  638,  and 
by  Thomson,  Land  and  Book  (London,  i860),  p.  474. 

! To  this  the  Samaritans  always  turn  in  prayer,  as  the  Jews 
to  Jerusalem  and  Moslems  to  Mecca. 

5 This  is  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  legend  that  Palestine  was 
not  covered  by  the  flood.  Berethith  Rabba,  33,  and  Zehahim,  113b. 

4 See  the  Sam.  Pent,  in  Ex.  xv.  18  and  Deut.  xxxii.  35. 

Yilmar  (in  Abulfath,  p.  xxxvii)  thinks  that  (4)  and  (5)  were 

later  additions  to  the  Samaritan  creed. 


69 


of  the  unseen  world,  and  of  God : they  appeared 
at  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai ; by  one  of 
them,  not  in  person,  God  spake  to  Moses1. 

The  belief  in  a coming  Messiah  or  ‘ Restorer  V 
who  plays  so  conspicuous  a part  in  later  Samaritan 
theology,  was  probably  of  home  origin,  or  at  all 
events,  even  if  borrowed  from  their  neighbours, 
adapted  to  their  own  ideas  and  hopes3.  It  is 

1 It  is  doubtful  bow  tho  Samaritans  regard  angels,  whether  as 
attributes  of  the  Deity  or  uncreated  existences.  Cf.  De  Sacy,  in 
Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  26.  Their  belief  on  this  point  and  also  with 
regard  to  the  resurrection  is  probably  somewhat  hazy.  De  Sacy 
could  extract  no  satisfactory  replies  from  the  priest  Salameh. 
Fetermann  was  informed  by  the  priest  that  by  the  1 Spirit  of 
God’  and  ‘darkness’  of  Gen.  i.  were  signified  good  and  bad 
angels  respectively.  He  gave  him  the  names  of  the  four  greatest 
angels,  Fanuel  (Gen.  xxxii.  31),  Anusa  (Exod.  xiv.  25),  Cabbala 
(Num.  iv.  20),  and  Nasi  (Exod.  xvii.  15),  all  founded  upon  a 
misinterpretation  of  these  passages.  The  devils  are  Azazel  (Lev. 
xvi),  Belial  (Deut.  xv.  9),  and  Jasara  (perhaps  the  ‘ hornet  ’ of 
Exod.  xxiii.  28).  The  descendants  of  Cain  became  evil  spirits ; 
the  Nephilim  (Gen.  vi.  4)  also  are  evil  angels  who  fell  from 
heaven.  He  varied  in  his  account  of  the  resurrection ; at  one 
time  stating  that  the  spirits  of  good  and  evil  men  would  receive 
their  bodies  at  the  last  judgment  and  with  them  return  to  Para- 
dise and  hell  respectively ; at  another,  that  they  would  always 
remain  in  an  incorporeal  state. 

* Called  also  in  Arabic  El-muhdi,  the  ' guide.’  Robinson,  ii. 
278. 

3 It  is  not  likely  that  the  idea  of  a Messiah  the  son  of  Joseph 
would  have  its  origin  anywhere  but  among  the  Samaritans,  who 
were  always  eager  to  raise  the  tribe  of  Joseph  at  the  expense  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


70 


fully  explained  in  the  letter  addressed  by  the 
Samaritans  to  their  ‘brethren  in  England’  in  a.h. 
1096  ( = a.d.  1684)  * : ‘You  have  spoken  of  the 
arrival  of  the  great  Prophet.  This  is  he  who  was 
announced  to  our  father  Abraham,  as  it  is  said 
there  appeared  “a  smoking  furnace  and  a burning 
lamp”  (Gen.  xv.  17):  “to  him  shall  the  people 
submit  themselves”  (ib.  xlix.  10) : of  him  also  it  is 
said  (Nuin.  xxiv.  17),  “he  shall  destroy  all  the 
children  of  Sheth,  and  Israel  shall  do  valiantly 
of  him,  “ the  Lord  thy  God  shall  raise  thee  up  from 
amidst  thy  brethren  a prophet  like  unto  me,  unto 
him  shall  ye  hearken”  (Deut.  xviii.  15).  Our 
teachers  have  said  on  this  point  that  this  prophet 
shall  arise,  that  all  people  shall  submit  to  him 
and  believe  in  him  and  in  the  Law  and  Mount 
Garizim  : that  the  religion  of  Moses  son  of  Amram 
will  then  appear  in  glory,  that  the  beginning  of 


that  of  Judah.  The  summary  of  Jewish  doctriue  on  the  subject  is 
as  follows : Messiah  the  son  of  Joseph  will  come  before  Messiah 
the  son  of  David,  will  assemble  the  ten  tribes  in  Galilee  and 
lead  them  to  Jerusalem,  but  will  at  last  perish  in  battle  against 
Gog  and  Magog  for  the  sins  of  Jeroboam.  See  references  in 
Gesenius,  De  Sam.  Theologia,  43.  annn  0r  WIWl  signifies  the 
‘restorer.’  Ibid.  44;  Vilmar,  p.  xlii. 

' De  Sacy,  Not.  el  Extr.  xii.  209.  The  Samaritans  do  not 
interpret  ‘Shiloh’  in  Gen.  xlix.  10  of  the  Messiah,  but  of  Solo- 
mon, the  magician,  after  whose  time  the  sceptre  departed  from 
Judah.  Cf.  the  Samaritan  letter  to  Ludolf  in  1691  (Eichhorn, 
Repertorium,  xiii.  281). 


Digitized  by  Google 


71 


tbe  name  of  the  prophet  who  will  arise  will  be  M 1 ; 
that  he  will  die  and  be  interred  near  Joseph  “ the 
fruitful  bough,”  that  the  Tabernacle  will  appear  by 
his  ministry  and  be  established  on  Garizim.’  As 
to  the  time  of  his  appearance  the  Samaritans  were 
formerly  uncertain ; * no  one  knows  his  coming 
but  Jehovah,’  says  Ab  Zehuta  in  1 589  2 : ‘ it  is  a 
great  mystery  with  regard  to  Hattaheb  who  is  to 
come  and  who  will  manifest  his  spirit : happy  shall 
we  be  when  he  arrives,’  writes  Salameh  in  1 8 1 1 3. 
But  the  modern  Samaritans  are  more  communica- 
tive. * The  appearance  of  the  Messias,’  writes 
Petermann  in  i860,  ‘is  to  take  place  6000  years 
after  the  creation4,  and  these  have  just  elapsed, 
consequently  he  now,  though  all  unconsciously,  is 
going  about  upon  earth.  In  1853  the  Samaritans 
expected  a great  political  revolution,  but  in  1863 
the  kings  of  the  earth  will,  according  to  them, 
assemble  the  wisest  out  of  all  nations  in  order  by 
mutual  counsel  to  discover  the  true  faith.  From 
the  Israelites,  i.e.  Samaritans,  will  one  be  sent, 
and  he  will  be  the  Taheb.  He  will  gain  the  day. 


1 ‘ The  Messiah  has  not  arisen  yet,  hut  he  will  come,  and  his 
name  will  be  Hattaheb  ibid.  Cf.  Vilmar,  p.  xliv. 

8 In  Eicbhom,  liepertorium,  xiii.  266.  The  Jews,  after 
repeated  disappointments,  forbade  any  one  to  calculate  the 
arrival  of  the  Messiah.  Cf.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  f.  97  b. 

5 De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  122. 

4 This  is  borrowed  from  the  Jews ; cf.  Bab. ' Aboda  Zara,  9 a. 


72 


lead  them  to  Garizim,  where  under  the  twelve 
stones  they  will  find  the  ten  commandments  (or 
the  whole  Law),  and  under  the  stone  of  Bethel 
the  Temple  utensils1  and  manna.  Then  will  all 
believe  in  the  Law,  and  acknowledge  him  as  their 
king  and  lord  of  all  the  earth.  He  will  convert 
and  equalise  all  men,  live  1 10  years  upon  earth, 
then  die  and  be  buried  near  Garizim,  for  upon 
that  pure  and  holy  mountain  can  no  burial  take 
place.  Afterwards  will  the  earth  remain  some 
hundreds  of  years  more  till  the  7000  are  com- 
pleted, and  then  will  the  last  judgment  come  in*.’ 
This  part  of  the  subject  may  be  concluded  by 
a sketch  of  the  religious  observances  of  the  Sama- 
ritans at  the  present  day.  They  celebrate  seven 
feasts  in  the  year,  although  only  one,  the  Passover, 
is  observed  with  its  former  solemnities ; for,  the 
former  obligation  to  sacrifice  having  ceased  with 
the  disappearance  of  the  Tabernacle  and  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  divine  favour,  prayers  have  been  sub- 
stituted for  the  former  rites.  For  this  feast  they 
prepare  themselves  some  days  before  by  a puri- 
fication of  themselves  and  their  houses : the  un- 
leavened cakes3  are  baked  of  corn  specially  bought 

* See  above,  p.  20,  note  2.  a In  Herzog,  xiii.  373. 

5 Their  number  of  days  for  eating  unleavened  bread  seems  to 
have  varied  : in  the  seventeenth  century  they  write  to  Ludolf 
‘ six  ’ days  (cf.  Eichhorn,  Repertorium,  xiii.  283) ; in  this  cen- 
tury, to  De  Sacv,  ‘seven.’  Nut.  et  Extr.  xii.  104,  120. 


for  the  purpose  while  still  in  the  ear,  and  not 
threshed  by  oxen  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
country,  but  prepared  by  the  women  of  the  con- 
gregation : the  lambs  must  have  been  born  in 
the  previous  Tisri  (October),  and  be  without 
blemish  of  any  sort.  On  the  14th  of  Nisan  the 
congregation  ascend  to  the  lower  plateau  of  Gari- 
zim  and  pitch  their  tents  there  : at  sunset ' on 
the  following  day  the  lambs  are  slain  amid  the 
recitation  of  prayers,  hymns,  and  passages  of  the 
Law  describing  the  original  ceremonial,  then 
stripped  of  their  wool,  cleaned  and  sprinkled  with 
salt ; next,  sticks  are  run  through  the  leg-sinews 
and  the  animals  suspended  in  a trench  lined  with 
stones  wdiich  has  been  well  heated  by  a fire  lighted 
within ; wet  earth  and  turf  are  then  piled  over 
and  trampled  down,  so  that  the  hole  is  hermeti- 
cally sealed  and  the  lambs  thoroughly  roasted. 
At  sunset  they  are  brought  forth  and  eaten  in 
haste  with  unleavened  bread  and  bitter  herbs, 
the  men  and  boys  first  partaking  of  them,  and 
afterwards  the  women  and  girls,  all  with  staves 
in  their  hands  as  if  equipped  for  a journey  : the 
remainder  is  consumed  with  fire.  Then  follow 
the  morning  prayers,  lasting  for  four  hours  : the 
next  day  is  spent  in  general  rejoicing  and  the 
consumption  of  fish,  rice,  eggs,  and  all  sorts  of 


1 Or  after  noun,  when  the  Passover  falls  on  a Sabbath. 


74 


delicacies  (in  which  however  no  leaven  may  be 
used),  in  the  drinking  of  wine  and  brandy,  accom- 
panied by  the  recitation  of  hymns  either  extem- 
porary or  learnt  by  heart,  suitable  passages  of 
Scripture,  &C.1 *  The  2ist  of  Nisan,  or  last  day 
of  unleavened  bread,  is  also  counted  as  a feast, 
and  is  marked  by  a pilgrimage  to  Garizim,  visiting 
the  various  sacred  spots  there,  and  recitation  of 
the  Law.  The  third  feast  is  Pentecost,  com- 
mencing on  the  Wednesday  previous  to  the  day 
itself : this  is  also  marked  by  going  to  Garizim  in 
procession,  visiting  the  holy  places,  and  reading 
through  the  whole  Law.  The  fourth  is  that  of 
Trumpets,  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  Tisri : on 
this  occasion  the  oldest  synagogue  roll  is  displayed 
and  kissed  by  the  worshippers,  as  on  eight  other 
occasions  during  the  year.  The  fifth  is  the  Day 
of  Atonement,  on  which  from  sunset  to  sunset3 
no  eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  or  talking  is  allowed, 
but  the  whole  twenty-four  hours  must  be  spent 
ia  the  synagogue  in  reading  the  Law  from  end 


1 For  a minute  and  interesting  account  of  the  ceremonies  of 
the  Passover,  as  celebrated  in  1853,  for  the  first  time  after  an 
interruption  of  many  years,  on  Garizim,  see  Petermann  in 

Herzog,  xiii.  378 ; also  Dr.  Stanley,  Jewish  Church,  i.  513. 

* Even  the  children  fast  (De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  177)  : among 
the  Jews  they  do  not  till  they  are  twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  age. 
Fjr  an  account  of  the  ceremonies  of  this  duy  see  Mr.  Grove’s 
paper  in  Galton’s  Vacation  Tourists  for  1861. 


■Btpzed  by_Goog!e 


75 


to  end  and  singing  hymns.  The  first  and  eighth 
days  of  Tabernacles  count  for  the  remaining  feast- 
days,  the  intermediate  time  is  spent  in  huts  of 
laurel  and  other  fragrant  leaves  pitched  on  the 
slope  of  Garizim,  and  employed  in  daily  pilgrim- 
age to  the  top.  The  Sabbath  moreover  is  kept 
with  great  strictness : no  fire  may  be  lighted  on 
it 1 * : the  years  of  jubilee  and  release  are  also  still 
observed.  The  Samaritans  have  two  more  days 
of  assembly,  though  they  do  not  count  them  as 
feast-days,  termed  Summoth 3,  sixty  days  before 
Passover  and  Tabernacles  respectively:  the  number 
of  the  congregation  is  then  taken,  and  in  return 
each  male  over  twenty  years  of  age  presents  the 
priest  with  half  a shekel  (three  piastres),  in  ac- 
cordance with  Exod.  xxx.  12-14,  receiving  from 
him  a calendar  for  the  coming  six  months  pre- 
pared from  a table  in  his  possession,  originally, 
it  is  said,  composed  by  Adam  and  committed  to 
writing  in  the  time  of  Phinehas3:  from  these 
offerings,  the  tenth  of  the  incomes  of  the  congre- 
gation, and  other  small  gifts,  the  priest  gains  his 
living4.  He  may  consecrate  any  of  his  family 


1 Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  124  ; Repertorinvi,  ix.  32. 

1 Cf.  the  chron.  El-Tholidoth  (below,  p.  124)  in  Joum.  Afriat. 

(1869),  p.  452.  s See  below,  p.  125. 

4 The  Samaritans  allow  that  their  high-priest  is  only  a Levite, 
and  that  the  family  of  Aaron  has  long  died  out.  Not.  el  Extr. 
xii.  30,  218. 


••  .tizoc  by  Google 


76 


that  he  pleases  to  the  priesthood,  provided  the 
candidate  for  the  office  be  twenty-five  years  of 
age  and  never  have  suffered  his  hair  to  be  cut. 
Like  other  Orientals,  he  never  removes  his  turban, 
and  so  is  not  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  the 
rest  of  the  congregation ; but,  in  accordance  with 
Lev.  x.  6,  he  does  not  ‘ rend  his  clothes  ’ by  wear- 
ing a slit  on  his  sleeve  as  other  Samaritans,  and 
when  the  roll  of  the  Law  is  taken  from  the  ark 
lie,  like  his  assistants,  places  a tallith  or  cloth 
round  his  head.  On  festal  occasions  and  in  the 
synagogue  the  Samaritans  wear  white  turbans ; 
ordinarily  they  are  compelled,  by  way  of  distinction 
from  Mohammedans,  to  wear  them  of  a pale  red 
colour : they  may  cut  their  hair  or  not  as  they 
please,  but  not  their  beards,  this  being  forbidden 
in  Lev.  xix.  27;  xxi.  5 '.  Women  must  let  their 
hair  grow,  and  may  wear  no  earrings,  because  of 
them  the  golden  calf  in  the  wilderness  was  made  : 
for  fear  of  scandalising  the  Mohammedans,  none 
but  the  old  ones  venture  to  attend  the  synagogue. 
Great  rejoicings  are  held  over  the  birth  of  a boy : 
his  circumcision  always  takes  place  on  the  eighth 
day  after  birth,  even  though  it  be  a Sabbath1 2. 
Boys  marry  as  early  as  fifteen  or  sixteen,  girls  at 
twelve : the  latter  receiving  as  dowry  from  their 


1 The  Karaites  interpret  these  passages  in  the  same  manner. 

2 Cf.  Repertorium,  xiii.  261. 


Digitized  by  Google 


77 


bridegrooms  sums  varying  from  £40  to  £60. 
When  a man  has  a childless  wife,  he  may  take 
a second but  if  she  also  be  barren,  not  a third  : 
divorces,  though  permitted,  are  uncommon.  The 
dead  are  prepared  for  burial  by  their  own  friends 2: 
the  whole  body  is  washed,  but  especially  the  hands 
(thrice),  mouth,  nose,  face,  ears  both  inside  and 
out,  (all  this  in  Mohammedan  fashion),  and  lastly 
the  feet : the  burial  takes  place,  if  possible,  before 
sunset  the  same  day,  accompanied  with  the  reci- 
tation of  hymns  and  of  the  whole  Law.  These 
readings  are  continued  every  day  to  the  next 
Sabbath,  the  women  of  the  family  watching  near 
the  grave  : on  the  Sabbath  it  is  visited  by  the 
whole  congregation  (except  the  near  relations),  who 
eat  there  together,  reciting  part  of  the  Law  and 
singing  hymns,  finishing  the  recitation  later  in 
the  day  with  the  relations3. 

III.  It  will  be  time  to  pass  on  to  a review  of  the 


’ This  was  not  always  so.  In  their  letter  to  Scaligcr  ( Reper - 
iorium,  xiii.  261)  they  say,  ‘we  take  but  one  wife,  the  Jews 
many.’  In  their  letter  to  De  Sacy  ( Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  108)  they 
say  the  same  aa  in  the  text. 

’ Not  by  Mohammedans,  as  reported  by  M.  Pillavoine.  See 
De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  34. 

’ Some  observances  the  Samaritans  appear  to  have  relin- 
quished : thus  in  the  letters  to  Scaliger  (Repertorivm,  xiii.  260) 
and  Huntington  (Not.  el  Extr.  xii.  178)  they  say  they  use  the 
‘water  of  separation'  (Num.  xix.  21),  but  in  1820  (ibid.  127) 
they  did  so  no  more. 


Digitized  by  Google 


78 


literature  of  the  Samaritans  when  a few  remarks 
have  been  made  upon  the  peculiar  dialect  in  which 
a great  part  of  it  is  composed.  It  is  probable  that 
even  before  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes  the 
closer  intercourse  which  had  sprung  up  between 
them  and  neighbouring  Aramaean  nations  had 
already  had  some  influence  upon  the  Hebrew  of 
northern  and  central  Palestine  *.  Doubtless  also 
the  changes  which  were  brought  about  by  the 
Assyrian  invasion  in  the  removal  of  the  educated 
classes  into  exile  and  the  settlement  of  a mixed 
Aramaean  population  in  their  places  must  have 
served  still  further  to  corrupt  the  ancient  Hebrew 
and  give  rise  to  a dialect  of  the  Aramaean  which 
under  some  form  or  other  was  spoken  from  Baby- 
lonia to  the  Mediterranean1 *  3.  Other  elements  also 
besides  Aramaean  are  observable  in  the  language. 
The  non-Semitic  settlers  left  their  mark  behind  in 
foreign  words  which  can  be  traced  to  no  known 


1 The  existence  of  a vulgar  idiom  in  the  north  of  Palestine 
verging  towards  Aramaic  is  possibly  discernible  even  so  early  as 
the  song  of  Deborah.  Renan,  Languts  Semitigues  ( 1864),  p.  143  ; 

Ewald,  Grammatik  (1838),  sect.  5. 

1 The  eastern  branch  of  Aramaean  is  still  spoken  by  a con- 
siderable Christian  population  on  the  Upper  Tigris,  in  Koor- 
di8tan,  and  on  the  lake  of  Urmia.  The  western  is  entirely  lost, 
except  in  Ma’lflla  and  two  neighbouring  villages  in  Antilibanus, 
and  this  is  not  likely  to  survive  long,  as  the  people  speak  Arabic 
as  well.  Noldeke  in  Zeilschr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xxi.  183. 


Digitized  by  Google 


79 


source Greek,  Latin,  Persian,  Arabic,  and  possibly 
other  languages  as  well,  have  each  contributed 
something  to  enrich  the  vocabulary.  The  grammar 
bears  all  the  signs  of  irregularity  which  would 
characterise  that  of  an  illiterate  people,  the  or- 
thography is  uncertain,  there  is  a profusion  of 
quiescents,  and  a complete  confusion  between  the 
several  gutturals  and  cognate  letters  respectively; 
the  vowels  are  uncertain,  the  A sound  being  most 
prominent.  Such  is  the  dialect  which  was  spoken 
in  Samaria  till  the  Arabian  conquest  of  the  country 
in  the  seventh  century  A.  D.,  when  the  language  of 
the  victors  was  introduced,  and  by  its  superior 
vigour  gradually  overpowered  its  rival  till,  probably 
by  about  the  eighth  or  ninth  century,  it  had  entirely 
taken  its  place.  The  old  language  however  still 
continued  to  be  understood  and  written  by  the 
priests,  so  that  like  the  Jews  they  had  two  sacred 
languages,  which  however  they  had.  not  the  skill 
completely  to  distinguish  from  each  other:  the 
‘ Hebrew'  consequently  which  appears  in  the  cor- 
respondence of  Samaritans  with  Europeans  is 
largely  impregnated  with  Aramaisms ; Arabisms 
also  are  not  by  any  means  unfrequent. 

In  the  literature  of  the  Samaritans  there  is  little 


1 Kohn,  Sam.  Studien,  p.  95.  Noldeke  however  (in  Geiger’s 
Zeitschr.  vi.  204  sq.)  is  not  disposed  to  allow  this.  Kohn  recog- 
nises Aethiopic,  Coptic,  and  Armenian  roots  as  well. 


Digitized  by  Google 


80 


to  be  found  of  much  interest  or  value.  For  they 
were  a people  of  neither  genius  nor  originality ; as 
in  their  creed,  so  in  their  literature,  all  they  could 
for  the  most  part  do  was  to  borrow  from  their 
neighbours,  endeavouring  by  alteration  and  loud 
assertion  to  hide  the  fraud  which,  from  the 
clumsiness  with  which  it  was  carried  out,  became 
apparent  on  the  first  searching  investigation  it 
underwent 

But  before  passing  on  to  such  parts  of  Samaritan 
literature  as  have  come  down  to  our  times  it  will 
be  as  well  to  notice  the  remains,  in  many  cases 
amounting  only  to  a name,  of  certain  Samaritan 
Hellenists  who  appear  to  have  lived  during  the 
last  two  or  three  centuries  B.C.  Thus  Eusebius 
has  preserved  for  us  considerable  extracts  made 
by  Alexander  Polyhistor,  an  author  living  at  Rome 
at  the  time  of  Sulla,  from  the  writings  of  a certain 
Eupolemus1  2.  Many  of  these  have  perhaps  been 

1 In  the  Cliron.  Sam.  chap,  xlvii,  the  Samaritans  are  stated  to 
have  lost  the  following  books  in  the  persecution  under  Hadrian  ; 
the  ‘ book  of  selections,’  consisting  perhaps  of  proverbs  and  wise 
sayings  ; songs  and  pray  ers  for  the  various  offerings ; other 
hymns ; the  ‘ book  of  the  high-priests,’  which  traced  their  line 
up  to  Phinehas,  and  lastly  their  Annals ; nothing  being  left  but 
the  Law  aud  a similar  book  of  Annals.  In  Abulfath  (Ann. 
pp.  120,  1 2 1 ) this  loss  is  ascribed  to  the  time  of  Commodus. 

* Praep.  Evang.  ix.  Polyhistor  himself  appears  to  have  been 
a Samaritan.  (Juynboll,  Comment,  p.  49.)  The  varied  cha- 
racter of  the  fragments  attributed  to  Eupolemus  in  chaps.  17, 


Digitized  by  Google 


81 


wrongly  attributed  to  his  authorship,  but  there 
is  one  of  which  the  Samaritan  origin  cannot  be 
mistaken.  It  is  there  related  how  the  Giants 
after  building  the  tower  of  Babel  were  dispersed 
over  the  earth,  how  Abraham  was  the  inventor 
of  astrology  and  Chaldaean  (arts),  and  after  his 
removal  to  Phoenicia  taught  astronomy  to  the 
inhabitants  of  that  country.  After  rescuing  Lot 
from  the  Armenians  he  is  entertained  at  Argarizim, 
that  is,  as  it  is  explained,  the  ‘ Mountain  of  the 
Most  High,’  where  he  receives  gifts  from  the  priest 
Melchizedek  who  reigned  there.  Passing  on  later 
into  Egypt,  he  becomes  intimate  with  the  priests, 
and  instructs  them  in  astrology  and  other  sciences. 

In  the  same  book  of  Eusebius  are  preserved  some 
fifty  hexameter  lines  by  Theodotus,  an  Alexandrian 
poet,  taken  apparently  from  a versified  history  of 

26,  30-34,  39,  has  induced  different  writers  to  take  the  most 
opposite  view  of  his  opinions,  and  hold  him  for  a Jew,  a Sama- 
ritan, and  a heathen.  The  whole  question  has  been  fully  dis- 
cussed by  Freudenthal  in  the  J ahresbericht  d.  Seminars  zu  Bres- 
lau (1874),  pp.  82  sq.  He  believes  chaps.  17  and  18  to  be  the 
work  of  some  unknown  Samaritan,  and  to  have  been  wrongly 
ascribed  by  Polyhistor  to  Eupolemus.  The  title  n<p\  TouiatW 
also  he  thinks  to  be  a mistake.  The  writer,  whoever  he  was, 
appears  to  have  known  and  used  the  LXX  version.  The  remain- 
ing chapters  are  probably  the  work  of  a Jew.  Eupolemus  is 
also  mentioned  in  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  21,  as  giving  3149 
years  from  Adam  to  the  fifth  year  of  Demetrius  Ptolemaeus, 
and  2580  from  the  Exodus  to  the  same  time. 

g 


Digitized  by  Google 


82 


Sichem,  in  which  the  beauties  of  its  situation  are 
described  and  its  sacred  character  extolled  ; the 
history  of  Jacob  also  is  related  in  connexion  with 
it  from  his  flight  out  of  Mesopotamia  to  the 
destruction  of  the  town  by  Simeon  and  Levi  *. 
The  Cleodemfls-Malchas  also  mentioned  by  the 
same  historian2  would  appear  to  be  of  the  same 
nationality,  and  a Samaritan  hand  has  been 
detected  in  a passage  occurring  in  the  eleventh 
Sibylline  book  where  famine  and  pestilence  are 
denounced  against  the  Egyptian  Jews  during  the 
reign  of  eight  of  the  Ptolemies3 4.  Thallus  also, 
possibly  the  freedman  of  Tiberius  mentioned  by 
Josephus1,  the  author  of  a work  on  Syria5,  who 
notices  Moses’  leadership  of  the  Israelites6,  ex- 
plains the  darkness  at  the  Crucifixion  as  arising 
from  an  eclipse  of  the  sun 7,  and,  like  the  pseudo- 
Eupolemus  above  mentioned,  relates  how  Belus 
and  the  Titans  rose  in  insurrection  against  Zeus 
and  the  confederate  gods8;  he  also  is  supposed  to 


1 Cap.  22.  Cf.  Ewald,  Gesch.  (1864),  iv.  338  ; Herzfeld,  iii. 
520 ; and  Freudenthal,  p.  99.  No  one  but  a Samaritan  would 
have  called  Sichem  hpi)  ItKipav : the  work  was  probably  not  ntpi 
’lovSutuK,  but  as  described  in  the  text. 

1 Op.  cit.  ix.  20;  Freudenthal,  p.  100. 

s Sibyll.  xi.  239-242  ; Ewald,  ibid.  p.  340. 

4 Ant.  xviii.  6.  4,  5 Eusebius,  ibid.  x.  10. 

4 JuBt.  Mart.  Coh.  9.  7 Syncellus,  Chronoyraphia,  p.  322. 

4 Theophilus,  ad  Autol.  iii.  29. 


Digitized  by  Google 


83 


have  been  a Samaritan  by  origin : and  another 
countryman  of  his  is  thought  to  be  designated 
by  the  2,e/ji)]p<Lviof  6 Baf3v\u>vios  6 llepcrris  of  the 
Chronicon  Paschale'.  It  is  remarkable  that  out 
of  the  nine  writings  of  Hellenists  of  Israelitic 
origin  quoted  by  Alexander  Polyhistor  and  pre- 
served to  us  by  Eusebius,  some  five  or  six  appear 
to  have  had  a decided  bias  either  for  or  against 
the  Samaritans  ; it  would  seem  therefore  extremely 
probable  that  a considerable  controversial  literature 
between  Jews  and  Samaritans  had  sprung  up  by 
the  first  century  b.c.,  of  which  only  some  few 
fragments  now  remain. 

Of  the  Samaritan  literature  which  has  come 
down  to  our  times,  first  in  importance  and  order 
will  be  the  Pentateuch. 

It  had  been  well  known  to  early  Jewish  and 
Christian  writers  that  a recension  of  the  Penta- 
teuch differing  in  important  respects  from  that  in 
use  among  the  Jews  was  in  possession  of  the 
Samaritan  community.  It  was  regarded  however 
by  these  writers  in  very  different  lights : the 
former  treat  it  with  contempt  as  a forgery.  ‘ You 

1 p.  68.  The  philosopher  Marinos,  a convert  from  Samari- 
tanism  to  heathenism,  the  biographer  and  successor  of  the  Neo- 
Platonist  Proclus  in  the  school  of  Athens  in  485,  speaks  of 
Abraham’s  having  ‘sacrificed  on  Argarizim,  where  is  the  most 
holy  temple  of  the  supreme  Zeus,’  thus  betraying  his  Samaritan 
origin.  Photius,  Bibl.  p.  345  b. 

S 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


84 


have  falsified  your  Law,'  says  E.  Elieser  ben  Simon1 
to  the  Samaritan  scribes  about  160  A.D.,  ‘and 
have  done  yourselves  no  good  by  it,’  referring  to 
their  insertion  of  the  words  ‘ opposite  Shechem’ 
in  Deut.  xi.  30  to  obviate  the  Jewish  objection 
that  it  was  not  the  Samaritan  Garizim  here  referred 
to.  ‘ Who  has  led  you  into  error,’  says  another 
writer  of  the  same  period2,  jeering  at  their 
ignorance  of  grammar  displayed  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  ordinance  in  Deut.  xxv.  5 as  to 
marrying  a brother’s  widow.  Early  Christian 
writers  on  the  other  hand  speak  of  it  with  respect, 
in  some  cases  even  preferring  its  authority  to  that 
of  the  Masoretic  text.  Origen  quotes  it  under  the 
name  of  to  Tan/  ^a/iapeiTwv  'l'lfipaiKOV,  giving  its 
various  readings  on  the  margin  of  his  Hexapla3. 

1 Jer.  Sola,  vii.  3 : the  Siphre  and  Bab.  Sola,  33  b,  ascribe  the 
saying  to  R.  Elieser  ben  Jose.  There  is  much  valuable  informa- 
tion on  the  subject  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  to  be  found  in 
Frankel’B  Vorstudien  zur  Sej/tuaginta,  pp.  260  sq.,  but  especially 
in  his  Einflust  d.  pahistin.  Exegese  auf  d.  alexandrin.  Ilerme- 
neutik,  pp.  237  sqq.  English  renders  may  also  consult  the 
article  in  Smith’s  Bible  Did.  iii.  1106. 

2 R.  Simon  ben  Elieser,  Jer.  Jeb.  i.  6.  He  may  however  be 
the  some  as  R.  Elieser  ben  Simon ; see  Frankel,  Yorstudien, 
197;  E influx*,  243.  Through  ignorance  of  the  use  of  n locale 
they  took  nwifl  to  be  an  epithet  of  nS’K,  and  translated  it  the 
1 outer  wife,’  i.  e.  betrothed,  who  had  not  yet  entered  the  house 
of  her  husband.  See  above,  p.  42. 

2 e.  g.  on  Num.  xiii.  1 : cf.  xxi.  13,  and  Montfaucou,  Ilexapl. 
Prelim,  i.  8,  9. 


Digitized  by  Google 


85 


Eusebius  of  Caesarea  notices  the  agreement  in  the 
chronology  of  the  LXX  and  Samaritan  text  as 
against  the  Hebrew,  and  remarks  that  it  was 
written  in  a character  confessedly  more  ancient 
than  that  of  the  latter1.  Jerome  also  mentions 
this  fact3:  in  his  comment  on  Gal.  iii.  io  he 
upholds  the  genuineness  of  its  text  over  that  of 
the  Masoretic  one,  which  he  considers  to  have  been 
purposely  altered  \ Cyril  of  Alexandria  mentions 
that  the  Samaritan  supplies  words  wanting  in  the 
Hebrew 4 : Procopius  of  Gaza  that  portions  of 
Deuteronomy  have  been  inserted  in  the  parallel 
passages  of  former  books 5 : Georgius  Syncellus, 
the  chronologist  of  the  eighth  century,  is  most 


1 Citron,  i.  xvi.  7-1 1. 

3 Prolog,  to  Kings  : ‘ Samaritani  etiam  Pcntateucliura  Moysis 
totidem  literis  scriptitant,  figuris  tamcn  ot  apicibus  disrrcpantcs.1 

* St.  Paul  has,  ‘ Cursed  lie  he  that  abideth  not  in  all  that  is 
written,’  &c.  This  word  appears  in  the  LXX  and  Samaritan,  but 
not  in  the  Masoretic  text  of  Deut.  xxvii.  26,  whence  it  is  quoted, 
though  it  does  in  parallel  passuges  such  as  xxviii.  15.  In  his 
commentary  on  Geu.  iv.  8,  St.  Jerome  speaks  more  favourably  of 
the  Hebrew:  ‘Suliauditur,  “ea  quaelocutus  est  Doininus.”  Super- 
fluum  ergo  est  quod  in  Samaritanorum  et  nostro  volumine  est, 
“ Transeamus  in  campum.”  ’ 

* tlnp’  ovStv'i  rCiv  \omCtv  Kcirm  to  pijpara  too  Kale  ra  npus  ' A,y<X , 
dXX*  oo3«  nap * ’E^paioir*  dXX*  iv  ttnoKpvtfxp  tfvia lv‘  napa  3*  row  o’  KtiTiu 

aura  sal  to  SapoptiTutov : mentioned  by  Migne  in  a note  on 
the  last  quoted  passage  of  St.  .Jerome  as  attributed  to  St.  Cyril. 

5 In  his  commentary’  on  Deut.  i.  9. 


f by  Google 


86 


outspoken  in  his  praise  of  it,  terming  it  ‘ the 
earliest  and  best  even  by  the  testimony  of  the 
Jews  themselves  V 

But  all  recollection  of  this  recension  afterwards 
entirely  died  out,  so  that  the  plain  statements  of 
Fathers  and  other  early  writers  were  looked  upon 
as  misapprehensions,  till  in  1 6 1 6 Pietro  della  Valle 
succeeded  in  procuring  a complete  copy  of  it  at 
Damascus,  which,  after  much  delay,  was  published 
in  the  Paris  Polyglott  of  1 6451  2.  The  editor  of 
the  part  which  contained  this  text,  Joannes 
Morinus,  priest  of  the  Oratory,  seized  the  oppor- 
tunity of  the  discovery  of  the  long-lost  treasure 
for  pressing  his  own  peculiar  views  as  to  the 
value  of  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Ludovicus  Cappellus,  the  learned  professor  of 
Saumur,  had  indeed  as  early  as  1624  attacked 
the  views  of  the  elder  Buxtorf  and  endeavoured 
to  establish  the  comparatively  modem  origin  of 
the  Hebrew  points  and  accents3 * 5:  and  in  his 


1 Chronographia , p.  83.  Xte^pt  rainy  rov  KaraxXvapnv  Knfluis 
irpoKdrat  diatfxarovtrt  r a 'K Apiwca  dvriypa(j>a  irpiis  to  2apnptnvv 
apxaitWarov  Kat  xnp(ucn]p<n  biaXXarrov  6 Kelt  aXrj&ts  tixnl  kqi  irpwros 

' Krtpnini  KaOopoXoyov'rtv. 

* For  the  history  of  this  edition  see  G.  W.  Meyer,  Gesch.  d. 

Schrifterkldmng  (1804),  iii.  153  sq. 

5 In  his  A rcanum  Punctationis  Iievelatum ; followed  by  his 
Arcnni  Punctatiouis  Vindiciae  in  1689,  in  reply  to  the  rejoinder 
of  Buxtorf  the  younger.  In  his  Diatriba  de  Verts  et  Aniiquis 


Digitized  by  Google 


87 


‘ Critica  Sacra,’  -which  after  great  delay,  caused 
by  the  opposition  of  the  Protestants,  finally  ap- 
peared in  1650,  he  put  forth  the  view  that  the 
Hebrew  text  of  the  Old  Testament  has  been  in 
numberless  places  corrupted  by  the  errors  of  copy- 
ists, and  that  the  true  reading  in  such  cases  is  to 
be  found  only  by  comparison  of  MSS.  and  ancient 
translations,  and  finally  by  conjecture  *. 

But  Morinus  went  to  much  further  lengths. 
He  maintained  that  the  Hebrew  original  had  been 
so  hopelessly  depraved  by  continued  blunders  and 
falsi  fictitious  as  to  be  utterly  untrustworthy,  and 
with  all  a convert’s  zeal  he  urged  that  recourse 
must  under  these  circumstances  be  had-  to  the 
two  translations  authorised  by  the  Church,  the 
Vulgate,  and  LXX  version2,  and  in  accordance 
with  these  views  he  naturally  took  up  the  cause 
of  the . Samaritan  text,  placing  it  far  above  the 
Hebrew  for  correctness  and  importance 3. 

The  assertion  of  theories  so  different  to  those 


I/ebraeotrum  Literis,  1645,  he  proved  that  the  Samaritan  letters 
were  older  than  the  square  characters. 

1 Meyer,  ibid.,  p.  287. 

* In  his  Ejcerritaliones  Biblicae,  Part  i,  1633.  Part  ii  was 
published  after  his  death  in  1669. 

* He  lmd  first  noticed  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  in  the 
preface  to  his  edition  of  the  LXX  in  1628,  and  spoke  of  it  with 
high  praise  in  his  Exe.rcitatione*  EccUtiasticae  in  iitmmque 
Samaritanorum  Pentateuchum,  1631. 


DTgffizsd  by  Google 


88 


generally  accepted  called  forth  doughty  champions 
on  the  other  side,  the  most  conspicuous  among 
whom  were  Simon  de  Muis,  archdeacon  of  Soissons  *, 
and  Hottinger,  the  learned  professor  of  Oriental 
languages  at  Zurich2;  and  the  contest  was  kept  up 
with  great  vigour  on  either  side  for  a considerable 
time.  But  there  was  too  much  party  spirit  infused 
into  the  strife  to  allow  the  combatants  calmly  to 
weigh  the  merits  of  the  questions  under  debate. 
A more  moderate  position  was  taken  up  by  Walton, 
the  editor  of  the  London  Polyglott  of  16573,  and 
Richard  Simon  the  Oratorian  *.  They  neither, 
with  the  Buxtorfs,  upheld  the  absolute  authority 
of  the  Masora  on  the  one  hand,  nor  committed 
themselves  to  the  extravagances  of  Morinus  and  his 
friends  on  the  other  as  to  the  excellencies  of  the 
LXX  and  Samaritan  text,  but  held  that  the  latter, 
though  on  the  whole  of  inferior  value,  had  never- 
theless preserved  readings  which  are  to  be  pre- 
ferred to  those  of  the  Hebrew  text. 

Thus  matters  rested  for  a century,  when  Houbi- 


' He  published  the  Assertio  Veritatis  JJebraicae  ad  rerun# 
J.  Morini  Exercitaliones  in  1631,  and  in  1634  Assertio  Altera 
in  reply  to  Morinus’  Exercitaliones  Biblicae ; later  again,  in 
1639,  a Castigatio  Animadversionum  Morini. 

2 Exercitationes  Anlimorinianae  de  Pent.  Sam.  1644. 

5 In  the  Prolegomena  to  vol.  i. 

4 In  his  Histoire  Critique  da  Vieux  Testament , published  iu 
1678,  hut  immediately  suppressed  by  the  influence  of  Bossuet. 


’"DigitizecTby’Google 


89 


gant,  also  a priest  of  the  Oratory,  once  more 
resumed  the  old  weapons  of  his  predecessor 
Morinus,  contending  for  the  authority  of  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  in  preference  to  that  of 
the  received  text 1 : he  however  found  more  than 
his  match  in  Ravins,  Oriental  Professor  at  Utrecht2, 
and  the  same  fate  befell  the  Benedictine  father 
Poncet  at  the  hands  of  J.  D.  Michaelis3 4  when  he 
commenced  the  discussion  once  more 1 : since  his 
time  no  one  has  again  ventured  to  put  forth  the 
same  extreme  views  on  the  subject ; though  a few 
years  later  the  depreciatory  estimate  of  the  Sama- 
ritan recension  put  forth  by  Tychsen,  the  famous 
Orientalist  of  Rostock5 6,  was  warmly  disputed  by 
Hassencamp  of  Rinteln,  the  former  holding  it  for 
a mere  copy  of  the  Masoretic  text,  the  latter  on 
the  contrary  maintaining  its  importance  and  con- 
tending for  the  view  that  from  it  the  Alexandrine 
version  had  been  made  °. 


1 In  his  fiiblia  Hebraica  of  1753. 

2 Sjiecimtn  Observationum  ad  C.  F.  II ubigantii  Prolegomena, 
1761  ; afterwards  reprinted. 

* Cf.  Orient,  und  exeg.  lUbliothek,  xxi.  177-189;  Meyer, 
op.  cit.  v.  363. 

4 In  his  Nouveaux  eclai rcissements  eur  I’origine  el  le  Penta- 

teuque.  lies  Samaritains,  1760. 

6 Ditpulalia  hietorico-philologica-crilica , Biitzow,  1765. 

* Der  enldeckle  wahre  Ursprung  d.  alien  Bibeliihersetzungen, 
Minden,  1775.  The  dispute  was  continued  into  the  present  cen- 
tury in  defence  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  by  Alex,  h S.  Aqui- 


Digitized  by  Google 


00 


In  the  course  of  this  protracted  discussion,  ex- 
tending over  a space  of  two  centuries,  the  merits 
and  demerits  of  the  Samaritan  text  had  been 
keenly  disputed  by  the  various  combatants  and 
many  personalities  exchanged  between  them,  but 
till  the  time  of  Gesenius  no  one  seems  to  have 
attempted  the  only  satisfactory  solution  of  the  ques- 
tion. To  him  the  happy  idea  presented  itself  of 
subjecting  the  recension  to  a rigid  analysis,  and 
arranging  its  variations  under  different  heads. 
Later  writers  who  have  approached  the  subject 
have  in  some  respects  modified  and  amended  his 
conclusions,  but  no  one  has  succeeded  in  upsetting 
the  general  result  at  which  he  arrived,  that  out  of 
the  many  hundreds  of  various  readings  presented 
in  this  text  some  three  or  four  solitary  ones, 
though  of  little  importance,  may  be  genuine,  the 
rest  being  due  in  the  first  instance  to  improvements 
introduced  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  obscurities,  and 
secondly  to  the  Samaritans’  ignorance  of  grammar 
and  exegesis,  and  to  alterations  made  by  them  in 
the  interest  of  their  national  religion  \ 


lino,  Lobstein,  Geddes,  Ilgen,  and  Bertholdt ; the  opposite  side 
being  maintained  by  Yater,  Eichhorn,  Bauer,  and  Jahn. 

1 In  his  De  Petit.  Sam.  Origine,  &c.  (1815),  pp.  26  sqq.,  he 
enumerates  eight  heads  of  variations: — 

(1)  Grammatical  emendations,  such  as  the  insertion  of  quies- 
cent?, for  Dt,  nt-  for  n-,  <tc. ; the  substitution  of  commoner 
for  rarer  forms  of  the  pronouns,  as  uruK  for  uro  ; of  the  longer 


’ digitized  by  Google 


91 


But  with  the  question  of  the  comparative  merits 
of  the  two  texts,  is  bound  up  another  which  has 


for  the  apocopated  future,  as  Tjni  for  um  ; of  common  for 
archaic  forms,  as  pc*  for  U3B'  (Deut.  xxxiii.  16),  fvn  for  livn 
(Gen.  i.  24) ; alterations  of  genders,  of  common  nouns  to  mascu- 
line or  feminine,  e.  g.  Enb  to  masc.  (Gen.  xlix.  20),  ;—iX  to  fem. 
(ibid.  xiii.  6),  iyj,  in  the  sense  of  girl,  to  myj ; the  infinitive 
absolute  is  changed  into  a finite  verb,  21tn  "pbn  12E"1  (Gen.  viii. 
3)  into  13tn  labn  'l,  or  into  a participle,  as  JTIJ  yrvn  (ibid. 
xliii.  7)  into  the  meaningless  ')  jnvn ; common  forms  are  sub- 
stituted for  unusual,  as  n:xn  nby  (ibid.  ii.  7)  for  'n  'by,  &c. 

(2)  Glosses  received  into  the  text,  some  being  found  in  the 
LXX  also,  others  in  various  versions  and  Jewish  commentaries, 
most  of  them  therefore  the  result  of  exegctical  tradition  ; as  lit 
D2p3t  for  HEW  t?'K  (ibid.  vii.  2),  when  spoken  of  animals ; bfWt 
Q13N  (ibid.  xiii.  18)  becomes  'ft  ‘jb’t. 

(3)  Conjectural  emendations  of  difficulties ; as  for  nxa  pbn 
ibv  D’3t?  (ibid.  xvii.  17)  I'blN  is  substituted. 

(4)  Words  corrected  or  supplied  from  parallel  passages,  as 
new  t<b  (ibid,  xviii.  29)  becomes  n'TC’N  t<b  according  to  ver.  28. 

(5)  Insertions  of  long  passages  derived  from  the  same  source; 
for  instances  see  above,  p.  41,  note  3. 

(6)  Alterations  to  add  dignity  to  the  patriarchs,  e.  g.  in  the 
antediluvian  chronology  of  Gen.  v,  none  is  allowed  to  beget  his 
first-born  son  after  the  age  of  1 50,  consequently  years  are  cut 
off  before  the  event  and  added  after,  as  is  required.  No  post- 
diluvian patriarch,  on  the  other  hand  (chap,  xi),  may  beget  a 
son  before  he  is  50,  nor  may  in  cither  case  a patriarch  live 
longer  than  his  father.  Or  changes  are  made  for  the  greater 
glory  of  God,  as  (Gen.  ii.  2)  ‘on  the  sixth  day  God  ended  his 
work,’  instead  of  seventh,  lest  He  should  be  thought  to  have 
worked  on  the  Sabbath. 

(7)  Samaritanisms ; the  substitution  of  one  guttural  for 


Digitized  by  Google 


92 


already  been  incidentally  noticed,  that  of  the 
relation  of  the  LXX  to  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch, 


another,  as  DUD  for  D”HN  (Gen.  viii.  4)  ; of  forms  of  the  vcrh 
especially  Samaritan,  as  'npnx  for  npnv  (ibid,  xviii.  16)  ; *ni3tK 
for  'main  (Exod.  XX.  24). 

(8)  Alterations  in  support  of  Samaritan  doctrines ; e.  g.  in 
the  interests  of  monotheism  D'r6x  may  never  (as  in  Gen.  xx. 
13)  be  joined  to  a plural,  only  a singular  verb;  or  to  avoid 
anthropomorphisms  and  anthropopathisms,  thus  mi'  qN 
(Deut.  xxix.  19)  becomes  in' ; D'n^N  N3'Y  (Num.  xxii.  20) 
becomes  qxfe  'l ; ‘ Take  all  the  heads  of  the  people  and  hang 
them  up  before  the  Lord  ’ becomes  ‘ Order  that  the  men  be  sluin 
that  were  joined  unto  Baalpeor,’  lest  God  should  seem  to  have 
ordered  the  punishment  of  the  innocent  with  the  guilty,  or  Moses 
to  have  been  directed  to  act  himself  as  executioner.  Other 
instances  will  be  found  below  when  the  Samaritan  commentaries 
are  discussed.  Four  readings  alone  of  the  Samaritan  Penta- 
teuch Gcsenius  is  inclined  to  prefer  to  the  corresponding  ones 
of  the  Masoretic  text ; the  insertion  of  mcTI  13^3  in  Gen.  iv.  8 
as  the  words  of  Cain  ; inx  for  1HX  ibid.  xxii.  13  (also 
found  in  five  fragments  of  old  Jewish  MSS.  at  St.  Petersburg, 
8 ee  Journ.  Asiat.  1866,  i.  542);  D’U  Iton  (ibid.  xlix.  14)  for 
DU  'n,  in  the  same  sense;  YO’jrt  nt<  pTY  (ibid.  xiv.  14),  he 
‘ counted,’  for  pl'1,  he  ‘led  forth  ;’  all  of  them  of  very  slight  im- 
portance, which  moreover  have  lieen  rejected  by  later  commeu- 
tators;  cf.  Fraukel,  Einjluss , 242. 

Many  of  the  classes  into  which  Gesenius  has  divided  the  vari- 
ations are  evidently  cross-divisions : the  number  has  conse- 
quently been  reduced  by  Kohn  (De  Pent.  Sam.  p.  9)  to  three : 
(1)  Samaritan  forms  of  words,  (2)  corrections  and  emendations, 

(3)  glosses  and  corruptions  for  religious  purposes,  and  perhaps 

(4)  blunders  in  orthography.  Kirchhcim  in  his  Karme  S/uimeron 
gives  them  somewhat  differently,  making  thirteen  divisions. 


93 


for  from  the  time  of  the  first  discovery  of  the 
latter,  its  striking  resemblance  in  numerous 
passages  to  the  Alexandrine  version  had  been 
noticed  by  all  \ 

The  earliest  explanation  given  of  this  fact  was 
that  the  LXX  had  been  translated  from  the 
Samaritan  : this  was  the  view  of  De  Dieu,  Selden, 
and  Hottinger,  a theory  favourably  regarded  in 
later  times  by  Hassencamp  and  Eichhom,  and  of 
late  revived  again  by  Kohn.  Grounds  such  as  the 
following  have  been  alleged  for  it. 

The  evidence  of  Origen,  supported  and  amplified 
by  that  of  St.  Jerome,  goes  to  prove  that  the  LXX 
must  have  been  translated  from  a Samaritan 
original,  because  that  in  certain  MSS.  of  the  LXX 
existing  in  their  day  the  word  iTVT  was  retained  in 
the  ancient  Hebrew  (i.e.  Samaritan)  characters2. 


Frankel  (Einfluss,  238  sq.)  notices,  in  addition  to  tho  remarks 
of  Gesenius,  the  insertion  of  passages  from  Onkelos  and  the 
LXX,  the  latter  being  often  mistranslated ; the  employment  of 
late  technical  expressions  from  the  Mischna  ; the  improper  use 
of  the  imperative,  as  13’lpn  for  3*ipn  (Lev.  vi.  7) ; and  the 
approximation  in  orthography  nnd  forms  of  words  to  Pales- 
tinian Aramaic,  but  with  continual  blunderings. 

1 Hassencamp  (op.  cil.  p.  215)  reckons  up  some  1 900  places 
in  which  the  LXX  agrees  with  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch. 
Gesenius  (op.  cit.  p.  10)  calculates  them  at  more  than  1000, 
while  in  as  many  the  Hebrew  and  LXX  agree  against  the 
Samaritan. 

2 See  below,  pp.  100-102. 


Digitized  by  Google 


94 


not  in  those  used  at  their  time,  Ezra,  according  to 
tradition,  having  introduced  other  letters  after  the 
captivity  K It  is  clear,  however,  from  the  state- 
ment made  by  St.  Jerome  on  this  point  that  the 
remark  of  Origen  can  apply  only  to  the  Aramaic 
or  square  characters,  not  to  those  in  use  among  the 
Samaritans,  and  consequently  the  argument  based 
upon  his  words  must  fall  to  the  ground. 

Another  reason  which  has  been  alleged  in  sup- 
port of  the  LXX  having  been  derived  from  a 
Samaritan  original  is  that  only  on  this  supposition 
can  its  variations  from  the  Hebrew  text  be  ex- 
plained ; they  must,  it  is  said,  have  arisen  from 
a confusion  between  letters  which  resemble  each 
other  in  the  Samaritan,  and  not  in  the  square 
alphabet.  On  a closer  examination,  however,  it 
will  be  found  that  although  many  various  readings 
are  evidently  due  to  such  mistakes  between  similar 
letters,  yet  that  these  may  have  occurred  quite  as 
well  in  the  square  alphabet,  the  error  being  equally 
possible  in  either  case. 

Or  again,  the  following  argument  has  been  used  : 
— the  Samaritans  had  already  brought  out  for 
their  own  use  a Greek  translation,  that  known 
under  the  name  of  to  ’Za/j.apetTiKov  ; the  translators 
of  the  LXX  finding  this  convenient  for  their 


’ Origen,  llexapla,  ed.  Montfalcon,  i.  86 ; St.  Jerome,  Epi- 
ilita  136  (ed.  Mignc,  25),  ad  Marcellam. 


Digitized  by  Google 


95 


purpose  with  their  imperfect  knowledge  of  Hebrew, 
took  it  for  the  basis  of  their  own  translation, 
altering  it  in  parts  after  the  Hebrew  original  to 
suit  their  own  ideas 

There  is  however  a great  objection  to  this  theory, 
that  no  one  knows  of  the  existence  of  any  such 
Samaritan  Greek  Version  at  so  early  a period  of 
their  history : there  is  no  trace  of  the  translation 
so  called  (even  if  it  was  a complete  one,  and  not 
emendations  of  particular  passages)  before  the 
third  or  fourth  century  a.d.  2 And  moreover, 
if  the  foregoing  sketch  of  the  Samaritan  history 
be  trustworthy,  it  is  most  unlikely  that  a people, 
who  had  on  all  other  occasions  shown  themselves 
powerless  to  invent,  only  capable  of  feeble  imitation, 
should  in  this  one  instance  have  distanced  their 
rivals  in  the  production  of  so  great  a literary  work 


1 Kohn,  De  Pent.  Sam.  p.  36. 

1 Kohn  supposes  that  the  additions  of  the  LXX  in  Gen.  xxxv. 
4,  mil  anmXurtv  aura  ius  TT}i  tr^fupov  tjfupat,  were  originally  inserted 
in  the  Samaritan  Greek  text  to  stop  Jewish  cavils  at  their 
idolutry,  and  thence  coined  inadvertently  into  the  LXX  : that 
they  do  not  appear  in  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  because  its  text 
was  then  dosed  and  the  difficulty  had  till  now  been  overlooked ; 
but  this  gives  much  too  early  a date  to  the  Samaritan  Greek 
version : it  is  quite  impossible  that  the  LXX  should  have  had 
time  to  copy  from  it  by  the  third  century  b.  c.  The  most 
singular  theory  was  that  of  Isaac  Voss,  who  held  that  the 
Masoretic  text  was  translated  from  the  LXX  : he  was  refuted 
by  Liody. 


Digitized  by  Google 


96 


as  a Greek  translation  of  the  Pentateuch  : it  was 
only  the  versatile  Jewish  spirit,  in  such  a place 
as  Alexandria,  where  the  union  of  Eastern  and 
Western  civilisation  gave  rise  to  a busy  literary 
activity,  that  could  have  produced  such  a work. 
It  is  most  unlikely  moreover  that  the  Jews,  with 
their  intense  hatred  of  the  Samaritans,  would  have 
received  the  LXX  translation,  manifestly  grounded 
upon  the  Samaritan  recension,  largely  departing 
from  the  Hebrew.  Even  if  the  Alexandrian  Jew's 
could  have  been  induced  to  admit  it,  would  their 
Palestinian  brethren  have  received  w'ith  respect  a 
text  differing  widely  from  that  to  which  they  had 
been  accustomed,  one  moreover  not  varying  of  set 
purpose  to  overcome  difficulties,  but  ignorantly 
borrowed  from  Samaritan  interpretations  1 ? 

This  explanation,  accordingly,  of  the  similarity 
of  the  two  texts  must  be  given  up.  The  next  one 
for  consideration  is  the  theory  of  Grotius,  Usher, 
and  others,  that  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  was 
corrected  from  the  LXX.  This  is  true  to  a certain 


1 Cf.  Geiger  in  Zeitschr.  d.  D.  if.  G.  xix.  6n  sq.  The 
Samaritans  would  have  no  such  scruple  in  borrowing  and  then 
claiming  the  text  for  their  own.  Abusaid  continually  copies 
from  Saadiah  in  his  Arabic  translation  of  the  Pentateuch,  all  the 
while  heaping  maledictions  on  him.  The  Bab.  Tulmud  (Mtgillah, 
f.  9)  speaks  of  the  LXX  with  respect ; later  the  Palestinian 
Jews  became  suspicious  of  it  and  unwilling  to  admit  it  into 
their  synagogues.  FraDkel,  Vorstudien,  p.  61. 


Digitized  by  Google 


97 


extent ; many  passages  occur  in  the  former  which 
bear  all  the  marks  of  being  interpolations  from  the 
Alexandrine  version But  still  the  explanation 
is  inadequate  to  solve  the  problem  proposed ; it 
gives  no  reason  for  the  correspondence  which  exists 
between  the  two  texts  in  very  many  minute 
instances  which  cannot  be  due  to  alterations  made 
in  deference  to  religious  feeling 2.  How  moreover, 
on  this  supposition,  are  the  equally  numerous 
passages  to  be  accounted  for  in  which  the  Sama- 
ritan Pentateuch  differs  from  the  LXX,  sometimes 
in  these  cases  agreeing  with  the  Hebrew,  at  others 
departing  from  it3? 

1 E.g.  Gen.  xxiii.  2,  poy  bx  vmxn  nnpa  = <V  n,i\n  ’Ap3i*,  17 
((TTtv  iv  to)  Kotiaipan:  ibid.  XXvii.  27,  n'“0  u>r  007117 

aypov  it \r)povt  : ibid,  xliii.  28,  O'rbvb  Kinn  ty'xn  "pi3 : Exod.  v. 
13,  jnj  pnn  nvm  nrto : xxxii.  32,  ns?  orixon  sen  dx 
the  Hebrew  of  these  examples  bears  strong  trace  of  a Samaritan 
origin  ; see  other  examples  of  interpolations  in  Frankel,  FAnflusn, 
161,  162,  238.  On  the  other  hand,  portions  of  the  Samaritan 
Greek  version  (see  below,  p.  115)  have  apparently  found  their 
way  into  the  LXX  ; see  Frankel,  op.  cit.  108,  on  the  insertions  in 
Exod.  xxii.  4 (5),  and  xxiii.  19.  This  fact  raises  a doubt 
whether  the  insertions  from  the  LXX  formed  part  of  the  original 
text  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  or  were  later  additions. 

8 E.g.  the  conjunction  1 is  added  about  200  times  in  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  omitted  about  half  as  often ; in  this 
closely  agreeing  with  the  LXX. 

5 Asaria  de  Rossi  (in  his  Meor  ’Enaim,  iii.  8,  9)  put  forth 
two  theories  : — (1)  ‘That  the  Alexandrian  Greeks  corrupted  the 
LXX  out  of  hostility  to  the  Jews.’  This  however  must  have 

h 


Digitized  by  Google 


98 


One  theory  alone  remains,  that  suggested  by 
Gesenius,  which  seems  to  answer  fully  all  the 
requirements  of  the  case.  He  supposes  that  both 
the  LXX  and  Samaritan  Pentateuch  were  derived 
from  Jewish  MSS.  which  bore  a great  resemblance 
to  each  other  but  contained  a text  varying  from  that 
preserved  in  our  Hebrew  Pentateuch.  The  origin 
of  this  difference,  he  thinks,  is  to  be  sought  for  in 
the  misdirected  zeal  of  revisers  and  their  endeavours 
to  make  the  text  run  smoothly  and  harmoniously, 
and  it  was  in  this  manner  he  considers  that  many 
glosses  and  conjectural  emendations  found  their 
way  into  the  text.  Add  to  this  the  blunders  of 
successive  generations,  made  especially  in  the 
mistaking  of  similar  letters,  and  a satisfactory 
explanation  can  be  given  of  the  divergence  of  the 
LXX  and  Samaritan  Pentateuch  from  the  older 
and  more  difficult  readings  which  were  religiously 


been  doue  before  the  time  of  Philo,  and  go  the  authors  of  the 
corruption  must  have  been  heathen  : but  why  should  they  have 
troubled  themselves  about  the  matter,  or  who  would  have 
trusted  their  work  1 The  variations  of  the  LXX  also  imply 
ignorance  more  than  deliberate  falsification.  (2)  ‘ That  the 
LXX  was  rendered  from  an  Aramaean  translation  dating  from 
the  time  of  Ezra,  the  inaccuracies,  paraphrases,  and  corruptions 
of  which  caused  the  variations,  in  the  Alexandrine  text.’  No 
trace  however  of  such  a version  exists,  and  the  variations  of  the 
LXX  seem  to  originate  partly  from  a misunderstanding  of  the 
Hebrew  and  partly  from  following  a different  text.  Frankel, 
For*/.  33  sq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


99 


preserved  in  the  MSS.  of  Jerusalem.  That  the 
copy  which  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Samaritans 
and  that  which  found  its  way  to  Alexandria  may 
have  originally  differed  from  each  other  is  quite 
possible,  and  both  may  have  received  subsequent 
corrections  at  the  hands  of  their  owners.  The 
Samaritans,  it  is  evident,  set  about  the  work  of 
revising  their  Pentateuch  without  scruple,  and  the 
Alexandrine  Jews  may  not  have  been  entirely 
guiltless  with  regard  to  their  own  copies l.  It  is 
quite  possible  also  that  the  two  texts  were  more 
alike  formerly : that  of  the  LXX  had  become  much 
corrupted  even  in  Origen’s  time,  and  it  is  very  pro- 
bable that  his  exertions  have  partly  contributed  to 
its  still  further  decay  from  the  reception  of  many 
of  his  glosses  and  corrections  into  the  text  itself2. 

To  the  question  of  the  time  at  which  the 
Pentateuch  first  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Samaritans,  about  which  so  many  theories  have 
been  held 3,  no  satisfactory  answer  can  be  given : 
if  however  the  view  maintained 'above  be  correct. 


1 In  the  Prophets  nncl  Hagiographa  the  LXX  varies  from  the 
Hebrew  still  more  than  in  the  Pentateuch.  Ibid.  36. 

1 Gesenius,  op.  ait.  p.  1 4 ; Montfalcon,  Prelim,  in  Uexapl. 
cap.  iv. 

* From  the  ten  tribes  they  succeeded,  or  from  the  priest  sent 
by  the  king  of  Assyria  during  the  lion-plague  (2  Kings  xvii),  or 
from  Manasseh  their  first  high-priest  Smith’s  Bible  Diet.  iii. 
1112  ; Herzfeld,  op.  oil.  iii.  £53;  Gesenius,  op.  cit.  3. 

' h 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


100 


that  Samaritan  doctrines  were  not  of  home  growth 
but  a late  importation  from  Judaea  after  Sadducaean 
views  had  had  time  to  develop  themselves  there, 
then  it  would  seem  to  be  highly  probable  that  the 
Pentateuch  also  found  its  way  at  a late  date  into 
Samaria.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  quite  certain 
that  it  cannot  have  assumed  its  present  form  till  it 
had  been  subjected  to  long  and  continued  revisions 
by  its  new  possessors. 

With  regard  to  the  question  incidentally  alluded 
to  above,  the  discontinuance  by  the  Jews  of  the 
old  Hebrew,  or  as  it  is  now  called  Samaritan, 
character  for  transcribing  their  Law,  the  testimony 
of  the  Talmud,  Samaritans,  and  Fathers  is  unani- 
mous in  ascribing  it  to  the  age  of  Ezra1.  It  is 


1 Bab.  Sanh&lr.  f.  21  and  22.  ‘At  first  the  Law  was  given 
to  Israel  in  the  Hebrew  writing  and  in  the  holy  language : once 
more  again  in  the  time  of  Ezra  in  the  Assyrian  writing  and  the 
Aramaean  language.  Israel  then  chose  the  Assyrian  writing  and 
the  holy  language,  leaving  to  the  ignorant  the  Hebrew  writing 
and  the  Aramaean  language.  Who  are  the  ignorant  ? R.  Hasda 
says  the  Samaritans.  What  is  the  Hebrew  writing  1 R.  Hasda 
says  that  of  the  Libonai ; ’ i.  e.  according  to  Rashi,  that  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Libanus ; the  character  employed  in  writing 
amulets  and  mezuzoth.  (See  Luzzat‘o  in  Kirchheim,  op.  cit.  ill.) 
Again,  ‘ Although  the  Law  was  not  given  through  him  (Ezra), 
yet  the  writing  was  changed  by  him.  Why  is  it  called  Assyrian  1 
Because  it  was  brought  up  with  them  from  Assyria:’  Chaldaea 
and  Babylonia  being  included  under  the  wider  name  of  Assyria. 
Here  and  in  Jer.  Megittah,  i.  11,  the  ‘Hebrew’  character  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


101 


clear  from  Nell.  viii.  8 that  a change  in  the 
language  had  then  taken  place  *.  The  Hebrew 
which  till  the  captivity  had  been  spoken  in  Jeru- 
salem, the  language  in  which  the  Law  was  written, 
had  during  the  exile  been  so  much  modified  by 
admixture  with  cognate  Aramaean  dialects  that 
the  grandchildren  of  those  who  had  been  carried 
captive  by  Nebuchadnezzar  found  it  hard  to  under- 
stand the  ancient  language  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
had  thus  become  dependent  for  an  explanation 
of  them  upon  the  more  learned  portion  of  the 
community.  With  this  new  Aramaic  dialect  a 
corresponding  alphabet  also  probably  had  come 
into  use,  and  it  was  in  this  most  likely,  not  in 
the  square  character  of  three  or  four  centuries 
later,  that  Ezra  according  to  tradition  commenced 

termed  ‘broken.’  Other  derivations  are  given  of  the  name 
‘ Assyrian.’  R.  Jehuda  the  Holy  (B.  Sank,  ibid.)  says  it  was 
so  termed  as  being  the  ‘blessed;’  Abr.  de  Balmis  and  J.  D. 
Michaelis  as  ‘ upright :’  it  is  also  termed  the  ‘ square  ’ character. 
For  Samaritan  testimony  cf.  Eichhom,  Bepertorium,  xiii.  266, 
288.  Origen  (IJexapl.  i.  86,  ed.  Montfalcon)  says,  ‘They  say 
that  Ezra  used  other  (letters)  after  the  captivity.’  So  Jerome, 
in  his  Prolog,  to  the  Kings.  For  the  whole  subject  see  Lenor- 
mant,  Alphabet  Phenicien,  i.  176  sq.,  282  sq. ; Herzfeld,  iii.  76  ; 
and  the  article  on  ‘Writing’  in  Smith’s  Diet.  iii.  1788. 

* ‘ They  read  in  the  book,  in  the  Law  of  God  distinctly  and 
gave  the  sense,  and  caused  (them)  to  understand  the  reading.’ 
Herzfeld  (iii.  58)  does  not  so  interpret  the  passage;  he  thinks 
that  Hebrew  was  still  spoken  by  the  Jews  on  their  return 
from  Babylon,  and  that  Aramaean  did  not  come  in  till  later. 


Digitized  by  Google 


102 


the  practice  of  transcribing  copies  of  the  Law 
The  former  character  still  continued  to  be  used  on 
coins,  just  as  Latin  still  appears  on  our  present 
money,  long  after  the  general  use  of  it  has  died 
out2.  But  the  Samaritans  could  not  afford  to 
give  it  up.  With  a reputation  to  acquire  as  the 
genuine  representatives  of  ancient  Israel  they 
naturally  clung  to  everything  which  would  seem 
in  any  way  to  support  their  claim ; even  to  the 
present  day  they  employ  a form  of  it  for  the 
transcription  of  the  Law3. 

It  may  be  of  interest,  before  passing  on  to  other 


1 It  hag  been  suggested  by  Phil.  Luzzatto  as  an  additional 
reason  for  the  change  of  alphabet,  besides  the  fact  that  the 
Aramaic  may  have  now  been  more  familiar  to  the  Jews,  that  it 
became  desirable  to  be  able  to  distinguish  the  Jewish  copies  of 
the  Law  from  those  altered  by  the  Samaritans.  Jost,  i.  52,  note. 

2 They  were  also  likely  to  be  used  in  neighbouring  countries, 
such  as  Phoenicia,  where  an  almost  identical  alphabet  was  in 
use ; hence  it  would  be  convenient  to  keep  the  old  character. 
Herzfeld,  iii.  89.  The  old  thick  shekels,  with  inscriptions  in  a 
character  resembling  the  Samaritan,  though  with  differences, 
which  have  been  attributed  by  Cavedoni,  Levy,  and  Madden  to 
Simon  Maccabaeus  (b.c.  138),  are  now  assigned  by  Vaux,  De 
Saulcy,  and  Lenormant  to  the  times  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah. 
They  differ  materially  in  execution  from  the  thin  ones  struck  by 
tbe  Maccabees.  This  alphabet  was  employed  on  Jewish  coins  as 
late  as  the  revolts  under  Titus  and  Hadrian. 

* The  Sidonian  clement  also  (see  Josephus,  Ant.  xii.  5.  5)  in 
the  Samaritan  people  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  the 
retention  of  the  character  so  nearly  resembling  the  Phoenician. 


Digitized  by  Google 


103 


subjects,  to  give  some  particulars  as  to  the  extant 
MSS.  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch.  The  first 
which  found  its  way  to  Europe  was  purchased, 
as  before  observed,  at  Damascus  in  1616  by  Pietro 
della  Valle,  and  a few  years  later  was  presented 
by  Achille  Harley  de  Sancy  to  the  library  of  the 
Oratory  at  Paris.  After  appearing  in  the  Paris 
Polyglott  Bible  of  1645,  it  was  twelve  years 
afterwards  reprinted  by  Walton  in  the  London 
Polyglott1.  Since  that  time  many  more  copies 
have  been  brought  into  the  West,  and  most  of 
the  public  libraries  of  Europe  now  possess  some 
specimens  of  this  Pentateuch  either  in  fragments 
or  complete  codices 2.  All  of  these  are  written  on 

1 The  text  of  the  Pentateuch  in  the  Paris  Polyglott  was  very 
indifferently  edited  by  Morinus,  being  prepared  from  this  MS. 
alone,  with  a Latin  translation  appended  which  was  intended  to 
serve  for  both  the  Pentateuch  and  Targum,  though  in  many 
places  they  widely  differ.  Morinus  endeavoured  later  to  supply 
some  of  its  deficiencies  by  the  publication  of  his  1 Variae  Lee- 
tiones,’  which  appeared  among  his  ‘Opuscule*  in  1657,  derived 
from  a collation  of  four  other  MSS.  The  Pentateuch  text  in 
the  London  Polyglott  of  the  same  year  is  almost  an  exact  reprint 
of  the  Paris  one,  only  the  most  glaring  typographical  blunders 
having  been  corrected,  but  a much  more  complete  and  exact  list 
of  variations  was  appended,  the  Latin  version  to  some  extent 
amended,  and  the  deviations  of  the  Targum  from  the  Pentateuch 
noted. 

8 Kennicott’s  list  of  the  MSS.  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch 
existing  in  his  time  in  European  libraries,  with  some  additions, 
is  to  be  found  in  Smith’s  Diet.  iii.  1 1 13. 


Digitized  by  Google 


104 


separate  leaves,  none  are  in  the  shape  of  rolls. 
At  Nablus  however,  as  is  well  known  from  the 
descriptions  of  modem  travellers,  there  is  still 
preserved  in  the  synagogue,  and  only  brought 
out  with  much  solemnity  on  certain  festivals,  an 
ancient  parchment  roll,  purporting  by  its  in- 
scription to  have  been  written  by  the  hand  of 
the  great-grandson  of  Aaron  himself,  thirteen  years 
after  the  original  settlement  of  the  Israelites  in 
Canaan 1 ! It  is  written  on  the  hair-side  of  the 


1 * I,  Abisha,  son  of  Phinehas,  son  of  Eleazar,  son  of  Aaron 
the  priest — upon  them  be  the  favour  of  Jehovah — in  His  honour 
I wrote  this  holy  Law  at  the  entrance  of  the  Talternacle  of 
Testimony  on  Mount  Garizim,  even  Bethel,  in  the  thirteenth  year 
of  the  taking  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan  and  all  its  boun- 
daries about  it  by  the  children  of  Israel.’  (Letter  of  Meschalmah 
ben  Ab  Sechuah  in  Heidenheim,  i.  88 ; cf.  also  Eot.  el  Extr.  xii. 
p.  179.)  This  inscription  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  time  of 
Huntington’s  visit  in  1671  ( Epistt . pp.  49,  56).  It  had  been 
there,  so  the  Samaritans  told  him,  but  had  been  erased  by  some 
evil-minded  person.  It  has  lately  been  found  again,  we  arc  told, 
by  Messrs.  Kraus  and  Levysohn,  who  saw  the  famous  MS.  in 
i860  while  it  was  being  transferred  from  its  old  case  to  a new 
one.  They  obtained  a collation  of  Deut.  xix.  8 sq.  from  the 
priest’s  nephew,  and  restored  the  character,  as  they  best  could, 
from  memory,  not  being  able  to  procure  an  exact  tracing.  Their 
description  of  it  and  facsimile  are  given  by  Dr.  Rosen  in  the 
Zeitschr.  d.  D.  if.  G.  xviii.  p.  582.  It  has  been  thought  that  it 
may  have  been  written  for  Manasseh's  Temple  on  Garizim,  but 
it  is  most  improbable  that  the  MS.  can  be  so  old.  Some  guess 
as  to  its  age  might  perhaps  be  made  if  a photograph  could  be 


Digitized  by  Google 


105 


skins  of  some  twenty  rams  that  served  as  thank- 
offerings,  so  says  the  priest.  They  are  of  unequal 
size,  some  containing  five,  some  six  columns  of 
writing,  worn  quite  thin,  tom  and  in  holes, 
blackened  as  if  ink  has  been  spilt  over  it : perhaps 
some  half  of  the  whole  MS.  may  still  be  legible. 
Other  old  MSS.  are  also  mentioned  as  existing 
there;  one  has  the  date  of  a.h.  35  ( = a.d.  655) 
inscribed  on  it ; another  claims  to  be  the  very 
identical  copy  of  the  Law  which  figured  in  the 
trial  between  Zerubbabel  and  Sanballat  in  the 
presence  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  when  the 
respective  merits  of  the  Jewish  and  Samaritan 
versions  were  in  dispute,  as  is  truthfully  set 
forth  in  the  ‘book  of  Joshua;’  still  bearing  on  its 
worn  page  the  mark  where  Zerubbabel  spat  upon 
it  in  order  to  break  the  charm,  after  it  had  twice 
sprung  unhurt  from  the  fire  into  which  he  had 


procured  of  it  which  could  be  compared  with  other  old  MSS. 
This  the  Committee  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund  are  said 
already  to  have  done  (see  Journal  of  Sacred  Literature,  x. 
p.  240) ; it  is  however  very  doubtful  whether  they  have  obtained 
one  from  the  genuine  MS.  Mr.  Mills,  who  spent  some  weeks  at 
Nablus,  says  he  saw  three  rolls  kept  in  similar  cases.  Dr.  Wilson 
was  shewn  one  in  leaves,  and  told  it  was  the  famous  old  one  ! 
An  endeavour  was  made  to  impose  on  Robinson  (ii.  281)  also. 
The  same  happened  to  ‘ T.  L.  D.’  also,  as  described  by  him  in 
the  Times  of  April  6,  1874.  He  speaks  most  severely  of  the 
greed,  ignorance,  and  laziness  of  the  Samaritans. 


Digitized  by  Google 


106 


thrown  it:  the  third  time  it  came  out  again  un- 
damaged, only  the  spot  was  scorched  *.  It  is  held 
in  great  veneration  by  the  Samaritans  ; the  priest’s 
blessing  in  Num.  vi.  22  has  become  black  from  the 
frequent  kisses  of  the  worshippers. 

Next  after  an  account  of  the  Samaritan  Pen- 
tateuch itself  will  come  that  of  the  various  trans- 
lations it  underwent,  into  Samaritan,  Greek,  and 
Arabic.  Of  the  date  and  origin  of  the  first  of 
these  no  more  satisfactory  explanation  can  be 
given  than  of  the  Pentateuch  itself.  It  no  doubt 
must  have  been  submitted  to  many  revisions  and 
modifications  before  it  reached  the  form  in  which 
we  now  possess  it,  but  in  its  first  beginnings  it 
probably  was  long  anterior  to  the  Christian  era. 
The  Samaritans,  it  must  be  remembered,  were  in 
the  same  condition  as  the  Jews : each  nation  was 


* Rosen,  l.  c.  This  identical  MS.  was  a few  years  ago  offered 
to  the  Bodleian  for  the  modest  sum  of  £500 ; hut  the  bid  was 
not  accepted.  The  same  author  ( D . M.  G.  xiv.  622)  gives  a 
description  of  two  ancient  stone  tablets,  one  containing  the  Ten 
Commandments  in  an  abbreviated  form  (cf.  Heidenheim’s  Viertd- 
jahrettchr.,  iii.  486,  for  the  description  of  a similar  MS.),  built 
into  the  wall  of  a mosque  at  Nablus;  the  other  is  apparently 
of  later  date,  found  not  long  ago  in  a rubbish  heap ; it  contains 
the  ten  commands  of  Gen.  i ; it  probably  belonged  to  some 
former  synagogue.  Dr.  R.  thinks  them  to  be  anterior  to  the 
time  of  Justinian,  Dr.  Blau  (D.  M.  G.  xiii.  275)  to  have  belonged 
to  the  Temple  on  Gariz'.m  destroyed  by  Hyrcanus.  For  a further 
uccuunt  of  the  synagogue  rolls  see  below,  p.  155. 


Digitized  by  Google 


107 


in  the  possession  of  sacred  books  which  were  un- 
intelligible to  the  mass  of  the  people.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  there  very  early  arose  among  the 
Jews,  as  we  know,  the  custom,  instituted  according 
to  Talmudical  tradition  by  Ezra  himself1 *,  of  intro- 
ducing extemporary  translations  of  certain  portions 
of  the  Law  into  the  synagogue  services.  In  pro- 
cess of  time  a body  of  well-known  and  recognised 
renderings  of  Scripture  thus  came  into  being, 
which  were  however  for  many  centuries  preserved 
by  oral  tradition  only,  not  being  committed  to 
writing  for  fear  they  should  gain  an  undue  in- 
fluence and  overshadow  the  authority  of  the  Law 
itself.  Gradually  however  this  scruple  was  over- 
borne by  a feeling  of  the  grave  inconvenience 
which  might  ensue  from  the  prevalence  of  unsatis- 
factory expositions,  and  thus  the  earliest  Targum 
which  we  possess,  that  of  Onkelos  on  the  Penta- 
teuch, was  first  committed  to  writing,  probably 
about  the  third  century  a.d.,  in  the  schools  of 
Babylon 3. 

The  same  causes  were  no  doubt  operating  in 


1 For  references  see  Smith’s  Diet.  iii.  1638.  The  passage  in 
Neh.  viii.  8 is  thus  explained  : “ ‘ they  read  in  the  book  of  the 
Law  ’ — this  is  Mikra  (the  original  reading  in  the  Pentateuch)  ; 
‘ BH1DD,  clearly  ’ — this  is  Targum.”  Bab.  Meg.  3 a ; Bab.  Ned. 

37  t>. 

! This  however  is  disputed,  many  holding  the  Targum  of 
Jonathan  ben  Uzziel  on  the  prophets  to  be  older. 


Digitized  by  Google 


108 


Samaria  as  well  to  produce  a similar  result,  and  it 
is  not  unreasonable  to  ascribe  the  original  redaction 
of  the  Samaritan  Targum  to  about  the  same  time 
as  that  of  Onkelos,  or  perhaps  a little  earlier. 
Later  it  cannot  well  be,  for  the  Samaritan  Greek 
version  which  appears  to  have  been  formed  on  it, 
is  already  quoted  by  Fathers  of  the  third  and 
fourth  centuries.  Samaritan  tradition  apparently 
ascribes  it  to  a certain  Nathanael  who  died  about 
20  B.c.  *,  but  to  this  testimony  no  importance  need 
be  ascribed.  From  the  many  Arabisms  which 
occur  in  this  version  it  has  been  held  to  be  even 
subsequent  to  the  Mohammedan  invasion  of  632  *: 
it  is  possible  however  that  these  may  be  interpo- 
lations, not  parts  of  the  original  text.  It  must  also 
be  remembered  that  the  Samaritans  were  a mixed 
nice,  with  Arabs  included  among  them1 2  3,  and  that 
possibly  the  translator  himself  may  have  been 
one.  Many  hands  seem  to  have  been  employed 


1 Winer,  De  vers.  Sam.  irulole,  p.  9 ; Juynboll,  in  Oneulalia 
{1846),  ii.  1 16. 

2 Frankel  (in  Verhandlungen  d.  ersten  Versammlung  deulscher 
nnd  ausl.  Orientalislen  in  Dresden,  1844)  holds  that,  before  the 
dominion  of  the  Arabs,  Arabic  expressions  seldom  occur  in 
Chaldee  and  Palestinian  authors ; that  the  Targums,  Midrashim, 
and  Talmud  know  them  not.  R.  Lewi  alone  among  Midrash 
authors  explains  by  means  of  Arabic. 

3 Cf.  ‘Geshem  the  Arabian,’  Neh.  ii.  19  and  vi.  1 ; ‘the 
Arabians,’  ibid.  iv.  7.  Cf.  Kohn,  Samarilanisc/ie  Studien,  p.  60. 


1 


Digitized  byjGoogle 


109 


upon  it  before  it  assumed  its  present  form  : the 
first  thirty  chapters  of  Genesis  are  apparently 
the  oldest ',  containing  many  so-called  Samaritan 
words  which  cannot  be  traced  to  any  known 
source : differences  in  the  use  of  the  conjunctions 
are  observable  in  the  various  books : mistakes 
which  occur  in  the  rendering  of  one  passage  do 
not  repeat  themselves  in  the  parallel  phrase  of 
another  book.  At  some  period  or  other  the 
version  has  been  greatly  indebted  to  that  of 
Onkelos,  so  much  so  that  many  critics,  such  as 
Hottinger,  Eichhorn,  and  Kirchheim,  have  held  it 
to  have  been  copied  from  it.  This  however  seems 
to  be  rather  an  overstating  of  the  case : it  is  true 
that  ax a£  Xeyoj ueva  and  words  of  uncertain  meaning 
are  often  rendered  by  identical  or  similar  expres- 
sions in  both : moreover  when  Onkelos  borrows 
from  Jewish  tradition,  the  Samaritan  Targum 
often  follows  him.  And  yet  the  two  are  inde- 
pendent ; the  latter  falls  into  serious  blunders  from 
which  the  version  of  Onkelos  should  have  pro- 
tected it;  it  often  retains  difficulties  of  the  Hebrew 
text  where  the  other  gives  a translation.  It 
would  seem  therefore  to  have  been  at  the  outset 
an  original  translation,  but  in  course  of  time  and 
during  the  various  manipulations  it  underwent 
to  have  been  interpolated  largely  from  the  version 


1 Kohn,  ibid.  pp.  sq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


110 


prevalent  among  the  Jews.  It  is  in  general 
minutely  literal,  not  however  always  following  the 
text  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  but  sometimes 
deserting  it  for  the  Hebrew,  although  in  so  doing 
it  displays  very  little  skill  or  knowledge  of  the 
language,  falling  occasionally  into  the  most  gro- 
tesque blunders  from  a confusion  of  similar  words '. 
The  sense  of  numberless  easy  passages  is  per- 
verted ; in  difficult  ones  the  Hebrew  is  retained  or 
rendered  by  equally  ambiguous  words,  or  by  such 
as  refuse  to  have  a certain  meaning  affixed  to 
them  by  a comparison  with  cognate  dialects.  In 
the  style  of  translation  it  comes  between  the  pro- 
lixity of  the  Targumists  and  the  slavish  literalness 
of  Aquila:  like  the  Pentateuch,  it  is  careful  to 
avoid  phrases  which  might  seem  to  impair  the 
reverence  due  to  the  Deity  by  the  imputation  of 
human  feelings  or  parts,  and  also  to  change  ex- 
pressions which  might  be  thought  to  savour  of  in- 
delicacy into  others  more  suitable  to  the  dignity  of 

' e. g.  in  Deut.  i.  44,  D'lhl,  ‘bees,’  is  confounded  with  0'iyi, 
‘words,’  and  translated  n'i>D:  to  leave  you  a ‘remnant,’  JVttflP, 
is  rendered  p'en,  ‘dough,’  as  in  Lev.  xxi.  2 Ki?’,  a ‘blood- 
relation,’  is  confounded  with  ixt?,  ‘dough,’  und  translated  I'D?  : 
e|N.  ‘ anger’  and  ‘even,’  are  confused  (Lev.  xxvi.  44),  and  NiSN 
(Gen.  xliii.  11)  rendered  ntJlN:  Dn'3Bi  (Gen.  iii.  7)  is  confounded 
with  DiTJUtP,  and  translated  pn'^p  'DTI : (ibid.  xxxi.  27), 

with  ‘Bongs,’  is  rendered  D'3313  : KTinnC'  T'  (ibid.  47)  3mn 
nnn»D  : in  Num.  xix.  6 ny^in  '35?  is  rendered  ‘ two  worms  ’ 
instead  of  ‘scarlet  wool.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ill 


the  subject.  For  purposes  of  exegesis  the  version 
is  entirely  useless : it  is  simply  interesting  as 
faithfully  representing  the  religious  ideas  and 
literary  progress  of  that  strange  offshoot  and 
counterfeit  of  Israel,  the  Samaritan  people  ; valu- 
able also  for  philological  purposes  as  being  the 
most  trustworthy  monument  of  an  important 
Semitic  dialect,  though  of  only  a debased  one 
which  has  not  a literature  worthy  of  the  name. 
It  is  to  this  Targum  always  that  recourse  must 
principally  be  had  for  settling  the  foims  of  the 
Samaritan  language,  though  it  is  an  unsatisfac- 
tory witness  to  them  from  the  number  of  Hebra- 
isms it  contains  and  the  interpolations  it  has 
undergone ; but  all  the  later  documents  we 
possess  are  still  more  untrustworthy  from  the 
uncertainty  attending  their  age  and  the  possi- 
bility that  they  may  have  been  written  wliile 
the  language  was  no  longer  spoken1.  It  is  of 
considerable  importance  therefore  that  we  should 
possess  a thoroughly  critical  edition  of  the  text, 
and  it  is  as  a contribution  to  this  end  that  the 
present  fragment  has  been  edited. 

The  oldest  MSS.  hitherto  known  to  exist  are 
both  at  Home,  the  Barberini  triglott  and  the 
Vatican.  The  former  was  bought  by  Peiresc  at 
Damascus  in  1631,  and  bequeathed  by  him  to 


1 Cf.  Nijldeke  in  Geiger’s  Zeitschr.  vi.  204  sq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


112 


Cardinal  Barberini,  in  whose  library  it  still  remains. 
It  is  written  on  parchment,  with  the  Hebrew- 
Samaritan  text  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  Arabic 
version  of  Abusaid,  and  the  Samaritan  Targum 
in  three  parallel  columns.  It  is  imperfect : the 
oldest  parts  were  written  in  a.d.  1226,  and  the 
end  of  Deuteronomy  was  supplied  by  a later  hand 
in  1482.  It  has  never  been  published  : only  a 
single  page  of  it,  with  some  of  the  variations  of 
its  Targum  and  Pentateuch,  and  a specimen  of 
the  Arabic  version,  have  as  yet  appeared 

The  Vatican  MS.  was  bought  by  Pietro  della 
Valle  at  Damascus  in  16 16:  it  is  much  later 
than  the  one  just  described,  on  paper,  dated  1514 
a.d.,  with  considerable  lacunae  of  words  and  even 
verses  *.  This  is  the  only  text  that  has  ever  been 


1 It  is  described  by  De  Sacy  in  Mem.  de  I' A cad.  dee  Inscr. 
t.  49,  p.  3 ; by  J.  B.  de  Rossi  at  the  end  of  his  Specimen  Varr. 
Lectt.  (1783);  by  Adler  in  his  liibl.  Krit.  Reise  (1783),  p.  139. 
A triple  page  was  transcribed  by  Blanchini  in  his  Evangeliarium 
(1749),  ii.  604.  See  also  Hwiid,  Sj>ecimen  i ned.  vers.  Arab. 
Sam.  Pent.  (1780).  It  seems  to  have  been  lost  at  the  end  of 
the  last  century,  but  has  siuce  reappeared.  Some  of  the  varia- 
tions of  its  Pentateuch  and  Targum  may  be  found  in  Castellus’ 
Animadvv.  Samar,  in  vol.  vi.  of  the  London  Polyglott  of  1657, 
and  also  in  Morinus’  Opuscula  ITebr.  Sam.  (1657),  pp.  103-196, 
cf.  also  p.  96.  The  text  has  lately  been  collated  by  Heidenlieim 
with  a view  to  its  publication. 

* It  is  fully  described  in  Assemani,  liibl.  Vatican.  Calal.  i.  1. 
p.  464. 


1 


Digitized  by  Google 


113 


published : it  appeared  in  the  Paris  Polyglott  of 
1645,  and  was  thence  copied,  without  however  a 
fresh  collation  of  the  MS.,  into  the  London  Poly- 
glott of  1657.  The  most  glaring  blunders  were, 
it  is  true,  corrected  by  conjecture  in  the  process  of 
revision  by  the  editor  Castellus,  but  the  results  are 
eminently  unsatisfactory l.  The  Latin  translation 
also,  being  intended  to  serve  as  a version  both  of 
the  Hebrew-Samaritan  text  of  the  Pentateuch  and 
also  of  the  Samaritan  Targum,  is  not  to  be  depended 
upon.  It  is  hoped  therefore  that  the  publication 
of  the  present  very  ancient  fragment  may  prove  of 
some  assistance  for  a future  critical  edition  of  the 
Targum z. 

The  MS.  is  undated,  but  from  the  character  of 
the  writing  and  condition  of  the  parchment  it  is 
in  all  probability  considerably  older  than  the 
Barberini  triglott.  From  the  circumstance  that 
no  Arabic  translation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  MS. 
just  mentioned,  appears  by  the  side  of  the  Sama- 
ritan text,  it  may  be  conjectured  that  it  was 
copied  at  a time  when  the  language  was  still 


1 Sec  Kohn,  op.  cit.  p.  22  sq. 

* Prof.  Petermann  of  Berlin  is  publishing  an  edition  from 
MSS.  collated  by  him  at  Nablus ; they  are  on  parchment, 
I understand,  and  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Genesis  only  has 
as  yet  been  published.  Dr.  A.  Brtill  also  is  reprinting  at  Frauk- 
furt-am-Main  Walton’s  text  in  Hebrew  characters;  Genesis, 
Exodos,  and  Leviticus  have  already  appeared. 

i 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


114 


understood,  and  had  not  as  yet  been  superseded 
by  Arabic.  In  the  character  of  the  writing  it 
resembles  the  ancient  MSS.  still  existing  at 
Nablus  described  by  Dr.  Rosen  *.  The  text  varies 
very  considerably  from  that  of  the  Vatican  MS., 
and  also  from  the  printed  specimens  of  the  Barbe- 
rini  fragment.  It  has  unfortunately  suffered  many 
corrections  from  a later  hand,  most  frequently  in 
grammatical  forms,  sometimes  in  whole  words1  2 ; 
but  as  they  have  not  been  carried  out  with  con- 
sistency it  has  generally  been  possible  by  com- 
parison with  other  parts  of  the  MS.  to  restore 
the  original  form  with  certainty.  In  all  such 
parts  of  the  MS.  as  are  in  good  preservation  the 
corrections  are  easily  to  be  detected,  and  these 
are  distinguished  in  the  printed  text  by  round 
brackets:  additions  made  by  the  editor  from  con- 
jecture are  enclosed  in  square  brackets : as  this 
has  been  done  with  the  greatest  care,  the  present 
text  may  be  relied  upon  as  a faithful  reproduction 
of  the  original.  The  punctuation  of  the  MS.  may 
be  seen  from  the  photograph  appended.  I find  no 


1 See  above,  p.  104,  note  1.  The  facsimile  on  the  frontispiece 
is  the  exact  size  of  the  original.  The  MS.  is  numbered  Opp. 
Add.  8vo.  29.  When  it  first  came  into  the  possession  of  the 
Bodleian  it  had  but  thirty-nine  leaves,  another  has  lately  been 
added  by  the  liberality  of  the  Earl  of  Crawford  and  BalcarreB,  in 
whose  collection  it  was  found. 

* See  the  notes  appended  to  the  text  passim,  especially  p.  25. 


Digitized  by  Google 


115 


traces  of  any  such  elaborate  system  as  is  described 
by  the  Abbe  Barges  in  his  notice  of  some  frag- 
ments of  a Samaritan  Pentateuch  in  his  posses- 
sion, nor  are  the  vowels  marked  *.  Occasionally 
however,  not  always,  the  masculine  and  femi- 
nine possessive  pronouns  are  distinguished  from 
each  other,  the  former  by  a dot,  the  latter  by  a 
line,  over  the  n.  The  marginal  notes  are  of  the 
same  age  as  the  body  of  the  MS.,  but  they  have 
in  many  cases  become  illegible,  and  the  sense 
of  those  which  can  be  deciphered  is  often  very 
obscure  *. 

The  second  translation  in  order  of  time  which 
the  Pentateuch  underwent  at  the  hands  of  the 
Samaritans  was  that  into  Greek  : whether,  like 
the  LXX  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  flourishing  community  of  Alexandria1 * 3  is 
uncertain.  By  many  writers  its  existence  has 


1 Notice  sur  deux  fragments  d’un  Pentateuque  Jlebreu-Sama- 
ritain  (1865),  p.  15.  Ewald  ( Gutting . Nachrichtern,  1867,  p. 
221)  thinks  many  of  the  signs  noticed  by  Bnrgfis  to  be  identical, 
and  the  whole  question  doubtful.  The  Samaritan  use  of  diacritic 
points  is  described  by  Geiger,  Zeitschr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xxi.  172. 

* I had  hoped  to  have  added  to  this  edition  another  fragment 
belonging  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  of  which  a notice 
appeared  in  the  Journ.  Asiat.  (1870),  p.  525;  it  is  to  be  found 
in  the  Catalogue  of  Hebrew  and  Samaritan  MSS.  of  Trinity 
College,  p.  234.  .Not  however  having  succeeded  in  procuring 
the  loan  of  the  MS.  I have  been  obliged  to  bring  out  tho  present 
one  by  itself.  3 Sec  above,  p.  26. 

i 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


116 


been  denied  ',  and  the  quotations J of  Fathers  of 
the  third  and  fourth  centuries  from  to  'ZafiapuriKov 
have  been  understood  to  refer  to  the  version  of 
Symmachus,  or  the  Samaritan  Targum,  or  the 
Pentateuch,  or  the  LXX 3.  It  is  doubtful  whether 
it  was  a complete  version  or  only  consisted  of 
emendations  of  particular  passages ; possibly  the 
latter,  and  if  so,  it  may  have  related  to  difficulties 
in  the  Samaritan  Targum 4. 

The  third  translation  was  into  Arabic.  At  first 
the  Samaritans  did  not  scruple  to  use  the  trans- 
lation of  Saadiah,  who  died  in  a.d.  942,  but  in  the 
succeeding  century6  Abusaid  set  about  preparing 

1 e.  g.  Isaac  Vossius.  His  theory  is  ably  discussed  by  R.  Simon 
in  his  Hist.  Critique  du  V.  T.  (1680),  p.  261. 

* They  are  to  be  found  collected  in  Hottingcr,  Excrcitt.  A nti- 
morin.  p.  29  ; sec  also  Eicbhorn’s  Einleitung,  i.  p.  388  ; Walton, 
Proleijg.  to  London  Polyglolt,  xi.  22. 

* Winer,  De  vers.  Sam.  indole,  p.  7.  Noldeke,  in  the  dotting. 
Gel.  Anzeig.  (1865),  p.  1312,  considers  the  Safiapnrorw  to  be  the 
Hebrew  text  as  received  from  the  Samaritans.  De  Wette, 
Einleitung  ins  A.  T.  (1852),  89.  doubts  whether  it  was  an  inde- 
pendent translation,  or  extracts  from  the  Samaritan  Targum, 
or  corrections  of  the  LXX.  Epiphanius  {De  Mens,  et  Pond. 
p.  172)  mentions  that  Symmachus,  in  the  time  of  Severus,  made 
his  version  after  the  Samaritan  [1  Greek]  translation,  but  this 
seems  doubtful.  Origen  takes  no  notice  of  it,  though  mention- 
ing the  Hebrew-Samaritan  text.  Eichhom,  i.  p.  387. 

4 Kohn,  De  Pent.  Sam.  p.  68  ; Winer,  De  vers.  Sam.  p.  7. 

5 Probably  about  1070.  Saadiah  was  an  Egyptian  Jew; 
Abusaid  was  also  in  all  probability  of  the  same  country.  Cf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


117 


one  which  should  be  more  in  accordance  with  the 
tastes  of  his  Samaritan  countrymen.  He  appears 
to  have  employed  the  Hebrew-Samaritan  text,  the 
Targum,  and  also  Saadiah  (when  the  latter  does 
not  differ  from  the  Samaritan),  though  he  never 
quotes  him  without  abusing  him.  Like  his 
countrymen  generally,  he  is  careful  to  alter  phrases 
which  seem  to  impute  human  qualities  or  parts 
to  the  Deity,  or  in  any  sort  to  offend  against 
delicacy  : like  them,  he  loses  no  opportunity  of 
exalting  the  position  of  Moses,  nor  depressing  the 
dignity  of  Judah.  He  occasionally  substitutes 
later  geographical  names  for  those  of  the  text : 
his  style  is  marked  by  many  vulgarisms,  and 
many  Hebrew  and  Samaritan  expressions  are  to  be 
found  in  it.  About  the  year  1 208  his  translation 
underwent  a revision  at  the  hands  of  Abu-l-barakat, 
in  Syria  as  is  generally  supposed,  receiving  both 
corrections  and  annotations  from  him : the  two 
versions  became  intermixed,  and  are  now  not  to 
be  distinguished  from  each  other. 

Next  in  importance  to  the  Pentateuch  and  its 
translations  will  come  the  historical  literature  of 
the  Samaritans  comprised  in  various  chronicles 

Juynboll,  in  Orientalia,  ii.  1 1 6.  The  three  first  books  of  the 
Pentateuch  according  to  Abusaid’s  rendering  have  been  edited 
by  Kuenen.  It  is  described  by  De  Sacy  in  Mem.  de  FA  cad.  tie s 
Inter,  vol.  xlix,  and  by  Van  Vloten  in  his  Specimen  Philologicum, 
1803. 


Digitized  by  Google 


118 


which  have  come  down  to  us.  In  them  however 
it  will  be  a mistake  to  look  for  any  sober  narrative 
of  facts : nothing  was  further  from  the  mind  of  a 
Samaritan  chronicler  than  to  give  an  exact  relation 
of  past  events.  His  object  was  rather  to  stir  up 
the  minds  of  his  degenerate  countrymen  to  an 
emulation  of  the  mythical  past  glories  of  their 
race  and  the  heroic  deeds  of  their  ancestors,  to 
console  them  in  their  present  troubles  by  the  hope 
that,  when  like  their  forefathers  they  returned  to 
the  earnest  study  of  the  Law  and  practice  of  its 
requirements,  the  same  Divine  favour  would  be 
shewn  them  as  had  attended  the  nation  in  the 
happy  and  glorious  days  of  old.  He  has  no  idea 
of  a continuous  narrative,  but  selects  passages  of 
past  history  which  will  best  suit  the  purpose  of 
his  tale.  Tliese  he  chooses  from  any  source  which 
may  be  open  to  him,  chiefly  from  the  Bible  and 
Jewish  legend,  distorting,  amplifying,  and  omitting 
till  the  result  proves  satisfactory  to  his  taste.  In 
accordance  with  Oriental  fashion  he  endeavours  to 
enliven  his  narration  by  the  introduction  of  hymns 
and  proverbs,  and  for  the  same  purpose  he  puts 
long  speeches  into  the  mouths  of  his  heroes.  His 
efforts,  however  well  meant,  prove  highly  un- 
satisfactory ; he  only  succeeds  in  producing  a dull, 
wordy  parody  of  a chronicle,  full  of  the  most 
astounding  historical  blunders. 

All  these  characteristics  are  found  exemplified 


Digitized  by  Google 


119 


in  the  ‘Samaritan  Chronicle,’  or  ‘Book  of  Joshua' 
as  it  is  termed,  composed  in  all  probability  in 
Egypt  at  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century 1 : 
so  termed  because  its  greater  part  is  occupied  with 
narrating  the  glories  of  Joshua,  the  successor  of 
the  one  great  prophet  of  Israel,  himself  bom  of 
the  tribe  of  Ephraim  and  therefore  unconnected 
with  the  hated  Judah,  in  whose  time  Shechem 
and  Garizim  derived  new  honours  from  the  solemn 
rites  and  ceremonies  there  performed  by  him. 
After  a short  preface,  the  book  relates  Joshua’s 
assumption  of  office,  the  history  of  Balaam,  and 
the  slaughter  of  the  Midianites,  in  the  main  fol- 
lowing the  Biblical  account,  though  with  many 
amplifications,  such  as  the  falling  down  of  the 
wall  of  Midian  at  the  blast  of  the  trumpet,  Balaam 
being  found  within  the  temple  speechless  from 
terror,  and  his  slaughter  by  the  soldiers  against 
the  desire  of  Joshua.  Next  comes  an  account 
of  the  last  words  of  Moses,  Joshua’s  lamentation 
over  him,  the  renewal  of  the  covenant  between 
God  and  Israel,  the  ordering  of  the  army,  the 


1 Published  by  Juynboll  (Leyden,  1848)  from  an  Arabic  MS. 
written  in  Samaritan  character,  the  earlier  part  of  which  is 
dated  A.  D.  1362,  the  latter  1513  (there  is  another  copy  in  the 
British  Museum,  dated  1502).  The  author  appears  to  have 
woven  into  his  book  one  Samaritan  and  three  other  Arabic 
chronicles,  besides  employing  commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch 
and  annals  of  the  priests. 


Digitized  by  Google 


120 


sending  out  of  the  spies  (who  endeavour  to  scare 
the  Canaanites  to  flight  by  tales  of  what  Israel 
had  done  to  Sihon  and  Og,  Midian  and  Moab), 
the  passage  of  the  Jordan,  the  taking  of  Jericho, 
the  theft  of  Achan,  who  steals  2250  lbs.  weight 
of  gold  (though  no  mention  is  made  of  Ai),  the 
craft  of  the  Gibeonites,  the  slaughter  of  the 
Canaanites,  and  the  division  of  the  land  between 
the  several  tribes.  This  part  of  the  narration  ends 
with  the  appointment  of  Nabih  as  king  of  the 
tribes  east  of  Jordan,  and  for  the  next  twenty  years 
Israel  enjoys  a profound  peace,  all  wending  their 
way  thrice  in  each  year  with  joy  and  gladness 
to  the  ‘ Mount  of  Blessing.’  This  calm  is  broken 
by  a formidable  confederacy  of  the  king  of  Persia, 
the  greater  Armenia,  the  lesser  Rumia  (Asia 
Minor),  and  others  against  Israel ; they  send 
a challenge  to  Joshua,  who  is  greatly  alarmed  at 
the  missive,  but  puts  on  a bold  face  before  the 
messenger  and  sends  back  a defiant  reply : in  an 
hour’s  time  he  mounts  300,000  men,  the  half  of 
Israel,  and  seeks  his  foes,  but  is  by  magic  sur- 
rounded by  seven  walls  of  iron.  Nabih  however, 
the  king  of  Israel  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan, 
informed  of  his  danger  by  a letter  brought  to  him 
by  a dove,  soon  comes  to  the  rescue,  slays  Shaubak 
the  king  of  Persia  by  throwing  a dart  up  into 
the  air  which  in  its  fall  transfixes  man  and  horse, 
and  piercing  the  ground  causes  a fountain  to  burst 


» . — — 


121 


forth.  The  walls  raised  by  magic  art  collapse  at 
the  first  blast  of  the  priests’  trumpets,  at  Joshua’s 
bidding  the  light  stays,  the  winds  aid  him,  the 
enemies’  swords  turn  against  them,  and  a mighty 
slaughter  ensues  so  that  the  horses  wade  in  blood 
to  their  nostrils,  and  the  enemy  are  utterly  de- 
stroyed. During  the  happy  reign  of  Joshua,  which 
with  that  of  his  nine  successors  lasted  for  260 
years,  Israel  observed  the  Law,  kept  the  Sabbaths 
and  Feasts,  observed  the  sabbatical  year  and  the 
payment  of  tithes,  all  crime  was  immediately 
detected,  the  sacrifices  were  duly  offered  on  Gari- 
zim.  But  after  the  reign  of  Samson,  the  hand- 
somest and  strongest  of  all  the  kings,  Israel  falls 
into  sin,  the  divine  glory  disappears  from  the 
Temple,  ’Ozi  the  high-priest  hides  the  sacred 
vessels  in  a cave  on  Garizim,  Eli  the  apostate 
priest  builds  an  opposition  temple  at  Shiloh,  and, 
after  instructing  his  pupil  Samuel  in  all  the 
magical  arts  in  which  he  himself  excelled,’ perishes 
at  receiving  the  news  of  the  death  of  his  impious 
sons  in  battle  and  the  loss  of  the  ark.  The 
chronicle  now  makes  a leap  of  some  hundreds  of 
years  to  the  time  of  Bokhton&sar  (Nebuchad- 
nezzar) king  of  Persia,  who  reigned  at  Mausul. 
He  carries  away,  not  Judah,  but  Israel  into  cap- 
tivity; but  on  the  complaint  of  the  new  colonists 
that  a blight  rested  upon  the  produce  of  the  land, 
suffers  Israel,  to  the  number  of  300,000,  to  return, 


jitized  by  Google 


122 


the  colonists  making  way  for  them.  The  Jews  wish 
to  build  a temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  rest  of  Israel 
on  Garizim,  and  on  an  appeal  to  the  King  the 
famous  trial  of  the  merits  of  Sanballat’s  and 
Zerubbabel’s  copies  of  the  Law  is  made  in  his 
presence,  when  the  latter  is  at  once  burnt  on 
being  cast  into  the  flames,  the  former  jumps  out 
thrice  unhurt1 *;  Judah  repents,  and  all  Israel 
worships  on  Garizim.  Then  comes  another  break 
in  the  narrative  till  the  time  of  Alexander,  the 
whole  of  whose  history  as  it  appears  in  the 
chronicle  is  borrowed  from  Jewish  history.  Thus 
the  Samaritans,  and  not  the  Jews,  refuse  to 
break  their  league  with  Persia  and  give  aid 
to  Alexander 3 * 5 : he  marches  against  Shechem, 
not  Jerusalem,  but  spares  it,  overawed  by  the 
dignity  of  the  Samaritan,  not  the  Jewish  high- 
priest,  whose  figure  had  appeared  to  him  in 
dreams  and  promised  him  victory.  The  tale  of 
Alexander’s  three  days’  journey  to  the  land  of 
darkness,  the  dust  of  which  was  rubies  and 
pearls3;  of  his  ascending  to  the  clouds  in  a car 

1 See  above,  p.  105. 

* Josephus,  Ant.  xi.  8.  3.  There  it  is  told  how  the  Jewish 

high-priest  Jaddua  refuses  to  break  his  league  with  Darius, 
which  Sanballat  (ibid.  4)  at  once  does.  Alexander  marches 
against  Jerusalem,  but  at  the  sight  of  Jaddua  prostrates  himself 

before  him  (ibid.  4,  5). 

5 To  be  found  with  variations  in  Tamid.  32  a,  and  Josephus 
ben  Gorion,  ii.  16. 


drawn  by  eagles  who  rose  or  fell  according  as 
the  lumps  of  flash  which  they  endeavoured  to 
catch  were  held  above  or  below  them ' ; the 
device  by  which  the  priests  evaded  the  king’s 
injunction  of  erecting  statues  to  him  by  calling 
all  newT-bom  sons  by  his  name1 2, — all  these  can 
be  traced  to  Jewish  sources,  whence  they  have 
been  drawn  by  the  Samaritan  chronicler  for  his 
own  purposes.  Next  follows  a narrative  of  the 
great  revolt  under  Hadrian,  during  which  Jeru- 
salem falls  into  his  hands  by  means  of  two 
Samaritans ; a confusion  probably  with  the  cap- 
ture of  Bettar,  as  the  latter  is  said  to  have  been 
betrayed  by  Samaritan  intrigue 3.  The  whole 
concludes  with  a short  account  of  the  high-priest 
Aqbun,  his  son  Nathanael,  and  grandson  Baba 
Rubba,  the  last  of  whom  was  bom  in  grievous 
times,  when  the  Roman  hand  lay  heavy  upon  the 
Samaritans,  when  circumcision  was  forbidden,  and 
no  worshipper  might  approach  the  holy  mountain, 
a miraculous  bird  being  set  there  to  wain  the 
Roman  guards  when  a Samaritan  approached,  who 
thereupon  would  issue  forth  and  kill  him.  Baba 
Rabba  endeavours  to  alleviate  his  country’s  sorrows. 


1 Jer.  'Aboda  Zara,  iii.  i.  This  was  a common  mediaeval 
legend  ; it  is  related  of  Nimrod  by  the  Moslems;  cf.  Weil,  Bibl. 
Legend,  p.  77. 

1 Also  to  be  found  in  Josephus  ben  Gorion,  ii.  7. 

s Ewald,  Gesck.  vii.  (1868),  p.  418. 


124 


and  sends  his  nephew  Levi  to  Constantinople,  there 
to  acquire  all  the  learning  of  the  enemy,  that,  con- 
cealing his  birth  and  faith,  he  might  rise  to 
honour,  and  returning  to  Nablus,  destroy  the  fatal 
bird,  and  thus  enable  his  countrymen  to  ascend 
the  mountain  and  obtain  by  their  prayers  deliver- 
ance from  the  enemy.  In  this  he  completely 
succeeds,  and  the  narrative  breaks  off  abruptly 
at  the  point  when,  after  thirteen  years’  absence, 
he  pays  a visit  as  Archbishop  to  Nablus.  The 
above  sketch  will  shew  how  much  genuine  light 
we  may  expect  to  have  shed  upon  Samaritan 
history  by  the  truthfulness  and  historical  skill 
of  native  chroniclers. 

The  next  chronicle  to  be  noticed,  El-Tholidoth 
or  The  (book  of)  Generations,  is  of  a more  modest 
character.  In  the  .first  instance  it  professes  to 
have  been  written  by  Eleazar  ben  Amram  in  (a.h. 
544  = ) 1149  a.d.,  copied  and  continued  by  Jacob 
ben  Ismael  200  years  later,  and  carried  down  by 
other  hands  to  1859,  when  the  present  MS.  was 
written  by  Jacob  ben  Aaron  the  high-priest  *.  At 


1 Called  also  by  Abulfath  i 1—1  — 11  or  the  ‘ catena.’ 

1 Published  by  Neubauer  in  the  Journal  Asxatique  for  1869, 
pp.  385  sq.  He  gives  the  Samaritan,  or  rather  Hebrew,  text 
with  notes  and  translation,  citing  the  Arabic  translation  when 
the  sense  is  not  clear.  His  text  is  that  of  the  Bodleian  MB. 
numbered  Badl.  Or.  651,  collated  in  some  passages  with  one 
belonging  to  a private  owner. 


Digitized  by  Google 


125 


its  commencement  it  relates  how  Adam  received 
from  God  through  the  mediation  of  angels  the 
method  of  calculating  the  months  and  years  for 
the  proper  arrangement  of  the  calendar  of  festivals. 
This  passed  by  tradition  through  the  patriarchs  to 
the  time  of  Phinehas  the  grandson  of  Aaron,  in 
whose  days  it  was  committed  to  writing  by*  liis 
son  Abisham,  and  according  to  this  record,  which 
is  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Samaritan  high-priest, 
is  the  sacred  calendar  still  every  six  months  com- 
piled Each  period  of  seven  years  ends  with  a 
shemiffah  (year  of  release) ; seven  of  these  form 
a jubilee : the  first  shemiffah  counts  from  the  entry 
of  Israel  into  Canaan.  Three  books  are  mentioned 
as  having  been  given  to  the  Fathers  from  the  time 
of  Adam  to  Moses,  the  book  of  ‘Wars,’  that  of 
‘ Astronomy,'  and  that  of  ‘ Signs  V Next  are  given 
the  ages  of  the  patriarchs  from  Adam  to  the  death 
of  Moses,  and  then  a list  of  high-priests  down  to 
the  present  times  : interwoven  with  this  latter  are 
a few  scattered  notices  of  important  events,  such 
as  the  Babylonian  captivity,  the  return  from  it, 
the  death  of  our  Lord  \ &c. ; but  as  these  have  all 


1 See  above,  p.  75  ; Petermann,  in  Herzog,  xiii.  376,  note. 

J See  below,  p.  132. 

’ ‘ In  the  time  of  Jehonathan  was  put  to  death  JesuB  the  son 
of  Miriam,  the  son  of  Joseph  the  carpenter,  Ben  Hanahpheth, 
at  (mined  Salem  '1V1N3  flDnin  |3),  under  the  reign  of 

Tiberius  king  of  Rome,  by  I’alitah  his  governor.’  pp.  402,  438. 


Digitized  by  Google 


126 


been  inserted  in  the  chronicle  of  Abulfath  which 
will  pext  be  noticed,  they  need  not  be  further 
here  described.  The  chronicle  is  of  interest  to 
geographers  as,  while  mentioning  the  various 
Samaritan  families  settled  in  Damascus,  Palestine, 
and  Egypt,  it  incidentally  introduces  the  names 
of  a considerable  number  of  places  inhabited  by 
them1. 

The  third  chronicle  to  be  noticed  is  that  of 
Ahulfath,  composed  by  him  at  the  request  of  the 
high-priest  in  a.d.  1355,  and  continued  by  other 
hands  to  later  times2.  Its  literary  and  historical 
merit  is  no  greater  than  that  of  the  two  just 
described,  considerable  portions  of  which  were 
copied  into  the  present  wrork  by  its  author3.  The 
same  distortion  of  facts  in  the  interest  of  national 
vanity,  the  same  confusion  between  different 
periods,  the  same  omission  of  important  events, 


1 The  importance  of  this  chronicle  for  comparison  with  the 
‘ Book  of  Jubilees  ’ is  shewn  by  Ronsch  in  his  Buck  der  Jubilaen 

(>874),  p.  361. 

* Published  from  four  MSS.  by  Ed.  Vilmar,  Gotha,  1865.  It  is 
written  in  Arabic  containing  many  vulgar  grammatical  forms. 

3 Besides  these  two,  Ahulfath  also  appears  to  have  had  at  his 
disposal  several  other  books,  viz.  one  entitled  the 
probably  an  account  of  the  division  of  the  land  among  the 
twelve  tribes,  other  chronicles  %ound  up  in  one  volume  with  the 
book  of  J oshua,  three  more  in  Hebrew  obtained  from  Damascus, 
a book  termed  the  or  ‘ quires,’  and  a chronicle  of  Sadaqa  ; 
the  last  however  he  does  not  appear  to  have  used. 


Digitized  by  Google 


127 


the  same  unacknowledged  borrowing  from  Jewish 
sources,  is  observable.  It  commences  at  the  Crea- 
tion, which  is  placed  at  4350  B.c. ; from  this  point 
to  the  settlement  of  Israel  in  Canaan,  wliich, 
together  with  the  250  ensuing  years  of  peace 
under  the  rule  of  Joshua  and  his  successors  to 
Samson,  makes  altogether  a period  < of  3050  years, 
was  the  Ridv&n  or  time  of  the  Divine  Favour. 
Then  the  royal  and  pontifical  dignities  were  both 
preserved,  then  the  ‘ king’  with  the  aid  of  his 
seventy  elders  and  twelve  princes  of  the  tribes 
guided  the  state  in  accordance  with  the  Divine 
will,  the  high-priest  in  company  with  the  priests 
and  Levites  rightly  performing  the  services  of  the 
Temple,  while  the  rest  of  the  people  each  in  his 
proper  station  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the 
Law.  Then  the  Divine  Presence  manifested  itself 
in  the  shrine  on  Garizim,  whence  the  fire  of  the 
Lord  came  forth  and  each  day  consumed  the 
sacrifices  offered  upon  the  two  altars  of  the  holy 
Mount.  With  Eli’s  schism  commenced  the  period 
of  Fanfita,  or  ‘disappearance’  of  the  Divine 
Favour  and  of  its  visible  sign : Israel  fell  into 
idolatry  : Saul,  the  schismatical  monarch  set  up  by 
the  apostate  prophet  Samuel,  persecuted  the  true 
people  of  God  and  prohibited  their  approach  to 
Garizim  ; many  therefore  fled  their  country  to  avoid 
his  tyranny,  and  thus  commenced  1000  years  of 
migrations  and  exiles  to  the  time  of  Alexander, 


Digitized  by  Google 


128 


which  is  placed  at  250  B.c.  David  proceeds  to 
yet  greater  lengths,  usurps  the  priestly  offices  of 
benediction  and  sacrifice,  appoints  Jerusalem  as 
the  Qiblah  whither  Israel  should  turn  in  prayer, 
and  there  establishes  the  schismatical  ark  of  Shiloh, 
though  formerly  he  too  had  offered  on  Garizim. 
Solomon’s  wisdom  and  glory  are  beyond  denial: 
he  is  the  ‘ Shiloh’  after  whose  days  the  sceptre 
departed  from  Judah '.  Rehoboam  was  the  last 
king  who  reigned  with  any  show  of  right,  having 
been  elected  at  Shechem 2 in  an  assembly  of  the 
tribes.  Jeroboam,  corrupted  by  his  residence  in 
Egypt,  introduced  the  worship  of  the  calves  at 
Sebaste 3 and  Dan : Elijah  and  Elisha  are  also 
deserving  of  the  deepest  reprobation  for  the  part 
they  took  in  seducing  Israel  from  their  true 
allegiance.  Divine  vengeance  comes  at  last  in 
the  shape  of  Nebuchadnezzar’s  invasion,  who 
destroys  Jerusalem  and  Sebaste  : ’Aqbia  the  high- 
priest  buries  the  sacred  vessels  in  Garizim,  and 
with  his  countrymen  departs  to  exile  in  Harran 
and  Edessa,  carrying  with  him  a copy  of  the  Law  ; 
the  Jews  with  their  king  ‘Jumaqim’  proceed  to 
Babylon.  Seventy  years  later,  3790  years  after 
the  Creation,  Israel  returns  from  captivity,  but 


1 Gen.  xlix.  10.  1 1 Kings  xii.  1. 

9 Not  at  Bethel  (or  Luz),  for  that  is  the  higher  summit  of 

Garizim.  See  above,  p.  67. 


Digitized  by  Google 


129 


a second  exile  ensues  1 20  years  later,  which  lasts 
for  fifty-five  years ; the  subsequent  return  from 
this,  by  permission  of  King  Surdi,  took  place  not 
long  before  that  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  l.  Then 
ensues  the  famous  contest  between  Zerubbabel 
and  Sanballat  as  to  whether  Jerusalem  or  Garizim 
should  be  the  Qiblah  of  Israel,  ending  in  the 
defeat  of  the  Jews  and  the  re-establishment  of 
sacrifice  on  Garizim.  Kesra,  the  next  king  of 
Persia,  suffers  the  Jews  to  return  and  build  Jeru- 
salem : his  successors  were  Zaradushti,  Ahash- 
varush,  Artahast,  Darius.  This  last  king  favours 
the  Jews,  and  subjects  Samaria  to  them,  which 
accordingly  is  cruelly  oppressed  : a revolt  ensues 
in  which  Jerusalem  is  destroyed,  but  the  rising 
is  quelled,  the  Samaritans  severely  punished,  and 
the  exercise  of  their  religion  interdicted : many 
thereupon  fly  to  Kutha,  and  from  this  circumstance 
the  name  of  Kuthim  was  maliciously  fixed  upon 
them  by  the  Jews  in  order  to  rob  them  of  their 
true  designation  of  Israelites.  Alexander  died 
A.M.  4100,  about  1000  years  before  the  era  of 
Mohammed.  It  is  false  that  the  Jews  only  trans- 
lated their  Pentateuch  into  Greek : King  Ptolemy 

1 In  No.  xxvii.  p.  290,  Codd.  Or.  Bibl.  Acad.  Reg.  Scient. 
Lugd.  Bat.,  is  an  excerpt  from  a historical  work,  relating  how  at 
this  time  ‘ Aisled  the  high-priest  gave  his  son  in  marriage  to 
the  daughter  of  Sanballat,  telling  Sanballat  at  the  same  time  to 
instruct  him  in  the  Law.’  Cf.  Do  Jong’s  Catal.  p.  62. 

k 


Digitized  by  Google 


130 


sent  for  Samaritan  translators  as  well,  and  after 
hearing  the  arguments  on  both  sides  as  to  the 
merits  of  the  respective  copies  of  the  Jewish  and 
Samaritan  Law,  pronounced  in  favour  of  the  latter 
and  offered  sacrifice  on  Garizim In  a.m.  4350 
Christ  was  born,  and  crucified  by  the  procurator 
of  Tiberius : John  the  Baptist  had  before  this 
suffered  at  Sebaste  by  the  order  of  Herod.  Vespa- 
sian’s reign  is  passed  over  in  silence  : the  events 
occurring  in  those  of  Hadrian  and  Commodus  are 
apparently  confused  2.  In  the  days  of  Alexander 
(Severus)  Baba  Rabba  restored  the  independence 
of  Samaria  and  the  study  of  the  Law,  though  in 
many  of  his  enactments  he  departed  from  the 
polity  established  under  the  Ridv&n.  He  ended 
his  days  in  captivity  at  Constantinople,  having 
been  allured  there  by  the  promises  of  the  Emperor 
Philip.  Notices  occur  of  the  reign  of  Marcian, 
when  the  possession  of  the  tombs  of  the  patriarchs 
was  decided  by  single  combat  between  a Christian 
and  Samaritan  in  favour  of  the  latter,  and  of  the 
persecution  of  Zeno,  &c.  to  the  time  of  Mohammed, 
whose  flight  is  fixed  at  700  A.  D.,  and  with  this 

1 The  legend  of  the  three  days’  darkness  which  came  over  the 
world  at  the  translation  of  the  Law  (Abulfath,  Anna/,  p.  95)  is 
to  ho  found  in  the  IfUkolh  Gedoloth  Ta’anith,  ed.  Von.  f.  39  b : 
cf.  Uratz,  Gesch.  iii.  430. 

2 The  destruction  of  Samaritun  books  is  attributed  to  Com- 
modus, which  in  the  book  of  Joshua,  chap,  xlvii,  is  asciibed  to 
Hadrian.  Viltnars  Abulfalh,  p.  lxv. 


Digitized  by  Google 


131 


the  original  chronicle  of  Abulfath  appears  to  have 
terminated,  though  later  events  have  been  added 
by  other  hands,  together  with  a list  of  high-priests 
down  to  the  present  time. 

From  the  foregoing  sketch  it  will  be  seen  how 
little  trustworthy  a source  of  information  is  in 
this  chronicle  presented  to  us,  in  consequence  of 
the  large  gaps  and  historical  blunders  occurring 
in  it.  For  instance,  the  Assyrian  invasion  is 
ignored,  not  a single  fact  related  which  occurred 
between  the  reigns  of  Tiberius  and  Hadrian,  nor 
for  the  hundred  and  more  years  which  elapsed 
between  Zeno  and  Mohammed ; Zerubbabel  and 
Ezra  are  made  contemporaries,  Hadrian  builds  a 
Christian  church  on  Garizim ; the  Arab  Philip 
rules  at  Constantinople,  Gordian  incites  the  Jews 
to  rebuild  Jerusalem.  Amid  this  general  con- 
fusion it  would  be  unwise  to  accept  anything  as 
genuine  which  comes  to  us  recommended  only 
by  Samaritan  authority. 

Hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  the  class  of 
literature  just  described  is  one  which  may  be 
classed  under  that  of  ‘Agadah.’  A specimen 
of  this  may  be  found  in  the  ‘ Legends  ascribed 
to  Moses/  a commentary  on  which  is  preserved 
in  the  British  Museum  *.  It  borrows  largely  from 


1 Add.  MS.  19656,  fol.  1-29.  The  title  is  % T* 

^-A>LAI . It  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Leitner  in  Heidenheim, 

k 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


132 


Jewish  sources.  Adam  and  Eve,  we  are  told, 
spent  eight  days  in  Paradise : the  former  instructs 
Lamech  in  the  ‘Book  of  Truth’  for  180  years; 
after  leaving  Paradise  he  dwells  in  Safra,  that  is 
Nablus,  and  is  afterwards  buried  at  Hebron:  Noah 
collects  three  writings  called  the  ‘ Books  of  the 
Covenant,’  viz.,  the  ‘ Book  of  Adam,’  or  of 
‘Wonders,’  that  of  ‘Nagmuth,’  or  Astronomy, 
and  the  Book  of  ‘Wars1.’  Enoch  dies  and  is 
buried  opposite  Garizim  in  Navus  on  Mount  Ebal, 
lamented  by  Adam.  Jared  founds  Salem  Rabtlia 
or  Nablus,  in  which  God  foretold  that  Mel- 
chizedek  should  hereafter  reign : there  also  is 
Noah  buried.  Great  honour  is  given  to  Abraham : 
he  is  cast  by  the  tyrant  Nimrod  into  the  fire,  but 
escapes  unhurt,  and  Haran  is  killed  by  it : 6000 
years  are  to  intervene  between  the  Creation  and 
the  ‘ day  of  vengeance.’ 

Of  a similar  type  is  the ‘Jewelled  necklace  in 
praise  of  the  Lord  of  the  human  race,’  composed 
in  (a.h.  944  = ) a.d.  1537  by  Ismail  Ibn  Badr  Ibn 


iv.  184.  Identical  with,  or  similar  to  this,  must  be  the  chronicle 
on  sixteen  leaves  written  by  Moses,  extending  from  the  creation 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  still  preserved  by  the  high-priest  at 
Nablus.  The  Samaritans  have  also  a similar  one  in  Arabic  by 
Jacob  Besini,  who  lived  before  Mohammed.  Pctermann  in 
Herzog,  xiii.  376. 

1 See  above,  p.  125. 


Digitized  by  Google 


133 


Abu-l-’Tzz  Ibn  Ilumaih in  honour  of  Moses ; it 
sets  forth  his  divine  nature,  and  extols  the  glories 
of  his  birth  and  miracles. 

With  this  may  be  classed  a ‘tract’  in  which  is 
contained  a ‘ complete  explanation  of  the  chapters 
on  Balak  ’ by  Ghaztll  Ibn  ad-Duwaik  *,  with  re- 
flections on  the  same  for  the  edification  of  the 
reader ; and  another  small  tract  by  the  famous 
Abu  Sa’Id  explaining  the  cause  of  the  fear  felt  by 
Jacob  on  his  way  to  Egypt  (Gen.  xlvi.  i,  3)  and 
by  Abraham  after  the  conquest  of  the  five  Kings 
(ibid.  xv.  i)3,  with  a third  by  an  unknown  author, 

* Brit.  Mus.  Aid.  MS.  1902 1.  J1  J— Jja  Ain  11 

by  J ■ ci (The  game  author  also 

wrote  a book  termed  j • » ; -j  0.  ■ : ‘HI  or  ‘ an  expla- 

nation of  the  72  laws.’  Geiger,  in  Zeitschr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xxii. 
531.)  Another  copy  of  this  MS.  is  described  by  Neubaucr  in 
Journal  A siati'jue  (1869),  p.  467.  This  and  the  other  MSS.  there 
mentioned  as  belonging  to  Dr.  Pusey  now  form  part  of  the  col- 
lection of  the  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Balcarres,  which  nlso  con- 
tains, besides  the  works  mentioned  in  the  text,  a Pentateuch 
containing  Gen.  i.  12  to  Deut.  xxix,  and  fragments  to  xxxi.  13, 
dated  a.  d.  1 2 1 1 ; another  with  Arabic  version  in  Samaritan 
characters  (not  that  of  Abusaid,  as  I understand  from  Dr.  A. 
Liiwy),  dated  A.D.  1328;  another,  apparently  a copy  of  the  last, 
containing  most  of  Genesis  and  Exodus ; nine  liturgical  volumes, 
written  a.d.  1722-1794  ; some  astronomical  treatises,  fragments 
of  Pentateuchs,  Ac. 

3 jJj  ^ i!Ua  by  ebjjJI  jjl  Jlji , MS.  xxvii 

Bibl.  Acad.  Hej.  Scient.  Amst.  pp.  265-289. 

3 Ibid.  pp.  292,  293. 


Digitized  by  Google 


in  which  the  fifteen  occasions  are  quoted  from 
Exodus  and  Numbers  when  the  Israelites  by 
their  complaints  and  abuse  of  Moses  and  Aaron 
tempted  God,  and  the  times  mentioned  at  which 
the  divine  glory  appeared 

Of  great  importance  for  ascertaining  the  doc- 
trinal views  of  the  Samaritans,  esj>ecially  as 
shewing  the  tenacity  with  which  they  clung  to 
ancient  traditional  interpretations,  are  their  com- 
mentaries on  the  Pentateuch.  Probably  one  of 
the  oldest  now  extant  is  in  the  Bodleian  Library : 
it  was  composed  (a.h.  445  = ) a.d.  1053  by  an  un- 
known Samaritan  for  the  benefit  of  a certain  Abft 
Sa’id  Levi,  possibly  the  well-known  translator 1 ; 
certainly  it  was  written  before  his  translation  of 
the  Pentateuch  was  made,  as  this  is  never  quoted 
in  it.  Like  others  of  his  countrymen  who  will  be 
afterwards  quoted,  the  author  was  well  acquainted 
w ith  the  works  of  Arabian  grammarians,  but  the 
triliteral  system  for  the  formation  of  verbs  dis- 
covered by  Havug  was  unknown  to  him.  He  is 
singular  in  quoting  not  only  from  the  Pentateuch, 
but  also  from  tire  former  and  later  prophets, 
Nehemiah,  the  Mishnah,  &c.,  but  strangely  enough 

1 MS.  xxvii.  Bibl.  Acad.  Reg.  Scicnt.  A mat.  pp.  294-296. 

* Opp.  Add.  MS.  4".  99.  At  its  commencement  it  has  two 
short  Samaritan  liturgies.  It  has  been  described  at  length  by 
Ncubauer  in  the  Juurn.  Asiat.  ( 1873),  pp.  341  sq.  It  is  written 
in  Arabic,  and  dated  (a.h.  749=)  a.  d.  1348. 


135 


does  not  mention  the  Samaritan  Targura.  Like  a 
genuine  Samaritan  he  shuns  anthropomorphisms, 
attributing  to  .angels  actions  ascribed  in  the  ori- 
ginal to  God  Himself,  but  he  is  singularly  peaceful, 
sometimes  even  agreeing  with  Rabbanite  interpre- 
tations, but  never  taking  occasion  to  attack  them. 

Another  interesting  and  important  one  is  that 
of  ‘ Ibrahim  from  the  family  of  Jacob,’  now  pre- 
served at  Berlin  *.  He  thoroughly  represents  the 
national  feeling  as  exhibited  in  opposition  to  the 
Rabbanite  school  of  thought  among  the  Jews. 
For  instance,  he  points  out  the  error  of  the  latter 
in  interpreting  the  ‘ I am  come  down  ’ of  Exod. 
iii.  8,  as  of  actual  change  of  place  on  the  part  of 
God,  rather  than  of  the  direction  of  His  Omni- 
potence to  a certain  point : so  he  renders  ‘ I will 
stretch  out  My  hand’  (ver.  20)  as  ‘power,’  imputing 
a literal  interpretation'  of  the  expression  to  the 
Jews:  the  Lord  ‘ repented’  of  the  evil  (xxxii.  14) 
must  signify  ‘turned  from,’  ‘wiped  away.’  This 
extreme  anxiety  to  avoid  anything  approaching 
anthropomorphism  has  been  often  pointed  out 
before.  His  desire  to  glorify  Sichem  and  its  sur- 
roundings may  be  seen  by  his  remark  on  Gen. 
iii.  23,  that  Adam,  on  being  driven  out  from 
Paradise,  was  sent  back  to  Garizim,  for  from  thence 


1 Large,  extracts  are  given  from  this  by  Geiger  in  the  Zeitsehr. 
d.  D.  M.  G.  xvii.  723  sq.,  xx.  147  sq.,  xxii.  532  sq. 


— Blgittzed  by  Google 


136 


had  he  been  taken.  Jered  ( ib . v.  18)  he  tells  us 
built  Salem  Itabtha,  the  city  of  Melchizedek,  but 
Achidan  built  Zion,  with  regard  to  which  the  Jews 
have  a tradition  that  ‘the  Law  of  Truth  shall 
go  forth  from  Zion  and  abrogate  the  Law  of 
Moses,’  but  rather  perish  the  Law  of  Ezra ! Like 
a true  Samaritan  he  places  Abraham’s  sacrifice, 
Jacob’s  dream,  &c.,  at  Nablus.  Very  character- 
istic also  is  his  anxiety  to  uphold  the  fame  of 
Joseph  against  the  charge  of  having  married  a 
daughter  of  Potiphar  or  Dinah,  and  to  rescue 
the  great  prophet  Moses  from  the  imputation  of 
having  postponed  the  circumcision  of  his  son ; the 
means  by  which  he  effects  this  last  point  is  a 
miracle  of  exegetic  ingenuity.  So  all  connected 
with  Moses  must  likewise  have  no  shadow  of 
suspicion  resting  upon  them  : Jethro  is  no  idola- 
trous priest,  Zipporah  is  no  ‘ Ethiopian  ’ (Numb, 
xii.  i),  but  ‘beautiful:’ — these  instances  are  suf- 
ficient to  give  a just  idea  of  the  style  'of  his 
commentary. 

Of  just  the  same  type  is  an  anonymous  com- 
mentary on  Genesis  preserved  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  brought  from  the  East  by  the  learned 
Bishop  Huntington  The  great  reverence  of  the 
Samaritans  for  all  belonging  to  the  priesthood 


* Hunt.  .VS.  301.  The  forty-ninth  chapter  was  published 
by  Schnurrer  in  Eicbhoru’s  Repertorium,  xvi.  154. 


137 


has  been  already  noticed,  they  felt  it  therefore 
necessary  at  all  hazards  to  explain  away  the 
severe  judgment  of  Jacob  upon  his  son  Levi  for 
his  slaughter  of  the  Shechemites  in  conjunction 
with  Simeon.  Consequently  the  words  ‘ 0 my 
soul,  come  thou  not  into  their  secret’  &c.  (xlix.  6) 
are  thus  explained,  ‘ they  had  no  occasion  to  take 
counsel  of  me,  for  they  knew  that  their  counsel 
was  right,  seeing  that  their  zeal  was  righteous.’ 
So  in  the  next  verse,  ‘ Cursed  (inn)  be  their 
anger’  &c.  is  paraphrased,  ‘ Most  excellent  (ttn) 
is  their  anger,’  or,  ‘exceeding  is  their  generosity 
and  fortitude ‘ 1 will  divide  them  in  Jacob,’  he 
prays  that  their  strenuousness  may  remain  and  be 
distributed  in  Jacob.  On  ‘thy  father’s  children 
shall  bow  down  before  thee’  (ver.  8)  he  remarks, 
‘ Some  weak  people  interpret  it,  “ they  will  bow 
towards  thee  because  the  Qiblah  is  in  thy  domain," 
but  this  is  false,  for  the  Qiblah  is  in  the  territory 
of  Ephraim.’  He  paraphrases  ver.  io  thus,  'know- 
ledge of  the  Law  and  obedience  towards  God  shall 
not  fail,  or  a lawgiver  from  between  his  feet  till 
Shiloh  (Solomon)  shall  arise,  who  shall  change  the 
Law,  and  man}-  shall  follow  him,  since  they  love 
license  and  are  prone  to  it.’ 

In  this  class  must  also  be  included  an  agadic 
commentary  on  the  Pentateuch  containing  Genesis 
and  Exodus,  termed  the  ‘ dissipater  of  darkness 
from  the  secrets  of  revelation,’  written  in  1753-4 


■—  - -Btgifeed  by  Google 


138 


by  Ghaz&l  Ibn  Abu-s-SurAr  as-Safawi  al-Yusufi 
al-MAsawl  al-Ghazzi 1 ; and  another  containing 
fragments  of  a commentary  on  Genesis,  Exodus, 
and  Leviticus,  often  quoted  by  Castellus  in  his 
notes  on  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch2.  Other 
writers  seem  to  have  devoted  their  energies  to 
the  same  subject,  but  nothing  now  remains  to  us 
hut  their  names  and  the  titles  of  their  books.  For 
instance.  Manga  Ibn  ash-Shaar  is  mentioned  as  the 
author  of  three  commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch 3 : 
Abu  Said  of  scholia  on  the  Decalogue  * ; Amin 
ad-Din  Abu-l-Barak&t  of  a commentary  on  the 
same 5 : commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch  are  said 
to  have  been  composed  by  the  celebrated  poet, 
philosopher,  and  physician,  Sadaqa  Ben  Mang& 
Ben  Sadaqa  ®,  who,  after  living  high  in  the  favour 
of  al-Malik  al-’Adil  the  Ayyubid  prince  ruling  at 
Damascus,  died  near  it  in  A. D.  1223;  by  Muhadh- 
dhib  ad-Din  Ytisuf  Ben  Abu  Said  Ben  Khalaf, 


1 Brit.  Mur.  Add.  MS.  19657  ; title  yi 

by  y\  y or, 

as  his  name  is  otherwise  written,  Jlyc  y)  yj — I' y)  y 

* Brit.  Mur.  Harl.  MS.  5495. 

’ Aunt.  MS.  xxv it,  p.  309 y\  Ls~*. 

‘ Ibid.  p.  315.  6 Ibid.  p.  314. 

* (not  Lies*  or  Lii-t,  cf.  Juynboll,  Comm.  p.  56)  lar-*  y 
iSx*  y.  He  wrote  a commentary  on  the  aphorismB  of  Hip- 
pocrates. 


nr 


- — _ by  Google 


139 


pupil  of  the  famous  tbraliim  Shams  al-Hukamfti, 
and  vizier  to  al-Malik  al-Amgad  Magd  ad- Din 
Bahr&m  Sh&h,  sultan  of  Baalbek  ; he  died  in  12271. 

Under  the  head  of  miscellaneous  theology  must 
be  classed  a number  of  works  many  of  which  are 
closely  connected  with  those  just  described.  To 
this  will  belong  a work  of  Abu-l-Hasan  of  Tyre, 
of  which  the  title  probably  should  be  the  ‘book 
of  cookery,’  i.e.  relating  to  lawful  and  forbidden 
meats,  or  ‘of  force2.’  In  it  the  peculiar  dogmas 
of  the  Samaritans  as  differing  from  those  of  the 
Jews  are  set  forth  and  supported  by  arguments 

' Wiistenfeld,  Gcsch.  d.  Arab.  Aerzte , p.  121 ; Jnynboll,  Com- 
ment. p.  56.  Yflsuf's  nephew  Abu-1- Hasan  Ben  Ghazdl  Ben 
AbO  Sn’id  was  noted  for  his  acquirements  in  medicine,  natural 
history,  and  astronomy,  composing  many  books  on  these  sub- 
jects. Embracing  Islamism,  be  entered  the  sendee  of  bis  uncle's 
patron,  and  later  into  that  of  al-Malik  as-S&lih  Isma’il  Ben 
al-Malik  al-’Adil,  sultan  of  Damascus,  who  made  him  his  vizier. 
His  library  is  said  to  have  consisted  of  10,000  volumes.  Another 
celebrated  .Samaritan  physician,  Muwaffaq  ad-Din 

pjbi  jh*-'  ^.1  vy-s"  yd)  lived  in 

the  same  century : lie  wrote  a commentary  on  the  canon  of 
Avicenna  (Bndl.  MS.  Marsh.  464),  on  logic  and  theology ; cf. 
Wiistenfeld,  op.  eit.  p.  144  ; Haji  Ivhalfu,  v.  160,  472.  For  other 
notices  of  commentaries  see  below,  p.  1 58. 

1 Bodl.  MS.  Hunt.  24;  title  r-bJoJI  by  jj} 

Jl;  see  notice  of  a similar  MS.  in  Jouru.  Asiat.  (1869), 
p.  468.  He  appears  to  have  lived  some  time  in  the  eleventh 
century;  before  Abu  Sa’id,  who  translated  the  Pentateuch  about 
1070  a. d.  Cf.  Juynboll  in  Orientalia,  ii.  117. 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


drawn  from  the  Pentateuch  : it  treats,  e.g.  of  the 
dignity  and  perpetual  succession  of  the  high- 
priests  ; of  animals  which  may  be  eaten  ; of  the 
sabbath ; that  believers  must  have  a Qiblah 
whither  they  may  turn  in  prayer,  i.e.  Garizim  ; 
of  the  differences  between  Karaites  and  Rabbanites 
as  to  the  fixing  of  the  new  moon  ; of  angels  ; that 
there  is  no  distinction  of  Persons  in  the  Deity, 
nor  conjunction  of  the  human  nature  with  the 
divine,  &c.  Closely  resembling  this  is  a work 
entitled  ‘a  book  sufficing  to  those  who  satisfy 
the  knowledge  of  the  book  of  God,’  by  Muhadhdhib 
ad-Din  Yfisuf  Ibn  Salirnah  Ibn  Yusuf  al-’Askari, 
commenced  in  a.d.  1041  ; it  treats  of  the  office 
of  the  priest,  of  purifications,  of  tithes,  usury,  &c., 
thus  corresponding  to  the  Mishneh  Thorah  of 
Maimonides 

Another  work  by  the  same  Abu-l-Hasan  has 
come  down  to  us,  containing  long  and  somewhat 
uninteresting  disquisitions  in  proof  of  a future  life, 
with  arguments  drawn  from  the  Pentateuch1 2. 

In  the  same  class  must  be  included  an  ‘ abridg- 


1 Brit.  Mx it.  Add.  MS.  19656.  (2);  title  i_>LA 

^yl^*  vJJl  by  ^ ~.yJ  WyJ.V  4 ■* 

isjC—  -I'  The  commentator  Ibrahim  mentioned  above 

quotca  him  iu  proof  of  the  reason  why  for  a stolen  ox  fivefold, 
for  a lamb  fourfold  should  be  restored.  Zeitsehr.  d.  D M.  G. 


xx.  569. 

2 Bodl.  MS.  Hunt.  350.  (1)  ; title  jUll 


141 


ment  of  the  Mosaic  Law  according  to  the  Sama- 
ritans,’ by  Abu-l-Farag  Ibn  Ishaq  Ibn  KathAr a 
work  occupied  in  scholastic  questions  of  the  KalAin  ; 
everything  according  to  it  is  to  be  decided  by 
means  of  logic  applied  to  the  Law.  The  author 
knows  the  613  precepts,  248  of  which,  equalling 
the  limbs  in  number,  are  positive  in  their  character, 
while  the  365  corresponding  to  the  days  of  the 
solar  year  are  prohibitory ; like  the  Labbanites 
he  distinguishes  between  local  and  temporary  com- 
mands and  such  as  are  of  universal  application. 

By  one  of  the  same  family,  in  all  probability, 
is  the  ‘book  of  penitence,’  a work  in  which  are 
collected  together  such  passages  of  the  Pentateuch 
as  relate  to  repentance  and  a reformation  of  morals, 
with  observations  thereupon  by  the  author  himself 


1 Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.  Ancien  funds,  5,  Peirese.  His  name  is 
Ool  u—Jij  (not  j\jS,  see  Zeitschr. 

il.  D.  M.  G.  xxii.  532-538,  when?  will  be  found  a quotation  from 
this  or  a similar  work  given  by  Ibrahim  the  commentator  on 
the  meanings  of  niD  and  JAJ,  epN  and  )*2p  ; his  view  is  also  men- 
tioned as  to  the  increase  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  and  with 
reference  to  Moses’  staff.  It  is  probable  that  he  wrote  a com- 
mentary also).  The  (‘  word,’  ‘ discourse,’)  was  a dogmatic 
or  scholastic  philosophy  which  originated  among  Mohammedans 
in  the  second  century  of  the  Higra : so  called  either  because  it 
first  was  occupied  with  questions  with  regard  to  the  divine 
‘ word’  addressed  to  the  prophets,  or  because  it  is  equivalent  to 
mantiq  or  logic.  Cf.  Munk,  Melanges  de  Philosophic  Juive  el 
Arabe,  p.  311 ; Guide  dcs  egares,  i.  335,  note  j. 


Digitized  by  Google 


142 


and  others  of  his  countrymen  *.  In  the  same  MS. 
are  other  works  of  miscellaneous  character:  one 
treating  of  the  nature  of  God  and  man  and  the 
worship  due  to  the  former  by  arguments  drawn 
from  the  Pentateuch,  its  authorship  is  ascribed  to 
the  Sadaqa  Ben  Manga  Ben  Sadaqa  mentioned 
above1 2 * * * * *:  questions  and  answers,  with  interpreta- 
tions of  the  Pentateuch 8 : and  in  the  same  work 
allusion  is  made  to  the  ‘ special  enactments  of  the 
holy  Law’  by  Muwaifaq  ad-Din  al-Gahbadh *:  the 
list  may  be  closed  by  the  mention  of  a treatise 
on  the  second  exile  by  Ghazfil  Ibn  ad-Duwaik, 
followed  by  two  homilies  by  S&lih  Ibn  al-Marlulm 
Surhr  Ibn  Sadaqa  and  by  Abft  Sa’id s. 

The  liturgical  remains  of  the  Samaritans  are 
very  extensive.  They  consist  of  prayers  and 
hymns  arranged  in  twelve  parts  for  use  on 
sabbaths  and  festivals  throughout  the  year,  and 

1 A mat.  MS.  xxvil  p.  304:  jjjill  by  ^.1  U y\ 

s«lt 

! He  is  here  named  iij-e  Jly* : Ibn  Abi  Osaibi’a  as- 
signs two  works  to  him,  the  or  ‘book  of  faith,’ 

which  may  possibly  be  the  present  MS.  (Amtt.  xxvii.  p.  223), 
and  ajyiJl  a ■ 11  y iJU^,  or  ‘treatise 

on  religion,'  surnamed  ‘ the  treasure  which  concerns  deliverance.’ 

s Ibid.  p.  297. 

* Ibid.  p.  310  x,  4 U ijjly*  : not  the  same  as  the  Muwaffaq 

ad-Din  mentioned  above,  p.  139 : Juynboll,  Cumment,  p.  60. 

* Journ.  Asiat.  (1869),  p.  458:  iJjjJI  ciy-J  iJUil 

ebjjJl  y Jl^i  i~Jl  i— L.JU  i-jLill. 


Digitized  by  Google 


143 


also  for  special  occasions,  such  as  circumcisions, 
marriages,  and  funerals.  Several  of  the  former 
have  been  published  by  Heidenheim  from  the 
rich  stores  of  the  British  Museum  : the  following, 
occurring  at  the  end  of  the  ‘ Litany  of  Marqah,’ 
may  serve  as  a specimen.  ‘ Lord,  for  the  sake  of 
the  three  perfect  ones,  of  Joseph  the  interpreter 
of  dreams,  of  Moses  chief  of  the  prophets,  of  the 
priests,  the  masters  of  the  priests,  of  the  Thorah, 
most  sacred  of  books,  of  Mount  Garizim,  the 
everlasting  hill,  of  the  hosts  of  angels— destroy 
the  enemy  and  foe,  graciously  receive  our  prayers, 
O Everlasting,  grant  us  relief  from  these  troubles, 
open  to  us  the  treasure  of  heaven 

The  hymns  of  the  Samaritans,  their  sole  poetical 
inheritance,  are  of  little  devotional  or  literary  merit, 
nor  does  there  seem  good  reason  for  ascribing  any 
very  great  antiquity  to  them,  however  august  and 
remote  may  be  the  parentage  assigned  to  them. 
The  earliest  pieces,  so  we  are  informed,  were  sung 
by  the  angels  on  the  occasion  of  the  completion 
of  the  tabernacle  and  the  death  of  Aaron,  others 


1 Heidenheim,  ii.  487.  The  British  Museum  possesses  nineteen 
volumes  of  prayers  ami  hymns,  besides  the  fragments  of  liturgies 
from  Damascus  published  by  Oeseuius  in  his  ‘ Carmina  Sama- 
ritans,' and  edited  again  by  Kirchheiin  in  the  ‘ Karme  Shomeron 
three  ‘prayers  of  Moses  and  Joshua’  and  five  ‘prayers  of  the 
angels’ (from  the  ‘Defter’)  are  printed  in  Petermann’s  Gram- 
maiica  Samaritana  (1873),  P-  •8  sq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


144 


are  ascribed  to  Marqah  and  Amram  Dari  who 
lived  some  time  b.c.,  others  again  to  Ahisha  in 
the  thirteenth  century.  The  present  Samaritans 
have  two  collections,  which  they  call  Durbin 
(‘  string  of  pearls  J and  Defter  (‘  hook  ’),  the  latter 
comprising  the  former,  the  arrangement  of  which 
they  ascribe  to  the  above-mentioned  Amram  Dari 
The  language  in  which  they  are  written  varies  : 
some  are  in  almost  classical  Hebrew,  others  in  a 
dialect  resembling  that  of  the  Targum  but  with 
peculiarities,  containing  an  admixture  of  Arabisms 
and  Hebraisms:  to  some  a translation  in  Arabic 
tinged  with  Hebrew,  Aramaean,  and  Samaritan  is 
appended.  The  metre  also  differs  considerably ; 
some  stanzas  are  arranged  in  distichs,  others  in 
tristichs,  others  again  in  tetrastichs ; some  poems 
are  alphabetical,  in  others  the  verses  rhyme ; the 
rhythm  also  varies,  that  in  use  among  both  Arabs 
and  Syrians  being  employed.  From  the  general 
style  of  their  composition  and  the  fact  that  many 
of  the  authors  bear  Arabic  names  it  is  most  probable 
that  they  were  mostly  written  at  a time  subsequent 
to  the  Mohammedan  invasion,  in  some  cases  long 
after  it1 2. 


1 Fctcrmann  in  Herzog,  xiii.  376. 

* For  instance,  the  metre  employed  in  Marqah’s  Paschal  hymn 
(Heidenheim,  iii.  96)  does  not  seem  to  have  been  known  before 
the  ninth  century  a.d.  : see  Geiger  in  Zeitsch r.  d.  D.  M.  (!■ 
xxii.  534.  Some  of  the  titles  of  the  pieces  published  by  Heideu- 


Digitized  by  Google 


145 


The  Samaritans,  following  the  example  of  the 
ancient  Jews,  calculate  their  year  by  the  lunar 
months,  and,  in  order  to  bring  it  into  harmony 
with  the  solar  year  and  the  revolution  of  the 
seasons  upon  which  their  feasts  depend,  are  ac- 
customed each  year  to  intercalate  a thirteenth 
lunar  month.  The  arrangement  of  this,  and  also 
the  authoritative  fixing  of  the  exact  moment  at 
which  the  new  moon  may  be  considered  to  have 
appeared,  upon  which  depended  the  festival  at  the 
beginning  of  each  month,  were  among  the  Jews 


lieim  may  be  of  interest : e.  g.  (i.  279,  408)  titles  of  the  prayers 
to  be  used  throughout  the  year : one  festival  with  two  suppli- 
catory hymns  (i.  421)  : dream  of  the  priest  Abischa  (ii.  80),  who 
sees  Moses  on  mount  Garizim  and  is  taken  by  him  to  visit 
heaven  and  Eden:  the  prayer  of  Ab  Gelugah  (ii.  213):  pass- 
over  hymns  of  Phineas  and  Elcazar  (iii.  94) : a passover  hymn 
(iii.  474)  containing  an  invocation  of  the  Holy  Spirit : a prayer 
of  Marqah  (iv.  237),  and  of  Amram  {ibid.  243) : three  prayers 
of  Amram  (iv.  390),  one  ending  with  the  Mohammedan  sentence 
‘there  is  only  one  God:’  a prayer  (ibid.  545)  in  which  are 
described  the  order  and  ministry  of  the  angels  and  the  motions 
of  the  twelve  planets,  these  being  likened  to  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel.  There  is  a volume  of  prayers  and  hymns  in  the  Paris 
Bill.  Nat.,  numbered  ancien  fottds,  4,  Peiretc,  apparently  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  and  a liturgical  MS.  numliered  Add.  MS.  334, 
in  the  Univ.  Library,  Cambridge,  of  which  the  title  lias  been 
kindly  communicated  to  me  by  Mr.  Bensly  the  Sub-Librarian. 
It  is  .ions  .jo  | .nijatrn  ,*or  .noon  | ,'jram  .p!>m  .pit? 
jon  | jetc  | inrvi>Di  | .mn*  .pyi  | .orb  .craptm  | .owm  It  is 
dated  a .11.  ii85  = a.d.  1771. 

1 


Digitized  by  Google 


146 


left  in  the  hands  of  the  high-priest  for  the  time 
being,  and  formed,  as  we  have  seen  before,  a 
fruitful  source  of  dispute  between  the  rival  factions 
of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  *.  Till  long  after  the 
captivity  of  Babylon  it  is  probable  that  actual 
observation  and  not  calculation  of  the  appearance 
of  the  new  moon  was  practised  by  the  Jews1 2. 
The  Samaritans,  as  has  been  already  remarked3, 
claim  to  possess  astronomical  tables  drawn  up  by 
the  great-grandson  of  Aaron  himself,  and  every 
six  months  the  high-priest  draws  up  a calendar 
for  the  use  of  the  congregation.  Scaliger  pub- 
lished two  such,  and  De  Sacy  has  also  edited  one 
with  a translation 4 * : several  more  MSS.  of  the  kind 
have  found  their  way  to  Europe,  one  written  (a.h. 
1164  = ) a.d.  1750,  another  commencing  with  574 
of  the  Jezdegird  era  ( = a.d.  1204),  written  (a.h. 
1101  = ) a.d.  1689;  a third,  which  calculates  also 
according  to  the  Jezdegird  era,  dated  (a.  h.  1137  = ) 
a.d.  1 724  s:  St.  Petersburg  also  possesses  several 
specimens 8. 

In  grammar  and  lexicography  the  Samaritans 
have  nothing  of  much  value  to  shew.  Possessed 
of  little  learning  themselves  and  living  secluded 


1 See  above,  p.  38. 

5 De  Sacy,  Not.  el  Extr.  xii.  p.  34. 

s See  above,  p.  125.  4 Op.  cit.  pp.135,  153. 

6 See  Joum.  Asiat.  (1869),  pp.  467,  468. 

6 See  below,  App.  i.  7. 


Digitized  by  Gopffle 


147 


from  their  neighbours,  enclosed  in  their  limited 
circle  of  ideas,  they  did  not  imitate  the  Jews  in 
taking  advantage  of  any  opportunity  of  self- 
improvement  which  offered  itself  to  them.  The 
latter,  as  soon  as  ever  the  system  of  vowel  points 
had  been  introduced  among  the  Syrians  and  Arabs, 
eagerly  took  it  up  and  for  centuries  patiently  toiled 
at  the  work  of  improving  and  adapting  it  to 
Hebrew ; then,  dissatisfied  with  the  results  of 
their  labour  in  the  Assyrian  punctuation,  threw 
it  over  and  took  up  the  one  now  in  use,  the 
Palestinian,  in  its  place.  Whatever  fault  may 
be  found  with  minute  details  of  the  system, 
still  the  warmest  thanks  of  scholars  are  due  to 
those  who  elaborated  it  with  so  much  patience 
and  skill  for  having  thus  rendered  Hebrew  gram- 
mar possible.  The  Samaritans  attempted  nothing 
of  the  kind,  but  trusted  entirely  to  tradition  for 
the  pronunciation  of  their  Hebrew  Scriptures ; it 
consequently  must  have  deteriorated  and  become 
more  uncertain  from  age  to  age  under  the  influence 
of  the  living  Aramaean  and  Arabic  with  which  it 
had  to  cope.  Thus  matters  went  on  till  the 
tenth  or  eleventh  century,  when  the  literary 
activity  of  the  Arabs  communicated  itself  at  last 
even  to  the  sluggish  spirit  of  the  Samaritans, 
and  they  set  about  enquiring  into  and  settling 
the  laws  of  Hebrew  grammar.  But  it  was  then 
too  late  : the  fatal  bar  of  a corrupt  and  uncertain 

1 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


148 


pronunciation  met  them  at  the  outset  and  rendered 
all  their  efforts  fruitless  *. 

The  truth  of  these  remarks  will  be  seen  by  an 
examination  of  three  grammatical  treatises  of 
Samaritan  authorship  which  have  been  published 
from  a MS.  at  Amsterdam  2.  The  first  of  the  three  * 
is  an  extract  made  by  the  high-priest  Eleazar, 
the  son  of  Phinehas  the  son  of  Joseph,  probably 
about  1400  a.d.,  from  the  second,  a grammar4 
by  Abil  Ishaq  Ibrahim  Ben  Farag  Ben  MAruth, 
surnamed  Shams  al-Hukam&i,  whose  name  has 
already  occurred  above  in  connection  with  his 
celebrated  pupil  Muhadlidhib  ad-Din ; the  third 
is  a tract  by  Abu  Said,  probably  the  famous 
commentator  of  that  name,  intended  to  correct 
the  faults  of  pronunciation  prevalent  in  his  time s. 
They  are  built  entirely  on  the  philological  views  of 
Arabic  grammarians,  some  sections,  such  as  those 
on  transitive  and  intransitive  verbs,  being  copied 
word  for  word  from  their  works,  but  the  writers 
have  not  proved  themselves  such  apt  scholars  as 
their  Jewish  brethren.  From  their  want  of  a 
system  of  punctuation,  their  varying  orthography, 


' Cf.  Geiger  in  ZeiUchr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xvii.  718. 

* By  Noldeke  in  Gotting.  Nachrichlen  (1862),  pp.  337,  385. 

3 iiiyjJI  v'US- i . : they  are  from  the  A mat.  MS.  xxvii. 

mentioned  above,  pp.  1-220. 

4 Title  iill’  ysA  J 

6 Titles'Ll  ^\ji.  V 


Digitized  by  Google 


149 


and  the  complete  or  partial  disappearance  from 
their  language  of  sounds  still  written  in  Hebrew, 
they  are  especially  uncertain  in  the  parts  of 
grammar  concerned  with  these  particulars ; the 
arrangement  also  of  the  second  of  these  tracts  is 
very  unskilful,  needlessly  full  in  some  parts,  defec- 
tive in  others Old  Samaritan  blunders,  which 
had  before  been  pointed  out  by  Jewish  opponents, 
recur  again  in  Abb  Sa’Id,  as  for  instance  the 
mistaking  of  n local  for  a post-positive  article ; 
he  also  misunderstands  the  n of  the  Hiphil,  taking 
it  for  a strengthening  particle.  Transcriptions  of 
Hebrew  words  into  Arabic,  shewing  the  Samaritan 
pronunciation  of  the  eleventh  century,  will  be  found 
in  the  anonymous  commentary  quoted  above2. 
The  commentator  Ibrahim,  who  has  been  quoted 
above,  does  not  appear  to  have  made  any  advance 
beyond  the  views  held  by  his  countrymen,  as  far 
as  one  may  judge  from  the  grammatical  views 
expressed  in  Iris  work3. 

1 E.  g.  on  account  of  the  irregularities  of  npl>  a separate 
chapter  is  ilevoteil  to  verbs  : in  some  cases  the  vowels  are 
expressed  by  letters  as  TOUWI,  but  generally  by  the  three 
Arabic  vowels  which  arc  naturally  unsuited  to  express  the 
niceties  of  punctuation : a distinction  is  sometimes  made  be- 
tween great  (-  and  T)  and  little  (-)  fat  ha,  that  between  long  and 
short  vowels  is  generally  overlooked,  as  also  between  full  and 
half- vowels.  1 See  above,  p.  134. 

3 See  the  extracts  by  Geiger  in  ZeiUchr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xvii. 
723-725. 


Digitized  by  Google 


150 


So  much  for  the  grammatical  acquirements  of 
the  Samaritans  seven  or  eight  centuries  ago. 
Their  present  system  of  pronunciation  has  been 
made  the  subject  of  an  elaborate  enquiry  by 
Professor  Petermann,  who  has  transcribed  the 
whole  book  of  Genesis  after  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  now  read  in  the  synagogue  of  Nablus,  to- 
gether with  a Hebrew  grammar  embodying  the 
views  of  the  present  Samaritans  on  the  subject 
It  is  possible  that  in  some  points  the  system  now 
in  vogue  among  them  may  he  an  improvement 
upon  that  invented  by  the  Masoreths8,  but  at 
this  period  of  time  it  is  naturally  more  difficult 
(or  rather  impossible)  to  decide  even  than  in  the 
days  of  AbQ  Said  how  much  of  the  system  is 
due  to  genuine  tradition  and  how  much  to  Syrian 
and  Arabian  influence  ; the  enquiry  is  consequently 
not  of  much  practical  value1 *  3. 

In  the  matter  of  lexicography  there  is  little 
infoimation  to  give.  Of  dictionaries  proper  none 
have  as  yet  come  to  light:  at  Paris  there  is  a 
concordance  of  forms  occurring  in  the  Scriptures 
with  the  corresponding  Arabic  and  Samaritan 
word  in  parallel  columns,  and  a similar  one  is 


1 Published  in  Ablutndl.  fur  d.  Kunde  d.  Morgenlande s 
herausg.  von  d.  D.  M.  G.  (1868),  Bd.  v.  Th.  1. 

* Cf.  Noldekc  in  GoUing.  Nachrichten  (1868),  p.  485  sq. 

3 Cf.  Dereubourg  in  Calieu’s  Archives  Israel,  xvi.  532. 


Digitized  by  Google 


151 


preserved  at  Cambridge,  in  which  however  the 
Samaritan  equivalent  is  omitted 

With  this  account  of  the  literature  of  the  Sama- 
ritans my  task  is  concluded.  In  the  notes  ac- 
companying the  foregoing  sketch  reference  has 
been  made  to  all  the  important  works  I have  met 
with  bearing  on  the  subjects  discussed,  but  I have 
not  thought  it  either  necessary  or  desirable  to 
swell  the  volume  by  the  mention  of  such  literature 
as  has  now  been  superseded  by  better  works,  which 


1 Bibl.  Nat.,  ancien  fonds,  6,  Peiresc,  it  is  dated  a.d.  1476; 
tlie  Bodleian  MS.,  numbered  Podl.  Or.  466,  is  a copy  of  it:  the 
Cambridge  MS.  is  in  the  library  of  Christ’s  College  : it, is  dated 
(A. II.  1188  = ) A.D.  1774,  its  title  is  v>Ui^and  it  was 

arranged  by  the  priest  Phinehas.  It  is  an  independent  com- 
pilation, but  nearly  corresponds  with  the  Paris  MS. : e.  g.  in  the 
former  are  found  DUT,  out,  ^x-Li  OUT ; in  the 

latter  itUNt  n:ir,  pi’Nti  out,  TDE  rur.  See  also  below,  A ftp.  I.  v. 

There  is  a very  vague  notice  of  the  MSS.  still  preserved  at 
Nablus  given  by  Lowe  in  the  AUg.  Ze.it.  d.  Judenthums,  1839, 
No.  47  (see  above,  p.  41).  In  Mills’  Nablus,  p.  317,  is  to  be 
found  a rough  list  drawn  up  by  the  priest  Amram.  He  there 
mentions,  in  addition  to  the  works  described  in  the  text,  (1) 
commentaries  (^i)  on  the  Law,  in  Hebrew  with  Arabic  trans- 
lations, by  Marqah  (termed  * El-Amir,’  , JO'EN^N),  Ibrahim 
el  Kaisi,  Glmzal  ibn  ad-Duwaik,  Musalem  el  Murjam  („^yll  1), 
(ihazal  al  Matri,  El  Ilhabr  (^il  ?)  Ya’qftb;  (2)  various  ‘orders’ 
(^_5_y)  of  prayers  in  Hebrew  for  the  various  festivals;  (3) 
miscellaneous  works,  including  one  on  marriage  (,-UGjl 
and  another  on  inheritance  (^l^Jd  by  Abu-l-Barakat ; an 

explanation  of  the  feasts  entitled  ^Ljd  iJL*,  by  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


152 


were  moreover  written  at  a time  when  fuller  in- 
formation was  obtainable  than  by  preceding 
authors ; references  however  to  the  earlier  litera- 
ture will  lie  discovered  by  any  one  interested  in 
the  subject  by  turning  to  the  books  quoted  by  me 
In  the  two  appendices  that  follow  will  be  found, 

i.  an  interesting  description  of  the  Firkowitsch 
Collection  of  Samaritan  MSS.,  recentlv  added  to 
the  Imperial  Library  of  St.  Petersburg,  with  which 
I have  been  kindly  supplied  by  Dr.  Harkavv  ; and 

ii.  a translation  of  the  Masse kheth  Kuthim,  an 
important  Talmudical  tract  written  probably  in 
the  second  century  a.d. 


priest  Eleazar,  and  a book  of  * direction  ’ for  the  same,  called 
iJL y , bv  Ibrahim  el  Ahi ; an  anonymous  history  of  the 
Samaritans  (^U);  and,  lastly,  a treatise  on  the  astronomical 
work  i.— U , prnn,  which  is  described  above  (p.  125)  as 
attributed  to  Adam. 

* See  also  the  list  in  Zenker,  Bill.  Orient.  (1861),  ii.  149,  150. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  I. 


The  Collection  of  Samaritan  MSS.  at  St.  Petersburg. 

In  the  year  1870  the  Russian  Minister  of  Public  Worship 
purchased  from  the  well-known  Karaite  traveller  and 
archaeologist  Abraham  Firkowitseh  his  collection  of  Sama- 
ritan MSS.  for  the  Imperial  Library  of  St.  Petersburg. 
It  consists  almost  exclusively  of  fragments,  this  circum- 
stance arising  from  the  fact  that  the  collector  during 
his  stay  in  Nablus  and  Egypt  completely  ransacked  the 
Samaritan  Genizoth 1 (that  is  to  say,  the  garrets  and 
cellars  of  the  synagogues  whither  their  worn-out  books 
were  conveyed),  thus  acquiring  several  fragments  of  Sama- 
"ritan  Pentateuch  rolls — none  of  which  have  before  this,  to 


1 The  word  ilPM  in  Hebrew  is  equivalent  to  the  Sama- 
ritan mcBD,  as  seems  to  be  proved  by  an  epigraph  quoted 
by  Rosen  ( Zeitsch , d.  D.  M.  O.  1864,  p.  588);  as  however  he 
has  misunderstood  it,  I give  it  here  with  a new  translation: 

rrai>ooi>  nx  a'jirm  njveen  nixo  tren  nx  nenipn  mtnn  mn 
n’VDntn  rx  mpix  metsot  pix  xb  mean  nn'n  foyeep  'x 
iron  w:  mi  'dv  by  ex  jo  mooo  ;ibx  ^x  npi>oi  ex  ;d 
. CiTDX  X'OJl  ^VTjn,  that  is  to  say,  'This  Holy  Law  was  a.h. 
598  in  the  Matamra,  in  a chest : the  Matamra  caught  fire,  but 
the  Law  was  preserved  from  fire  by  passing  out  of  it  through 
the  window  ; (p^X  accordingly  must  not,  with  Rosen,  be  trans- 
lated ‘oak,’  but  be  taken  for  p^n,  a various  reading  for  the 
same  word  in  Gen.  viii.  6) : this  happened  in  the  days  of  our 
lord  Buha  the  high-priest  and  prince  of  Abraham.’ 


Digitized  by  Google 


154 


the  writer’s  knowledge,  ever  reached  Europe — about  6000 
parchment  and  paper  leaves  from  various  Pentateuch 
MSS.  written  in  the  shape  of  books,  several  fragments 
of  commentaries  on  the  Bible,  liturgical,  grammatical, 
and  lexicographical  works,  and  lastly  a number  of  mar- 
riage-contracts. The  writer  of  the  present  notice  received 
directions  from  the  Minister  to  make  a complete  catalogue 
of  the  collection,  and  the  first  portion  of  it  is  already  in 
print ; the  MSS.  shall  now  be  briefly  described  in  general 
terms. 

A collection  such  as  the  present  could  on  account  of  its 
fragmentary  character  hardly  have  claimed  any  particular 
attention  on  the  part  of  the  learned  world  had  it  con- 
tained another  and  better  known  literature.  It  is  different 
however  when  the  literary  remains  of  a people  are  con- 
cerned whose  existence,  though  an  unimportant  one, 
extends  over  a historical  past  comprising  thousands  of 
years,  and  who  now  are  threatened  with  extinction  ; a 
people  moreover  whose  inner  life  and  intellectual  activity, 
though  they  were  early  developed,  have  hitherto  remained 
almost  unknown.  Every  fragment  accordingly,  however 
slight  it  may  be,  which  belongs  to  the  literature  of  such 
a people  has  a value  of  its  own,  as  being  capable  of  giving 
information  on  many  points  which  interest  the  learned 
world,  especially  too  at  a time  when  so  great  activity  is 
being  displayed  in  the  field  of  Semitic  studies,  and  an 
attempt  made  to  follow  the  example  of  Aryan  scholars  by 
enquiring  more  closely  into  separate  peoples  and  stems,  and 
thus  gradually  to  gain  an  idea  of  the  whole  Semitic  race. 

In  describing  the  collection,  the  existing  divisions  have 
been  preserved ; the  first  accordingly  will  consist  of — 

i.  Fragments  belonging  to  twenty-seven  parchment 
Pentateuch  rolls.  None  of  this  kind,  as  has  been  already 


Digitized  by  Google 


155 


remarked,  have  hitherto  been  discovered  in  any  European 
library,  all  the  existing  ones  being  in  the  shape  of  books ; 
the  reason  of  this  appears  to  be  that  the  Samaritans  hold 
such  rolls  as  especially  sacred  from  their  being  intended 
for  use  in  the  synagogues,  and  so  will  part  with  them  for 
no  sum,  however  large,  to  those  of  another  faith.  Accord- 
ingly in  1811  the  high-priest  Salameh  ben  Tobiah  made 
answer  as  follows  to  the  request  received  in  a letter 
from  the  well-known  senator  Abbe  Gregoire,  that  he 
would  sell  him  two  Pentateuchs ; * As  to  your  request  that 
we  would  send  you  the  holy  book  of  the  Law,  we  eould 
only  do  so  if  ye  were  Samaritans  like  us,  and  had  like  us 
observed  the  ordinances  prescribed  to  you  V As  however 
the  Samaritans  had  already  frequently  sold  MSS.  of  the 
Pentateuch  (for  instance,  to  Pietro  della  Valle  and  Hunting- 
ton  in  the  seventeenth  century),  this  ‘ non  possumus  ’ of  the 
high-priest  must  refer  to  rolls  used  in  the  synagogue. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  these  fragments  have  been  till  now 
the  only  ones  known  in  Europe,  and  so  they  are  of  con- 
siderable importance  for  explaining  to  us  how  the  Sama- 
ritans write  their  sacred  Law  for  use  in  Divine  worship. 
Unfortunately,  as  might  have  been  guessed  from  the  place 
where  they  were  found,  they  are  for  the  most  part  in  very 
bad  condition  ; and  as  Samaritan  palaeography  is  not  yet 
in  a condition  to  decide  with  certainty  upon  the  age  of  an 
undated  MS.,  it  is  only  such  as  contain  dated  epigraphs 
whose  age  can  be  without  doubt  ascertained.  Only  six  of 
the  fragments  contain  such  notices,  and  only  three  of  this 
number  have  their  dates  perfect ; one  (no.  4)  was  written 
(a.h.  599  = ) 1202-3,  another  (no.  10)  in  (a.h.  605  = ) 


1 De  Sacy,  Not.  et  Extr.  xii.  25,  105,  121.  So  Robinson, 
Palestine  (1867),  iii.  130. 


Digitized  by  Google 


156 


1208-9,  the  third  (no.  15)  in  (a.h.  808=)  1405:  it  is 
however  quite  certain  that  several  other  fragments  in  the 
collection  belong  to  a much  earlier  age. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  the  way  in  which  the  Sama- 
ritans insert  these  epigraphs  in  their  Pentateuchs.  For 
this  purpose  the  column  of  text  in  the  roll  or  page  of 
the  book  is  divided  down  the  middle  by  two  perpendicular 
lines,  the  interval  between  the  lines  being  left  vacant, 
except  for  the  insertion  of  such  letters  from  the  text  as 
serve  the  writer  to  compose  the  epigraph.  For  instance, 
the  first  word  in  general  will  be  'ON,  or  H3N,  signifying 
‘ I the  writer  will  wait  till  an  N presents  itself  in  or  near 
the  middle  of  a line  of  text,  he  sets  this  in  the  space  inter- 
vening between  the  two  lines  and  goes  on  with  his  writing 
till  he  reaches  a 3 in  the  middle  of  a line,  this  he  sets  iu 
the  same  space,  doing  the  like  with  ' or  H,  and  so  on  to 
the  end  of  the  epigraph,  which  is  thus  made  to  extend 
over  several  columns  or  pages  without  a single  letter  being 
added  to  the  text  of  the  Pentateuch,  which  thus  itself,  so 
to  speak,  supplies  the  materials  for  a memorial  both  of 
the  writer  and  of  the  person  who  ordered  the  MS.  to  be 
written.  * * * * * * 

Among  the  fragments  of  about  300  Pentateuch  MSS. 
written  on  parchment  or  paper  are  to  be  found  the  oldest 
Samaritan  MSS.  known  in  Europe,  viz.  of  a.h.  57 1 and 
577,  corresponding  to  1176-7  and  1181-2;  the  dated 
ones  however  are  not  by  any  means  the  oldest,  and  it  may 
without  exaggeration  be  asserted,  if  one  may  judge  from 
the  writing  and  appearance  of  the  MSS.,  that  some  go 
back  to  the  eleventh  or  tenth  century,  if  not  even  further. 
The  collection  offers  the  richest  spoil  for  Samaritan  palaeo- 
graphy which  is  to  be  met  with,  not  in  Europe  only,  but 
throughout  the  world,  Firkowitsch  having  completely 


Digitized  by  Google 


157 


stripped  the  only  archives  belonging  to  the  people,  the 
above-mentioned  Genizoth 

ii.  The  collection  contains  also  many  fragments  of  the 
Samaritan-Arabic  translation,  as  well  as  of  the  Samaritan 

1 The  only  paleeographical  note  known  to  me  in  Samaritan 
literature  is  an  epigraph  at  the  end  of  a Bodleian  MS.  (Hunt. 
24),  which  reads  thus,  ^Aill  Will  tx» 

3'3'x  ■ iya.  ^iSl,  &c. : then  follows  the  usual  alphabet, 

called  by  Gesenius  (J Ion.  I’hoen.  tab.  3)  ‘letters  of  the  MSS.;’ 
by  J uy  11  boll  (Book  of  J oshua)  * larger  letters.’  Wi.  must 

be  taken  in  the  sense  of  ‘ official,’  or  ‘ settled,’  ‘ abiding,’  so 
‘ square  ’ writing.  Will  <— Lid  » ju»j 

tYb'x  &c. : (here  follow  the  characters  called 

by  Gesenius  the  1 Gotha  ’ letters,  by  J uynboll  ‘ ordinary.’  ka. 
l_Ji/WJI  I take  in  the  sense  of  CHO  as  used  in  the  Bab.  Baba  Kama, 
f.  98,  and  explained  in  the  Aruch,  ‘erased,’  ‘unclear’  writing: 
according  to  Arabic  lexicons  signifies  to  renovate  faint 
writing).  There  is  also  an  allusion  to  Samaritan  writing  in  an 
epigraph  inserted  at  the  beginning  of  Deuteronomy  in  the  Bodl. 
MS.  Pococke,  5 : Tiara  RD1  [3  H’30  13  ’nip  3N  |3  'tV  3X  R2X 
3s  n'3iroi  mio'ii  rairoi  m'pi  n3i3ixi>  nncnp  nnimx  tna 
nnx  'n^3t  no'ye  ncens  neon  3x  13  mn'  isy  mm  13  vy 
nsro  pnx  .3  ii>o  x'm  byxv'b  .p  ,n  .31  .x  nit?  njnn  m>3 
(OX  0'33  '331  D’33b  RB^XD  .13'bo'  nW>HPXl  (3  by  m.T  RX  .111X 
}DX.  The  words  HD'yo  HECnS  may  mean  ‘tasteful,’  ‘beautiful’ 
writing,  or  may  signify  a particular  style.  I have  fully  ex- 
plained the  expression  pnx  .3  '1^0  X'm  and  the  like  in  my 
catalogue,  pp.  49,  50.  I forgot  to  mention  in  the  text  that  our 
Pentateuch  fragments  are  also  of  great  value  for  the  Samaritan 
text,  as,  quite  by  chance  and  without  searching  for  them,  I have 
discovered  a great  number  of  variations  from  the  Samaritan 
text  of  the  Polyglotts  which  are  also  unmarked  by  Kennicott. 
Many  of  these  I mention  in  my  catalogue,  the  rest  I keep 
for  a special  work. 


Digitized  by  Google 


158 


Targum,  with  the  restoration  of  which  the  learned  arc  now 
so  much  occupied ; for  instance,  Petermann  and  Geiger  in 
Berlin,  Kohn  in  Pesth,  Briill  in  Frankfurt-am-Main,  &C.1 

iii.  Another  division  contains  smaller  or  greater  portions 
of  several  commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch.  These  are 


1 I add  in  this  place  a collation  of  some  passages  in  the 
Targum  edited  by  Mr.  Nutt  with  a fragment  to  which  I have 
not  yet  given  a number,  and  which  I accordingly  designate  by 
the  provisional  number  put  on  it  by  Firkowitsch,  ii.  29. 


Nutt. 

F.  ii.  29. 

9.  D'D3  nruo5> 

rtD'Da  nnjo 

V3DJ1 

naio:i 

10.  naira  nair 

nnara  nn[ar] 

pmaoji 

pn'aiDJi 

u.  'rtoai 

'tsnai 

pnox 

pcx 

12.  D'D3  (twice) 

nD'oa 

an  nob 

nanx  mab 

in  -0-6 

mnx  maai> 

13.  D'D3 

no'oa 

an  anexi> 

nanx  n-oii> 

14.  pmaDJi 

pmaiDJi 

nj'x 

ru\a 

an 

nanx  mcS 

nijnaai  nan!)  nrx 

myaai  maai>  nrn 

an  ano tb  nrx 

nanx  moxb  ruvi 

■aninana 

nmana 

15-  ay 

i>y 

pn'3D31 

pmaiDJi 

1 6.  aDy  nyaaxa 

aoyaaxa 

17.  pn 

pan 

Here  is  a lacuna. 

24.  mm  ; 

mjn 

Digitized  by  Google 


159 


of  the  greatest  importance  for  a knowledge  of  the  religious 
and  moral  views  of  the  Samaritans,  their  relations  with 
those  of  another  creed,  and  their  theory  of  the  universe ; 
these  also  possess  especial  value  in  the  general  dearth  of 
their  literature  as  frequently  citing  fragments  of  ancient 
theological,  philosophical,  poetical,  and  other  works  h 


Num.  xxviii.  24.  pn’3D31 

' *5- 

26.  tl&D 

27.  mm 
pinctt 

28.  in  ib!> 
in  131b 

29.  in  i.ice<i> 

rrinoN 

31.  pmsDJi 
xxix.  1.  jpS>D 
xxxi.  51.  imp 
52-  Vi 
54-  in’Ki 
xxxii.  1.  ’3D  |’3pl 

PP 

2.  *n’D3il 

3- 

4 ■ PP 

5.  (|):(ppn)ra 

jjiapn 

6.  p^’  pD’nx 
7-  "UP 

8.  |[13]K 

9.  nbton 


pn’33031 

|ni?B 

jn^D 

myi 

mnx  ma^ 
mns  m3ii> 
mnx  moxii 
matt 

pn’3iD3i 

tnbo 

laipi  foi. 
r^pnoi] 

■bm 

’31D  |N’3p3 
|K'3p 
’N'D3^ 

!P»i 
fK'3P 
rnmncK 
13313pn 
pSp"  pmnbt  Nn 
13pm 

J313 

ni>3N 


1 Especially  interesting  are  the  quotations  from  earlier 
writings  or  poetical  productions  in  the  Aramaic  dialect  I 


Digitized  by  Google 


160 


iv.  To  the  same  class  belong  fragments  of  Samaritan 
law-books  ; these  are  very  rarely  to  be  found  in  Europe l. 


quote  some  passages  from  MS.  F.  iii.  a,  a fragment  of  a Mid- 
rash-like commentary  on  the  Pentateuch  : 

(1)  iJJl  133  »jJj  jl  npio  — - II  Jy&il 

130N  D'nksi  D'OI  ,T13  1131  lin  ‘I’yptrO  |3”3  JjiJ  i\ 

pryo  ptn  mat  iin  'o  13b  mi  i'i>o  jtra  ,130  pi>m 
. ”t<113  [O'yO.  Marqa  and  his  son  Nana  were,  as  is  well  known, 
the  earliest  writers  of  hymns  among  the  Samaritans.  The  first 
word  }3«3  is  doubtful,  can  it  be  for  p3N3 1 The  remainder  is 
plain  enough. 

(2)  npD3  nrta  nil  (npio  Jy  ^uj)  Jy  eJJi  Jic  Jjj  L. 
if6y  n^n  13S  nnn:i  no'ypi  rrn  mi>oi  icdd  itsnp  pyeo 
130  npD3i  intrs  ub  nt>vi  njnpi  njrai  moi  noi>n  13S  nnn3i 
. S>31p^1  1^1  [1  nil  nny:i  13i?1.  A person  might  say  he  had 
a bit  of  the  Sohar  before  him.  The  phrase  !TO1  IQ^n  is  im- 
portant for  the  interpretation  of  10*^13  in  the  Samaritan  Tar- 
gum  (Gen.  xli.  2),  as  it  shews  that  the  latter  word  is  no  mere 
copy  of  the  Hebrew  '1X3  as  many  people  supposed.  Moreover 
I’etermann  in  his  edition  has  not  the  word  in  question. 

(3)  i_oJ — II  y y npio  ^1  [sic]  y»j  — U aUi  Xiy 

Jji!  il  131  1313  131ft  j^JLc  »JUI  ^1 yi} 

i3i»3  n3i3  itro  av  leu  by  ri3n3  iniiiwi  not?  ^ JJI 

. Dp3  Dl*  by  DJtp  icn  N13  D'li>N  *»*»•»  I have  also  col- 
lected fragments  of  philosophical  works  written  in  the  Samaritan 
dialect,  the  publication  of  which  I reserve  for  myself. 

* Among  the  law-books  are  some  fragments  written  in  Arabic, 
but  in  Samaritan  characters,  e.  g.  F.  iv.  18  ; here  is  a specimen  : 

♦ ftoi3  p^yn'  ftoi  wii>tti  1'iDn^tt  3t<3  ♦ 

1N3!>N1  Noi>N3  pODp3  K313J!  Ml  D33^N  I^NtN  NltOyD  11N1D$>N 

1'ioniift  ns'  'ni>f<  itrc^tt  ;n  Jjij  fto,nntt3  ynm  no  ni3d 

NDl  3^n^K  NOl  113^N  N01  irQ^N  KOI  KCD^N  NO  HD  N13 

i'v  nod  11N0  ondpn  iy[3]iN  'by  ik'd^ni  pyi>N  ndi  i'3i>N 


Digitized  by  Google 


161 


v.  The  fifth  division  contains  fragments  of  grammatical 
works  and  of  Hebrew-Arabic  dictionaries,  or  Tardesche- 
ntanJs  (Interpreters),  as  they  are  termed  by  Samaritans 
and  Arabs.  These  last  are  of  so  much  greater  importance, 
because  in  the  only  example  of  such  a dictionary  hitherto 
known  to  exist1,  that  preserved  in  Paris2,  three  letters 
at  the  commencement  (N,  2,  and  half  3)  are  missing, 
and  now  fortunately  may  be  supplied  from  the  present 
fragments 3.  *****  * 


[?]umc$>x  vn  iron  nnxBi  nd5>x  ini  nroa 

xcb  n'iino^to  feynDo^x  xd^x  im  moo  my  mxai  Do»ei>x 
nDxji  n's  ni>n  '"6x  ini  dh  xoi  mnxB^N  x'rx^x  p no^xn 
mnxB^x  dxdpxi  nniipa  nDxii^x  'by  't-x  im 

ni'nDn  mb'  xn  nxixeota  ps  n^am  no'aai  wm  nnxi>n 
: dpb  mnxia  Dili’  xd  xmci  jxninxa  dt^  xo  xnm  nnxi>ni>xa 
|xn;nx3  m^xi  wm  ynt  naan  nb'i>  'ip  ^no  mnxia  dj>  '-6nb 
no  xob  5>no  nxPnbxi  ni>xi  arm  nj nvn  5>no  & c. 

1 [But  see  above,  p.  151.  J.  \V.  N.] 

1 [See  above,  p.  151.  J.  W.  N.] 

’ These  dictionaries  are  termed  in  Samaritan  in  Arabic 

there  are  six  fragments  in  the  collection ; viz. 

(1)  F.  v.  7 ; 21  leaves,  from  7'3X  to  ')>3. 

(2)  F.  v.  7 ; 2 leaves,  from  D'nbx  to  131N. 

(3)  F.  v.  8 ; 46  leaves,  from  2X  to  3S?y. 

(4)  F.  v.  9 ; 33  leaves,  from  yc'ax  to  lien. 

(5)  F.  v.  10 ; 1 leaf,  from  "pax  to  ';nx. 

(6)  F.  v.  10 ; 2 leaves,  from  E’BJ  to  ni>y. 

The  only  copy  which  has  the  beginning  perfect  has  the  fol- 


lowing inscription  on  the  title-page : 
vy*  1 « Jli 


^1  cW'  ^ r-1 

^ [sic]  lju» 


ij'  [1]  sllJj  ct*'  cr*'  'y+*-  ]y*j 

^ I — L-j  L»  * * » 1*  dJlj  [1]  ^-Ul  » cfc. 

r Juil  JJb  f\  y \ J_^  ±Jj}\  Jill 


m 


Digitized  by  Google 


162 


vi.  In  this  class  are  works  containing  historical  matter, 
not  only  the  already  edited  Book  of  Joshua  and  Annals  of 
Abulfath,  but  such  as  have  never  yet  appeared  ; for  instance, 
fabulous  tales  of  the  birth  and  death  of  Moses  *. 

vii.  To  this  division  belong  several  astronomical  works, 
some  entire,  some  imperfect.  These  are  unique  of  their 
kind,  for  as  far  as  the  present  writer  knows,  no  public 
library  in  Europe  has  any  such  to  shew*;  from  them 
alone  however  can  we  discover  how  the  Samaritans  reckon 
their  time,  arrange  their  feast-days,  &c.  Two  eras  are 
employed  by  them,  one  dating  from  the  entry  of  the 
Israelites  into  Canaan,  and  the  other  from  the  Persian 
king  Jezdegird:  two  more  are  also  used,  most  frequently 
the  Mohammedan,  and,  much  less  often  in  epigraphs,  the 
Creation  of  the  World  ; as  for  instance  in  the  epigraph  of 
the  Pentateuch  numbered  Add.  MS.  22369  in  the  British 


At  the  end  of  tp  is  the  following  epigraph  : 

J csUj  ^ ^L-ill 

(so)  j — il  ^ a wo,Kl 

^^•.1^11  AAll  jLjlII  jij\  Jj  < aJIj  «jGj 

ip.'  eP-'  dp"  "AA'  ‘-rjjj jJlj  LJa-U  g Ipc 

ert J!/*  ip’  eP1  eP-'  fP’vA' 

pj  ‘-Ac  cP”'?  *-*^c  eA  (A  »J  JGj  An  jii 

•cr*'  IP*'  J'  r^-Pt/t3  Jlr1^  Jv 

From  the  first  epigraph  we  see  that  the  author  of  the  Meliz 
was  called  Phinehas,  but  this  gives  us  no  information  as  to 
the  date  of  its  composition,  ns  there  have  been  very  many 
Samaritan  high-priests  of  this  name.  I reserve  to  myself 
the  supplying  of  full  information  with  regard  to  these  fragments 
and  the  Paris  MS. 

1 [See  above,  p.  132.  J.  W.  N.] 

* [For  similar  works,  see  above,  p.  146.  J.  W.  N.] 


Digitized  by  Google 


163 


Museum.  Calendars  also  for  a single  year,  giving  the  por- 
tions which  are  to  be  read  each  Sabbath  from  the  books  of 
Moses,  are  to  be  found  in  the  collection  x. 

viii.  This  part  consists  of  very  varied  fragments  which 
have  not  yet  been  carefully  examined,  but  it  may  be 
mentioned  that  it  contains  a good  deal  relating  to  medi- 

1 [See  above,  p.  75.  J.  W.  N.J  The  epigraph  in  Brit.  Mus. 
Add.  MS.  22369  is  written  in  after  the  manner  described  above 
in  p.  156.  As  this  is  almost  the  only  instance,  as  far  as  I know, 
in  which  the  three  eras  are  put  together,  I give  the  passage.  It 
commences  at  Deut.  xv,  and  runs  thus : '2X  12  D.112X  '3X 

mana  ainan  n-on  pby  'ax  p men  ax  p iyDX  'ax  12  jyyi 
inx  nip  nfem  2n2  mm  op  mi  'P33^>  npnpn  mmn  nxt 
D'si’x  ns'ta  nr  xm  bnycv*  mainoS  imp  mxo  yapi  jj'ew 
D’si>x  :n  nip  xm  Dmyco  itxiP'  '32  nxv^  nip  n'pbpi  npom 
.niiT  nx  mix  aby  nxmai*  nip  b'sdpi  dopi  mxo  yapi.  In 

the  astronomical  tables  the  eras  mentioned  are  2P10^  lpy.1  'IP 
fyi3  px  ^Nip*  '32  and  T>3ipi>  ipyn  'IP.  The  tables  themselves 
arc  called  in  the  epigraph  may.1  2pnon.(as  at  the  beginning  of 
Neubauer’s  chronicle)  : single  technical  expressions  are  B’^lID ; 
□'3n ; niyn;  nn'2P;  D’?i,  mpi;  B'3P,  ni'iP ; D'aaiP; 
nua ; nipnx  Dipo,  pun  Bipo,  pimi  bipd  ; (or  naim  7m)  na!m 
B'pinm  (or  nmoim)  niyosm  nivapa  mm  nibiao ; niViio  nobn 
niyprn  B'O'a  mm;  D'Pinm  niyoini  msapa  pnn  pxi  niaim ; 
niyprn  b'b'2  pnn  pxi  na^n ; inx  pr  m’  i>a  npoc^  mnr  poi 
pirn  tap  D'pim  : i npimo  nanpoi ; p npepi  nsapm  mip 
cm  p men  ityo  131?  B'lpyi  n iop  bit  mem  pin ; n32C’m  .11117 
pm  p men  ityo  nip  ipy  yem  bai  na'o  p mnn;  nano 
pn  13^  pppxi  p3x  noi  mnr  W>3  'pi  noa  'as  ni'in  ^>a^>a  'pi 
iiDyi  3^ai ; pi  nmxa  nanP'  ni'in  bibi  'pi  xin  icoxx  ioi 
noi  ncan  ppna  xia.  The  names  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the 
zodiac  arc  2P3;  HP ; XT13;  J’OiO;  nmx;  n^>2P;  [PD;  2ipy; 
npp ; '13 ; lpl ; pin  ; partly,  it  will  be  observed,  Hebrew,  and 
partly  Arabic. 

m 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


164 


cine,  though  it  is  doubtful  whether  all  belongs  to  Sama- 
ritan authors.  Some  fragments  of  historical  works  have 
also  found  their  way  by  mistake  into  this  division. 

ix.  In  this  are  contained,  according  to  a rough  list 
made  of  them,  fragments  of  276  MSS.  of  a liturgical 
character,  written  on  6300  leaves,  partly  composed  in 
Arabic  also.  The  knowledge  of  Aramaic  idioms  in  general, 
and  of  the  Samaritan  dialect  in  particular,  gained  from 
the  small  collection  of  hymns  published  by  Gesenius 
and  Heidenheim,  makes  one  long  to  sec  the  whole  cycle 
of  Samaritan  hymns  and  prayers  in  print,  at  all  events 
such  as  are  composed  in  Aramaean;  then  only,  when 
this  is  done,  will  it  be  possible  to  bring  out  a Samaritan 
dictionary  worthy  of  the  name.  The  said  cycle  consists  of 
at  least  twelve  quarto  volumes,  of  which  the  twelfth  is 
contained  in  Add.  MS.  19019  belonging  to  the  British 
Museum  ; should  the  various  parts  which  are  now  dis- 
persed among  all  the  libraries  of  Europe — Rome,  Paris, 
London,  Oxford,  Berlin,  Gotha — ever  be  united,  still  it  will 
never  be  possible  from  them  to  make  up  (auftreiben)  a per- 
fect copy.  By  means  however  of  the  vast  number  of 
fragments  belonging  to  the  St.  Petersburg  collection  one 
may  hope  to  fill  up  these  lacunae,  and  so  make  an  edition 
of  the  whole  cycle  possible ; though  this  cannot  be  decided 
with  certainty  till  these  fragments  have  been  more  care- 
fully examined  and  collated  with  those  of  other  European 
libraries  *. 

1 A very  imperfect  idea  will  be  gained  of  the  liturgical 
hymnology  of  the  Samaritans  from  a study  only  of  the  speci- 
mens published  by  Gesenius,  Heidenheim,  and  quite  lately  by 
Petermann.  Some  that  have  never  been  edited  are  far  from 
heavy,  and  not  without  a certain  poetical  vigour.  The  following 
is  from  Cod.  Firkovnbsck,  iii.  3 : 


aed  by-Google 


165 


x.  The  last  section  contains  twenty-two  documents  in 
Arabic  relating  to  civil  matters,  and  ranging  from  the 
seventeenth  to  the  nineteenth  century,  about  seventy  con- 
tracts of  marriage,  and  six  amulets.  As  regards  the  con- 
tracts, none  had  hitherto  been  discovered  older  than  the 
seventeenth  century,  and  Firkowitsch  in  a memorandum 

nx  | 'es3  omi  | nepn  | '3iy  p | neoa  | rein  'b  | y'eio  nx 
n'eon  | pnx  | 'eixa  | 'enpo  j ienpD3  | w:  | DD’ei  | ney 

These  are  a few  lines  from  the  eighth  part  of  the  Samaritan 
liturgy  ( Berlin , Coll.  Petermann,  No.  7) : 

mm  piyv*>  : ms  hi  vie'  bv 
men  npi>n  nx  : no'  |i>  nona 
n3'3DD  id'd  lynei  : ni'y  innoxi  ivp'nx 
itiot  npi>n  by  : nryn  myma  i33i 
XDon  unon  'nam  : noca  iD'n  men  npi>n 
m bub  t t pxi : xcon  'a  xiyn 
n:3  'b  nxat  3py' : n:x  iD'n  men  npi>n 
m bub  vp  pxi : nm  w np!> 
idh3  Dvn  'ix  : iD'n  men  np^n 
'i'  bxb  vp  pxi : *un  '33  B'yem 

i^oa  '3D  B'yem  : ibo3  no’n  men  npi>n 
'T  bxb  e'  pxi : tam  jnaenn 
*exi  by  xip'  p'tn  : 'em  xS  iD'n  men  npi>n 
m ^xb  e'  pxi : neo  oe  *30  pmnxi 
xeio  '3iy  i>n: : neos  by  iD'n  men  np^n 
'i'  i>xi>  vp  pxi : neinpn  minn  '30  p'mnx 
Sea  Di'n  'naio  : inpn  xen  men  np^n 
m bttb  vp  pxi : i>n3  jna  13  D'b 
’33x  iD'ni : '33n  men  npi>n 
'T  ^6  VP  PXI  : '33'  '3X1'  JO  ^3 
I hope  very  soon  to  publish  a good  deal  of  similar  matter  in 
a separate  work. 


166 


attached  to  the  collection  asserted  that  the  Samaritans  had 
none  till  this  time,  when  they  learnt  from  a Karaite 
traveller  how  to  compose  them.  This  is  however  a 
mistake,  as  the  present  writer  not  long  ago  published 
one  dated  (a.h.  916=)  1510-11,  which  was  found  by 
him  among  the  fragments  of  a Pentateuch  belonging  to 
the  collection '.  Before  this  nothing  had  been  brought 
out  but  two  badly  copied  specimens  by  Wilson 2.  The 
whole  number  should  however  be  edited,  first  because 
each  begins  with  a solemn  hymn  specially  composed  for 
the  occasion,  which  accordingly  offers  a new  Samaritan  text ; 
and  secondly,  because  the  names  of  persons  and  families 
are  of  special  interest,  and  present  rich  materials  for  a 
Semitic  Onomasticon  3. 


1 In  ffameliz,  1873,  no.  8,  pp.  62,  63. 

1 The  Ijand * of  the  Bible  (1847),  ii.  689-695. 

5 I here  communicate  some  personal  names  from  contracts  of 
marriage.  The  appended  numbers  betoken  the  years  (a.h.)  when 
the  documents  were  written.  Of  women’s  names  the  following  are 
of  interest:  moi’K  (1068,  1103,  1134,  1181),  (1209,  pro- 

bably identical  with  the  foregoing),  |Nn2¥N  (1132),  roifl  (1:48, 
1158,  1191,  1202,  1216),  !T2Sn  (?  with  the  article,  1181),  mnt 
(‘moon,’  1 1 8 x ),  rmjn  (1170),  n'3«n  (1142),  ncD2  (1134),  irinsa 
(1149),  mins  (1118,  1148,  1218),  nano  (1177),  mDio  (1180), 
■p^>D  (1084),  Nnw  (x  14 . ),  mD  (1242),  npnv  (1161,  1164,  1175, 
1194),  (1220,  1268),  rwx  (JI98,  probably  the  same  as  the 

foregoing),  HBV  (1158),  nn21  (1118),  TBt?D  n2"'  (‘  very  beauti- 
ful,’ 1118),  pn2">  (916,  hoi,  1154),  nn  (1101),  mxt?  (1203, 
1234),  mt?  (1165,  both  probably  identical  with  me),  r6t? 
(1211),  nrr6tr  (1244),  nr6e  (1124,  1143,  1146,  &c.),  nota 
(1146,  1209),  mot?  (1191),  iron  (>223),  nc’en  (1244),  noun 
(1149,  1168),  r\Bl;n  (1211,  probably  the  same). 

Of  men’s  names  I will  mention — mitT  (1149,  1168,  also  a 


167 


The  collection  contains  also  the  following  objects : (i)  a 
case  for  a Pentateuch-roll  made  of  brass  plates  and  adorned 
with  a variety  of  figures,  Samaritan  and  Arabic  proverbs  ; 
(2)  the  capital  of  a column  found  on  Garizim,  taken  possibly 
from  the  old  Samaritan  temple  there ; (3)  the  stone  tablet 
from  the  Samaritan  synagogue  at  Nablus,  on  which  arc 
inscribed  several  verses  of  the  Pentateuch  for  liturgical 
purposes,  as  described  by  Dr.  Rosen  and  Prof.  Rudiger '. 

Dit.  A.  Harkavy. 


woman's  name),  tpti’J'H  (1180),  mm  13y  (1103,  in6, 

1191,  (fcc.,  probably  in  imitation  of  the  Arabic  JJ1  a - c), 
(ann  nay  (IIOI,  1209,  probably  the  same  as  n:tDCn),  ruun  13y 
( 1 142, 1 190,  &c.),  n'CTtiVny  (t  19 1, 1248),  nnomay  (1168, 1244), 
me  (1273),  TVV  (1209,  1 2 1 1,  &c.,  also  a woman’s  name). 

The  family  names  most  frequently  occurring  are  nriDYl  (also 
written  nnstn),  nnom  or  nnonn  (also  nnoiy),  rtiWD  (not  the 
patriarch),  *IQD,  TmD,  12Y:  once  occur  mDS  (1158),  'ttnans 
(it  18),  iTCm  (1244),  &c.  Tlie  expression  pttn  'M2  [D1  is  twice 
(1068,  1084)  used;  can  it  mean  ‘priests  of  the  altar  1’  Com- 
pare also  the  family  names  mentioned  in  Neubauer’s  chronicle. 
There  is  a specimen  of  a letter  of  divorce  to  be  found  in  Brit. 
Mus.  Add.  MS.  19956,  f.  96. 

[In  the  Cambridge  dictionary  described  above,  p.  151,  is  a 
marriage  contract,  dated  A.  H.  1188,  between  ^1 
t^kil  dwelling  at  Joppa,  and  the  daughter  of  ^1  ° r.j . 

^Aill  fij—  of  Nablus. 

In  a later  account  Dr.  Harkavy  draws  attention  to  some  more 
peculiarities  of  Samaritan  Pentateuchs.  In  Exodus  ii,  where 
the  birth  of  Moses  is  related,  the  following  epigraph  is  inserted : 
"l^TiN  nci  no^y  V310  ■ Hail  to  the  'Almah  (Jungfrau)  and 
to  her  offspring  !’  Exodus  xiv  or  xv  generally  has  the  title  .Tin' 
n'3lp  'yvi3  ‘ The  Lord  is  Victor  in  fights.’  J.  W.  N.] 

1 Zeitschr.  d.  D.  M.  G.  xiv.  622-634. 


Digitized  by  Google 


APPENDIX  II. 


The  Massekhelh  Kuthirn,  or  Tract  on  the  Samaritans'. 

i.  As  to  the  usages  of  the  Kuthirn,  in  some  they  re- 
semble heathens,  in  some  Israelites,  but  in  roost  of  them 
Israelites.  We  do  not  accept  from  man  or  woman  among 
them  who  has  been  afflicted  with  an  issue  or  from  their 
women  after  childbirth  offerings  of  doves  or  pigeons2,  nor 
sin-offering,  nor  trespass-offering,  but  we  receive  from 
them  vows  and  free-will  offerings : we  do  not  suffer  them 
to  acquire  immovable  property 3,  nor  do  we  sell  them 
sheep  for  shearing4,  nor  crops  to  cut,  nor  timber  still 
standing6,  but  we  let  them  have  cattle  for  killing.  We 
do  not  sell  them  large  cattle  though  wounded,  nor  foals, 
nor  calves0,  but  we  let  them  have  cattle  that  are  wounded 


• 1 I have  mostly  followed  the  text  of  the  Massekheth  Kuthirn 

as  amended  by  Kirchheim,  but  many  important  variations  are 
to  be  found  in  the  Mishnah,  Tosifta,  and  the  two  Talmuds,  for 
which  the  reader  is  referred  to  Kirchheim's  elaborate  notes. 

2 Lev.  xv.  14,  29. 

3 Because  they  might  sell  it  to  heathens  : D3nn  tS  (Dcut  vii.  2 

‘ Thou  shalt  not  shew  mercy  upon  them  ’)  was  read  by  the  Rabbis 
Djrin  ‘ Thou  shalt  not  settle  them  : ’ Bab.  'Aboda  Zara,  20  a. 

* They  might  sell  it  to  heathens,  and  so  the  first  of  the  fleece 
(Deut.  xviii.  4)  might  not  be  given  to  the  priests;  so  with 
regard  to  crops  also. 

5 Lest  they  might  have  a claim  upon  the  ground ; Bab.  'Aboda 
Zara,  20  b. 

0 As  they  might  sell  or  lend  them  to  heathens,  and  the 
provisions  of  Exod.  xxii.  9 sq.  not  be  observed. 


169 


beyond  the  possibility  of  a cure.  We  sell  them  no  weapons 
nor  anything  which  could  damage  persons : we  neither 
give  nor  take  wives  from  them,  but  we  give  and  borrow 
on  usury  with  them : we  let  them  have  the  gleanings,  and 
that  which  is  forgotten,  and  the  corners  of  our  fields 1 ; and 
they  too  have  the  same  custom  with  regard  to  that  which 
is  forgotten  and  the  comers  of  their  fields,  and  are  to  be 
relied  upon  to  carry  out  all  these  practices  in  their  proper 
time  and  the  tithe  for  the  poor  in  its  year2;  the  fruit  of 
their  trees  is  held  for  untithed,  as  that  of  heathens,  and  their 
instrumentality  in  the  ‘ Erubh  ’ is  as  if  done  by  heathens  3. 
A daughter  of  Israel  may  not  deliver  a Samaritan  woman 
nor  suckle  her  son4 *,  but  a Samaritan  woman  may  perform 
these  offices  for  a daughter  of  Israel  in  her  (the  Israelite’s) 
house ; an  Israelite  may  circumcise  a Samaritan,  and  a Sama- 
ritan an  Israelite,  though  R.  Jehuda  says  a Samaritan 
should  not  do  so,  for  he  circumcises  in  honour  of  mount 
Garizim.  We  may  stand  a beast  in  the  stable  of  a Sama- 
ritan or  hire  a Samaritan  to  follow  and  tend  our  cattle  s,  or 
give  a son  in  the  charge  of  a Samaritan  to  teach  him  a trade: 
we  associate  and  converse  with  them  everywhere,  as  is  not 
the  case  with  heathens.  A Samaritan  suffers  the  halisah 
from  his  sister-in-law  6,  and  gives  a letter  of  divorce  to  his 
wife : he  may  be  trusted  to  bring  such  from  beyond  the 
sea  to  an  Israelite.  The  following  are  things  we  do  not 
sell  to  them, — that  which  has  died  of  itself,  what  has  been 
torn,  abominations,  reptiles,  the  abortion  of  an  animal, 


1 Lev.  xxiii.  22  ; Deut.  xxiv.  19. 

2 Every  third  year;  Deut.  xxvi.  12. 

s See  above,  p.  34,  note  3. 

* As  she  might  he  rearing  the  child  for  idolatry. 

* Exod.  xxii.  19.  * Deut.  xxv.  9. 


Digitized  by  Google 


170 


oil  Into  which  a mouse  has  fallen,  an  animal  that  is 
mortally  ill,  and  a foetus,  (though  these  last  two  arc  eaten 
by  Israelites,)  because  in  so  doing  we  should  be  leading 
into  error.  And  as  we  do  not  sell  such  things  to  them, 
so  neither  do  we  buy  them  from  them,  as  it  is  written, 
‘ For  thou  art  a holy  people  to  the  Lord  thy  God1;’  in- 
asmuch as  thou  art  holy,  thou  shalt  not  make  another 
people  more  holy  than  thyself.  A Samaritan  may  be 
trusted  to  say  whether  there  is  or  is  not  a sepulchre  [in 
a field],  or  of  an  animal  whether  it  is  first-born  or  not, 
of  a tree  whether  it  is  four  years  old  or  still  impure,  and 
also  is  credible  with  regard  to  grave-stones,  but  not  with 
regard  to  spreading  trees  2 nor  stones  projecting  from  walls, 
nor  with  regard  to  the  land  of  the  Gentiles 3,  nor  to  a 
field  in  which  a sepulchre  has  been  ploughed  up,  inasmuch 
as  in  these  things  their  belief  is  open  to  suspicion.  In 
fine,  they  are  not  to  be  trusted  in  a matter  in  which  their 
belief  is  open  to  suspicion. 

ii.  We  do  not  buy  meat  from  a Samaritan  butcher  except 
such  as  he  himself  eats,  nor  strings  of  birds  unless  he  has 
first  put  them  into  his  mouth ; it  is  not  enough  that  he 
offer  them  to  an  Israelite,  as  before  now  they  have  been 


1 Deut.  xiv.  at. 

* They  can  be  trusted  with  regard  to  grave-stones,  as  these 
are  distinctly  marked  : not  with  regard  to  a spreading  tree  or 
a stone  projecting  from  a wall,  under  which  a dead  body  might 
have  been  buried ; these  would  be  considered  by  the  Rabbis  as 
a tent,  and  cause  pollution  to  any  one  sitting  below.  The  Sama- 
ritans are  not  of  this  opinion,  and  so  their  testimony  would  not 
be  received,  as  they  would  naturally  be  careless  in  the  matter. 

3 Probably  because  the  Jews  would  hold  it  for  unclean,  which 
the  Samaritans  would  not  do. 


Digitized  by  Google 


171 


suspected  of  giving  us  to  eat  what  had  died  of  itself.  A 
Samaritan  and  Israelite  are  on  the  same  footing  with 
regard  to  all  damages  mentioned  in  the  Law : an  Israelite 
who.  kills  a Samaritan,  or  a Samaritan  who  kills  an  Israelite, 
goes  into  exile  1 if  he  have  done  it  unwittingly ; if  of  set 
purpose,  he  suffers  death  : if  the  ox  of  an  Israelite  gores 
the  ox  of  a Samaritan  the  master  escapes  free,  but  if  the  ox 
of  a Samaritan  gores  one  belonging  to  an  Israelite,  should 
it  be  the  first  offence,  half  the  damage  is  paid  ; should 
warning  before  have  been  given,  the  whole2:  R.  Meir  says 
that  if  the  ox  of  a Samaritan  gores  one  belonging  to  an 
Israelite,  whether  for  the  first  time  or  not,  the  whole 
damage  must  be  paid,  and  as  if  the  animal  had  been  of 
the  best.  The  cheese  of  Samaritans  is  allowed  : R.  Simeon 
Ben  Eleazar  says  that  of  householders  only,  while  that 
of  dealers  is  forbidden : their  pots  and  presses  are  for- 
bidden, because  they  make  wine  and  vinegar  with  them. 
The  priests  of  Israel  may  share  with  the  Samaritan  priests 
in  Samaria,  inasmuch  as  they  are,  as  it  were,  thus  rescuing 
their  property  from  their  hand,  but  not  in  the  land  of 
Israel,  in  order  not  to  establish  their  claim  to  the  priest- 
hood : a Samaritan  priest  while  unclean  may  give  what  he 
is  eating  to  an  Israelite,  but  not  if  he  be  clean  3.  We  buy 
no  bread  from  a Samaritan  baker  at  the  end  of  the  Pass- 
over  until  after  three  bakings,  nor  from  householders  till 
three  Sabbaths  are  past,  nor  from  villagers  till  it  has  been 
made  three  times4 *.  When  is  this  to  he  observed?  When 


1 To  the  city  of  refuge;  Xumb.  xxxv.  25  sq.  8 Exod.  xxi.  36. 

5 Because  what  he  eats  when  unclean  must  be  a common,  not 

a holy  thing. 

4 See  Kirchhcim's  note.  Leavened  bread  baked  during  the 

Passover  was  forbidden. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXXVI.  2-9.  84 

Diipb  'Mai  [e\D]v  an  pna  ntrja  in  i*na 
; btntr*  an*?  nnnnN  *trtn  n*n*D:>  anpbi  ntro 
nnben  nyit*  n*  paS  nm’  ips  *m  n*  naxi a 
rv  pab  mrvn  ipsa  ’nn  b^itr*  an1?  rntm 
ana  mb  pa  : nronb  pin#  mobs  nabs  j 
mbs  p pnnbs  isnna  pcab  btntr*  an  *an:r 
pnb  pn  nantr  nabs  by  *pnm  (i):nnnx 
anb  nbm*  *n*  pi  .*  ii*nrv  (l)jnnbs  insaai  4 
pnb  pn  nantr  mbs  by  pmbs  *pnm  bjntr* 

: pnnbs  ivnn*  (i)jnnnx  antr  rubs  pi 
nin*  ia*a  by  baity*  an  n*  ntra  ipsi  s 
nbb[aa]  p : pbbaa  fpv  an  antr  i*str  ia*ab  « 
pna»yn  [nab]  ia*ab  msb?  n:nb  mn*  ipsi 
: ptrnb  p*  pmn»  [one?]  pnb  pn  ptsab  p* 
antrb  antra  btntr*  anb  [rubs]  ’(in)Dn  xbi  7 
an  *pnpT  nnnn»  antr  n[nbsn]  (inn)  sbn 

: bjntr* 

btne>»  an  *ansr  p nnbs  nm*  m[n  bm]  » 
f[ini**i]  b*m  nnt<b  *nn  mn#  antr  pn[a  mb] 
3(m)Dn  Nbi  : [nnnnN]  mbs  n*  eatt  bmp*  an  9 
* * * piy  antrb  antr  p rubs 

1 So  MS.,  apparently.  ' So  MS.  5 So  MS.,  apparently. 


Digitized  by  Google 


83  NUMBERS  XXXV.  24— XXXVI.  1. 

>4  by  no"T«  'biNn  pm  n’yo  pn  nntwo  pjn’[i] 

35  biNn  -tn  p rryo  n*  nnooo  pvon  : pbxn  non 
poy*r  nobpo  *nnpb  nniioo  nn*  poryo  noiN 
nn'  mron  ran  mno  mo  "tv  nn  nvn  pnb 
26  omn  [p]  nbiop  po*  pso  pi  : nenp  ntyon 
37  biNO  nn*  ypcyo  : pnb  poy-r  lobpo  *nnp 
biN.i  bopo  nobpo 1 *  3nnp  oinno  in'?  nonN 

28  [n]npn  (i)bn  : din  nb  n*b  nbiop  rn*  noiN 
n:no  mo  irai  non  mno  mo  ny  nn’  nobpo 

: [n]n:nD  yoxb  nbiop  nry*  non 

29  bon  [p]omb  h rrnmb  pob  pbN  pm 

30  m bopm  pnnD  [o]o*ob  tysj  bop  bo  ponno 
3,  Nbi  1 nbopnob  tyson  ON’  pb  n]n  nnDi  nbiop 

nbopnob  n’n  ?-*inn  biop  trmb  [mbo]  pnDn 
v [pnyb]  mbD  pnon  s*<bi  j bop(n’)  bop  pbn] 
mo  ny  [nyoN]n  nNnob  noryob  (n)obpo  (m)pb 

33  imNi  nyoN  [rr]  pmn(n)  ^jbi  ; non  mono 
nyoN  m’  *pn*  r<in  Ichn]  (i)bn  mo  pnNt 

foi.  40.  b.  p*  pb]n  nn  tsjjh  DnNb  [nbno’]  Nb  nyoNbi* 

34  pnNn  [n]yoN  m’  pn’[on  ^bi]  : noo&y  chno 
nt v mn*  on  p]bn  nun  njy  [oni  n]n  pnNn 

:[b]Nno’[’  on  u]n 

xxxvi.  1 nn  nyb[n  on]  pob  nnnnN  ’cno  "mnpi 

1 After  $*1J0  on  marg.  , . rf?  TDK. 

! Altered  apparently  into  'Up. 

a Altered  apparently  into  'rip. 

* Before  UTpl  on  marg.  nDlptn . 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXXII.  2— XXXV.  23.  82 

nn  Tty*  ynN  rv  irm  nnty  bvn  ntwo  onjy 
nn  on  into  :pp  nnN  sinx  Km  nybn  ynN  3 
ncrob  now  ntsoo  onty  mabai  piNn  on 
mnoy  : no*ob  nnoon  ’n’Dabi  n:no  ntybNbi 3 
nil  onen  nbybNi  pntyni  nnon  inn  pnm 
bNo&”  noon  nmpb  mrr  trnnn  nyoN  .*  |yni  * 
(fp(ypn)trN  p noto  nop  "pnnybi  wn  jop  ynN  5 
■pnnyb  mn  nynN  n*  nmn’  ”|0’yn  'on 
: nrrv  n’  pnnyn  bto  nnnDb 
onty  mnbebi  nn  onbi  pirn  onb  nsyo  now  6 
man  pnnn  pnw  nnnpb  pby”  pottn  nooo 
nynxb  nny  p bNnsy*  on  nb  n*  pbacn  nobi  ^ 
*n(i)*7B?a  ponnnN  ray  ;[io]n  : mn’  pnb  nmn  s 
ny  ipbDi  : nyns  n»  onob  y:nn  tynpo  pn*  9 
[on]  nb  rv  iboon  nynN  n»  i?m  nbNon  bn: 

: mm  pnb  2m  nynxb  Vo  Nbn  bNno” 
****** 

fol.  40. 

na]m  mDn  [pi  ; npbop*  wn  nn  nyn[aon]  ***']; 
nn[no]  mnnn  ’N  : [n’01  nponn  vby  non  ’[n  *•’ 
bi]Nn  Kin  b’o[p]  n*yo  bop’  [bop]  n*oi  nnNn 
ftoyn  f]w  : nn  nynaon  nbiop  rv  bop’  [nontt  33 
Nbn  fno  [bn  vby]  non  in*  nann  nmn  Nbn 
»rn  anbnn  [nn  n]io*n  pN  bnn  in  : moon  *3 
’yn[o]  Nbi  3nb  mnn  Nb  Nim  n’oi  vby  baNi 

: [nr]NO”n 

1 The  ' is  written  over.  1 So  MS. 

3 So  MS.,  apparently. 


Digitized  by  Google 


81  NUMBERS  XXXI.  42-XXXII.  1. 

fpsn  non  nnnn  my1?#1?  mm  mans'  doo  n* 

: ncro  n*  mn’ 

43  rrnnn  1 to  ntro  ibsn  Vsno”  on  rnnbsoi 
43  fwo  n^n  my  to  nnaon  nibs  mm  .*  n*Vm 
: two  »om  pa1?#  rumen  t’n^ni  e\btn 
44, 45  *\btt  t’nbn  pom  : ttr,l?ni  nnt?  tmm 

4«,  47  non  : iDy  nnty  oosn  cyan  .*  two  tyom 

* nrntyon  fo  nn  nn#  n*  tonty*  on  nnbso  ntyo 
non  ’Nvb1?  fin*  nm  nnonn  pi  neo«  pi 
: neon  n*  mn*  npan  non  mn*  ptyo  moo 
4«  *mn  ^’n  'sbxbi  noo*no  ntyo  n*1?  mnpi 
,49  non  i*nny  ntyo1?  noto  .*  nnwo  onm  ma1?# 
mo  ntyyrw  umnn  nnnp  *nnn  diod  m 
50  fso  yptysn  nnn  mn*  fnnp  rn*  nnpm  : nnn 
mn'iDob  maoi  fiao  npDy  n*on  n*?oyp  [n]nn 
i.3?.b.  5i  nrybsi  ntyo  nmi*  : mn*  DmpS  untyan  by 
S2  mm  : nm y po  *?a  pmbo  nnnn  n*  ninn 
noy  rnnty  mm*?  lontn  nmonsn  nnnn 
mboi  ma1?#  onn  nV?o  *?pn  pernm  two  yntyi 
53, 54  nmi  : n1?  nnn  ltn  nVm  *nnn  : nrmo  onn 
ma*?N  onn  mVo  nnnn  n*  nnnn  nry^si  ntyo 
toner*  on1?  pan  nyio  ^ns1?  nn*  in’tn  nnwoi 

:mm  omp1? 

xxxii.  1 ninbato  nn  ’in1??  pwn  on*7  mn  *nD  3 topi 

* After  JD  on  marg,  , , , px 

* The  n is  written  over. 

s Before  p:p  on  marg.  . X ^13 . 


NUMBERS  XXXI.  25-41.  80 

dud  m id  ! no’ob  ne-’oV  mit  'idki  a5.  *« 
nrybtfi  nn#  nnormi  nKONi  mil?  idno 
niNDo  m ibem  ; nneoi  nniN  ’trtm  mm  n 
.•  nntwi  *7D  pn  nb’nb  ipsjn  mnp  h’hn  pi 
ipen  nnp  mi  rmbo  nirr1?  did  onm  3s 
pi  niMN  p pNO  B’on  p »D3  mn  nb’nb 
pmbso  .*  nnom  bio  my  p man  pi  min  *9 
pi  : mn'  man*  n»  mm  n?yb«b  pm  paon  30 
’ nmfon  p mnn  in  ion  btne”  01  nabo 
bio  rmy  pi  nnon  pi  min  pi  neo#  pi 
ptya  moo  no:  ’Ni’bb  pm  fnm  nnoni 
mn’  -rpn  noi  rum  ntybNi  ntyo  niyi  : mn’  31 
toy  1m  nnn  mio  hidno  mn[i]  .*  nep  n*  3* 
n[troni]  t)bN  pym  *|b*n  pNo  nw  (pay)  [nb*n] 

-rn  piom  : ^ bit  pyien  pin  pnm*  JD’Dbtt  33^34 
pin  >«b“r  toi  p earn  trsn  : tjbtt  pnen  35  5 
mm  : *ibi*  pnbm  inn  &’Dj  bi  in  nap  3« 
pxo  nbn  jyn  p:o  nb»ni  3 (*)ps»3  pbm  nmbo 
: ptto  com  pfibit  nyien  nbtt  pnbm  f]bttn 
ntyon  pita  nty  my  p mn’b  hdio  mm  37 
mmb  pDioi  p)b«  pnbm  nnty  pnm  : py  itr%  38 
p«o  tram  tjbtt  pnbn  pnam  : pyityi  pn  39 
iDy  nn&y  mtn  trsn  : pnten  m mn’b  pDioi  4° 
nap  inn  : pnbm  pin  mn’b  pDioi  *jb«  41 

1 Before  tDtO  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 

* The  n is  written  over. 

8 | has  apparently  been  erased  after  V 


Digitized  by  Google 


79 


NUMBERS  XXXI.  17-24. 


fol.  38.  b. 


noaab  oyba  bbaaa  bNn&”  ’jab  ’in  pjtf  p(b)K 
naaaa  nnsua  mm  m ys  bbaa  by  mma  npjy 
17  naann  nn«  bai  nbsaa  nan  ba  ibap  inai  : mm 
is  abn  maaa  nbsa  b ai  : ibap  nan  aaiyab  naa 
i9  mb  pab  rw  pnto  ; pab  wn  nan  aatya  i»3n 
anpn  b3i  trsj  bapn  b3  pov  ny at?  nnntyao 
nNy’asy  norm  n«mbn  novi  pnbnDn  b’opa 
*0  b3i  ib>d  jno  b3i  anab  b3i  : parvaen  pro* 
jpnb(n)on  D(¥’p)n  |ko  bai  '(pin)n  nniy 
3.  rnb’n  ’-mb  ion  mjna  ntybsb  ntya  naai 
:mn*  npsn  [n]nmn  nmta  m nanpb  lbyn 
» nbnifl  mi  ntym  [n’]i  nDDa  nn  nam  n*  pi 
33  bby-r  bbaa  ba»  : nni<3N  [hi]  mo’Dp  m 
rru  *02  pa  ’ami  mua  pnayn  mm 
: moa  pnayn  nnua  bby  Kbn  bai  nbno’ 
=4  nnai  panm  n^yrnty  nova  pa’ypn  pynni 

: nnntyob  pby’n 

nanpb  ibyn  nb’n  naab  mna  nrybtf  ’nasi 
pa  : ntya  n»  mm  npo*r  nnimn  nmta  m 
m nbmo  n*i  ncru  mi  nsDa  mi  nam  rv 
nnua  bbyn  bbaa  ba  : mxaK  m ma’Dp 
bai  nbnD’  nnj  »aa  pa  ’ami  mua  pnayn 
pa’ypn  pynni  :n’aa  pnayn  mua  bby  xbn 
: nnntyab  pby*n  nnai  panm  nxy’ajy  nava 


’ So  MS.  apparently. 

s The  words  from  here  to  verse  25  are  not  in  the  Hebrew. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXXI.  3-16.  78 

pay  by  ttaann  nnai  who  ay  fa  bjntr* 
pnaa  paja  uu  na'ab  nay  cay  ntya  bbai  3 
: pnaa  mir  napj  fnab  pa  by  pnn  nVnb 
banty*  ’aajy  bab  noajyb  t\bx  naacyb  t\bt*  * 
^ba  btfnty’  ’sbxa  ri[DD]tn  : nVnb  pnbc?n  5 
tin*  nban  .•  b’n  a’lae  t\bn  iDvnn  naatyb 6 
na  D[nj’3  n*i]  pn»  nVnb  naatyb  *\btt  ntra 
rumn  mnm  n^np  [n»ai]  nb’nb  mna  ntybN 
rv  rw  "rpan  naa  pa  by  iVnnto  : rrn  7 
by  ibap  pa  oba  m : nan  ba  ibapi  ncya  » 
nn  "ny  nn  mx  rv[i]  Dpi  nn  -nt*  rr  pn’bap 
ibap  [mya]  na  ayba  m pa  oba  nntyan  yan 
m pa  um  n»  b#nty’  na  laen*  : anna  9 
ba  m pnnnp  ba  m pnana  ba  nn  'pnbsa 
ba  nn  pnnnmaa  p»nnp  ba  nn  nra  pb»n  «° 
nn'N)n  ba  n*  lawm  : nua  rrpiK  pn[n’D]  » 
n»b  imo  jnnonaai  neaio  naNDa  ba  nn  i» 
b*nty*  na  ntwa  ba  "rbi  n:na  nryb#  n*bi  nva 
nnntyab  nn’tun  nn  naNDa  nn  n’acy  n» 

.*  inn’  prv  byn  atoo  nypab 
nnena  '»n*Dj  bai  n:na  ntybai  n& a ps»i  13 
3a(a»n)a  by  ntya  ram  : nnntyao  nab  paiaub  *4 
b’n  p.  4mnn  nmtta  aam  n'sbs  aan  nb1 * 3n  *5 
: nnapa  ba  pn’Kin  nab  ntya  pnb  nato  : nanp  i« 

1 After  pnbeta  on  marg.  . . UD  i>jn. 

3 After  'ITD3  on  marg.  , . 3Q^K. 

3 Tliere  is  a line  over  O'  in  'JO'HD.  * So  MS. 


foL  38. 


Digitized  by  Google 


77  NUMBERS  XXX.  6— XXXI.  a. 

6 fto  : pop*  n»M  by  rnDNn  nnDNi  mu 
nmi  bo  nyotyo  dvi  nn*  moN  y[oo*  y]oo 
nbD*  mm  pop*  n b nsrsi  by  noDNu  nnDNi 

7 noob  *nn  ’in  jni  : nn*  ptok  yoo  ibn  nb 
by  rmDNT  ' nnmoD  tsme  ’n  [n*]by  nnui 

s nb  pnem  nyopo  dvi  moo  yoem  : ntrsi 
ntyfiji  by  mDN-r  nnDNi  mu  bo  popn 

9 bo]on  nn*  yoo  moo  y dip  dvo  dni  : j[iop* 
[nfiDNt  ' nmoNOD  ems  ’n  mbyn  mu  [n* 

: nb  nbo*  mm  ntroi  by 

10  [n]jM)j  by  mDNi  bo  n[po^o]i  nboiN  nui 

n mDN  [*n]  mu  moo  'n*ON  pn  :n»by  op* 
i*  pnty(n)  [moo]  yosri  : nyiotro  nooi  by  odn 
fol.37.  b.  nnDN  boi  mu  bo  popn*  nn*  yoo  >ib  nb 
13  pn*  boo*  bioo  |ni  : pop*  nroi  by  rmDsn 
rmab  nmoNDD  piso  bo  nyotyo  dvo  moo 
nbD’  [mm]  pboo  moo  pop*  Nb  ntyw  oDNbi 
,4  vai  n[o]Nboob  udn  nyiotr  boi  mi  bo  : nb 
.5  pnen  pno’o  [ni  : niboo*  mooi  mop*  moo 
n»  *n  nnrra  bo  n*  O’pn  Dvb  dvo  moo  nb 
nb  pnti’  nbn  pn*  D*p[n]  rvbjn  nnDN  bo 

16  nyotyo  nno  pn*  boo’  bioo  jni  : [nyo>’D  dvo 

17  n*  mn*  upon  m*to  pbN  .*  noiy  ry  bopn 
nniN’ouo  nmob  on  poi  nnnNb  noo  po  ne?o 

:moN  n*oo 

x*xi.  1, 2 00  nopi  Dpi  : no’ob  ntro  oy  mn’  bboi 

1 So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXIX.  30— XXX.  3.  76 

primal  paVcy  my  nyniN  ms?  an  pino#  30 
; pm  paaan  nnnaNVi  mmiV  misV  pmniDJi 
mnn  nVy  p mV  mVDV  -rn  pry  maxi  a 

: mniDii  nnmoi 

pina#  pm  pm  nyncr  pis  nNy’nty  navm  11 
pnoiDn  pnmai  : paVcy  my  nynm  mtr  an  33 
I’sin  .*  pm  piaan  rnnettVi  mmV  nnsV  3+ 
nnmai  mnn  nVy  p mV  mVDV  m pry 

.*  noiD:[i] 

fyV[s  Vn]  pnV  ’in  n(my)  ntu’an  navn[i]  35 
nn  pi[p  nVy]  pmpm  : p-rnyn  >jV  nmny  3s 
racy  an  pi[naN  m]  mi  in  is  mn’V  mm 
nmiV  nioV  pmniDai  pnmai*  rpaVcr  nyncr  37  «.». 
[n]iVDV  in  pry  msxi  : pm  piaan  1 nnaaV  }s 
pVN  : mniDJi  nnmai  mnn  nVy  p mV  39 
pnmnn  pnnma  mV  pmyian  mn’V  pmyn 
nasi  : pn’aVtrVi  pnoDaVi  tfmnn]:aVi  pnnVyV  *«.  1 
: ncya  rr  mm  ipsi  Van  Vnict’  anV  ncya 
Vaicr*  anV  man^  ’crfn  cay  ncra  Wai  ® 
it  []a]  inn  : mm  ipsi  nVVaa  p Pa’aV  3 
Vy  idk  iD’aV  nymcy  ynncrn  in  mmV  na 
:my’  nasa  ps’i  Vnn  rVa  ner  r<V  hm: 
run#  n’nn  idn  iD’m  mmV  11:  nn  [p]  nnxi  4 
n’iDNi  nma  n»  runs  yatyi  ,•  nnvnm  5 
Vn  *pap’i  mnN  nV  3[p]ncya  ntrs:  Vy  niDNi 

1 So  MS.  ’ After  "'D'Q^  on  marg.  . IV  nt?D3. 

5 * is  written  over.  * So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


75 


NUMBERS  XXIX.  15-29. 


iDV  nnbnb  in  nob  pmoy  nnbn  ntyon  D’Di 
•5  mom  ; nnnn  pnnb  nn  nonb  prniDy  pm  nno 
.6  mem  : nnnox  idv  nynnxb  nn  max1?  mDy 
[nn]moi  nrnnn  nby  p nnb  mbDb  -rn  pry 

PI’DDIl 

17  pji  [n]Dynn  pmn  ’in  pno  nnn  norm 
•s  pnrooi  rpobir  '[-i]Dynnx  nitr  ’in  pnnox  ]nn  . 

: pno  prion  nnoxbi  mnnnb  [n]*neb  pmDDn 
»9  [nnnjioi  mnn  p -ub  mbDb  -rn  pry  [n»]sv*i 

: imon 

»o  pin  [pn]nn  nDy  -rn  pno  nxmbn  norm 
ji  pinmoi  rpober  [n]Dy  nynnx  nity  ’in  pnnox 
M.36.b.  pi’ion  rvnnoxbi  .-mnnnb  nnob*  [flirroDii 
“ mnn  nby  p nnb  mbDb  nn  pry  mom  : inn 

.•noiDii  nnnioi 

3}  pnnox  pin  pnnn  moy  pno  nxy’nn  cvm 
24  pnoiDn  pnnio'i  i pobcy  noy  nynnx  nitr  ’in 
»5  mom  : pnn  prion  nnnoxbi  nnnnb  mnob 
nnmoi  nrrn  nby  p mb  mbDb  nn  pry 

: mmon 

36  pnn  ox  pnn  pnnn  nytrn  pno  nxtr’orn  ovni 

27  pmoiDii  pnnioi  : pobtr  nDy  nynnx  nity  ’in 

28  mem  : pnn  prion  nnnoxVi  nnnnb  mnob 
nnnioi  mnn  nby  p nnb  mbob  nn  pry 

5 mmon 

a9  pnn  pnnn  rn’ioin  pno  nxn’nty  norm 

1 So  MS. 

L 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXVIII.  31— XXIX.  14.  74 

nby  \o  12*?  : pa^y  nn‘?Do‘?  mbob  in  pry  31 
: pn*2D3i  pD*7  pn*  pabcy  piayn  nnmai  mnn 
*n*  anp  pa*r  nni'1?  inn  nttyaEf  nmai  ***•  • 
nvoti’N  »[*]  piayn  k1?  may  \vb&  *?d  pa*7 
ns  nm*1?  mm  nn^]  n^y  piaym  pD*7  *n* 3 
nyaty  mtr  *32  pno»  i[n]  121  in  pnn  12 
nnVn  ntraa  ,-id*D2  n^D  pnroe[i]  : pa*?cy  3 
nofy]  niDyi  : idtV  p-nDy  pirn  -id1?  piiD[y]  ♦ 
in  p[ty]  i*oyi  : nnnoie  nyniy1?  in  max1?  5 
nm*  n*7[y  fa]  12*7  : pybv  nnbDsb  m^Db  s 
p3*ia  naoM  n[nmai]  mnn  n^yi  nnmai 
nni’V  mDym*  : mn*1?  flip  mini  nn1?  7 m.3«. 
pfayn^m  pa1?  *n*  'trip  pan  pin  nxyaty 
paipm  : piayn  tv*1?  may  by  panaa:  n*  s 
in  idi  in  piin  12  id  nm  nn  nm*1?  n*?y 
pnroei  : \Mb  *n*  pa*?ty  nyaa?  mty  *32  pinart  9 ■ 

pirn  id1?  pnoy  nn^n  ntraa  nD*D2  n^D 
maa*1?  in  ina#1?  nay  iiDyi  : in  idi1?  pnDy  « 
nV?D  fa  121?  mVD1?  in  pry  i*D*n  : mna»  » 

:n*aD3i  nnmai  mnn  nVyi  n’mbo 
pan  ’pin  nttyaar  nm*1?  dv  iDy  nntranai  x* 
panm  piayn  ttb  may  iy*?D  *72  pa1?  *n*  np 
nn  pip  n^y  paipm  .*  par  nyatr  mn*1?  an  u 
pin  piai  iDy  n*?n  pnn  *32  pno  mn*1?  nm 
n*?D  pnmai  : paba*  iDyaiN  me?  *32  pinett  >4 

* After  EHp  on  marg.  1030. 

s After  |J3n  on  marg.  , . n. 


Digitized  by  Google 


73  NUMBERS  XXVIII.  14-30. 

>4  pmoDJi  : mn’V  pip  mjn  nn  nVy  "tn  nnoxV 
nonV  nvx  nmVm  nn  nsV  non  nvx  rruVfl 
nnn*  nVy  m non  nn  nnoxV  nvx  nivnn 
>5  jtiVdV  nn  pry  mevi  : nnip  m’V  nmmra 
; pn’ODM  pnoyn’  mnn  nVy  oy  mmV 

16  nD£3  nnn’1?  dv  noy  nyonxo  nxonp  nmo 

17  .in  pn  rnno’V  dv  noy  rnntyonoi  : mn’1? 
is  pon  nxonp  novo  rpVo’n  moo  pov  nyoty 
19  pnp  ponpm  : pram  xV  nmoy  pVo  Vo  o*np 

nyoen  nn  non  pnn  pmn  oo  poo  mn’V  nVy 
>o  nVD  pnmoi  : poV  pn’  poVty  mty  oo  ponox 
piDy  pnm  00V  poiDy  nnVn  ntyoo  nD’DO 
ai  nyotrV  nn  nnoxV  moy  moyi  ,*  [pnjoyn  nonV 
2a  : [pO’Vy  nJnVDoV  mVoV  nn  pry  o’om  : [n’jonox 
M.3S.b.  33  n»  pnoyn  * [njonn  nVyVn  mov  nVy  p 00V 
M onV  n’ov  nyoty  pnoyn  dvV  pVxo  : pVx 
pnoyn’  rrnn  nVy  oy  mmV  mnn  nnV  pnp 
*5  Vo  poV  *n*  cynp  po*r  nxy*otr  novoi  : pmoDn 

: pnoyn  xV  nn»oy  pVa 

26  mn’V  nnnn  nnjo  pomoopxo  nmoo  'ovo 
xV  nn’oy  fyVe  Vo  poV  *n»  crop  pen  po’yntro 

27  poo  mn’V  mnn  nn  pnp  nVy  ponpm  : pnoyn 
nyory  row  »p  pnnox  nn  non  pnn  pmn  oo 

28  ntyoo  rnD’Do  nVD  pnmoi  : poV  pn*  poVtr 
;nn  nonV  piDy  pnm  nn  00V  pmDy  mnVn 

39, 30  o’ovi  j nnnox  nyotyV  nn  nnoxV  oiDy  mDyi 

1 Before  DV3  on  marg.  OK  , , , . 

L 


Digitized  by  Google 


72 


NUMBERS  XXVII.  23— XXVIII.  13. 

v*?y  n*  iodi  .*  nnty:s  *?s  DmpVi  runs  »3 
n1?  noNi 1 : n^o  nxs  nirr  bban  nos  rnnpsi 
p p^Nn  n’sbo  pnn1?  nin*  nsyn  rn*  nn  YJ*y 
n1?  .*  pn  nsy  nnNn  nnaisbo  Vs1?  mrv  nsy*  ■ 

: ps*7  irson  Kin  psn1?#  mn*  V?n  pmo  bmn 
us  n*  nps  : no’o1?  ncyo  ay  mn*  V?oi  «™- *.  * 
nn  finp^  von1?  usnp  n*  pn1?  no*m  ^ancy* 
pr  pn1?  no*m  : v[ist]s  'b  nsnpo1?  pnon  *nun  3 
po^ty  ruty  us  pnnox  mn*1?  psnpnn  msnp 
nsyn  mn  nnnoK  n*  :n*nn  rnby  nr*?  pnn  4 
: mtyon  u*s  nsyn  mun  nnnoN  rnn  msxs 
myisn  ntyos  d*d[s]  nmoV  nVo  nnKD  moyi  5 
mm  nnV  u*d  mos  mnsy  n*nn  nby  : m*N  « 
nn]  nnot*1?  ru’K  myisn  vson  : mnf’1?]  pnp  7 
[nnnoK]  nn  mn*S  onn  *spo  *sty  ntrrp[s  8 
*msDJSi  nnsx  nmos*  mtyon  u*s  nsyn  mun  w «• 
nnsity  dvsi  :mn*V  mnn  n*n  pnp  nsyn  » 
n^D  pniDy  pnm  f’oVtr  ruty  us  pnnoK  pn 
'nsnys  nsity  n by  1 vsdh  ntyos  d*ds  nmo*? 10 

: pmson  nn*nn  n*?y  by 

us  pns  3 mm1?  rn^y  psnpn  ps’nm  ’^msi  " 
rnysty  ruty  us  pnnot*  nn  nsm  pn  pmn 
ntyos  d’ds  nn:o  n^D  pmDy  nnVm  : po*?ty 
ntyos  D*Ds  rnmo  n*7D  pmoy  pnm  nn  ns1? 
ntyos  d’ds  nmo  n*?D  moy  niDyi  :nn  nsn1?  *3 

1 These  two  verses  are  in  Deut.  iii.  21,  22. 

s Apparently  altered  from  VDD333. 

3 After  mn'b  on  marg,  . , . N^T 


Digitized  by  Google 


71 


NUMBERS  XXVII.  9-22. 


r\'b  in  rw  pt  kok  mo1?  •j'yon  tony*  »n 

9 mi  r6  n*1?  pi  : nmi*7  nmbe  n*  p:nm  nb 

10  D’nN  n*7  rrb  pi  : vnttb  nrubs  n*  panni 

11  pntt  n’S  pi  jvik  ’nxb  nn^i  n*  pjnm 
nS  mpi  rrvoy1?  nmSs  n*  panni  vnttb 
pi  rrmb  btoty*  »jab  *n[n]i  nn*  m*»i  nmo 

tntyo  n*  nm*  ipsi  noi 
•a  »may  no1?  pd  io’o1?  n cyo  oy  to  ^boi 
• ton»»  in1?  in*  [*]3Kn  nyiK  n*  *?ni  pin 
>3  noi  nnN  *p  noy  by  [BNi]nm  nn[*]  *rnm 

14  inoi  no'o  n*  pnnoi  : Tin»  pnt*  [tw]mtn 
pit*  pn’yyb  n»oi  ’nenpo1?  nntni  ninani  pf 

15  mn*  Dy  ntyo  Sboi  : pf  mo  enp  mruvn  *o 

16  moa  *73*7  nmi  pnbtf  mrr  ips*  : id’o1? 

17  pn’onpb  Sy*n  pmoiip1?  ps’i  : nntyn  by  111 
[mya]  nm*  nw3  *nn  nVi  py?Ky*n  [papjeni 

: *yi  pb  n**n 

. .8  pi  -11  ytyin*  n*  ~\b  nn  ntyoS  nm*  ‘ icni» 

*9  D’pm  : vby  yrtt  n*  -|ODm  m nmn  [mu] 
nntwa  bD  DiipSi  nmi  nybte  coup1?  nn* 
30  *7*111  vby  Ttw  p pm  : p.i’j’yV  -nn*  tpsm 
2 1 irybN  DTipbi  : btr\v'  *n  ntyn  bn  pyoet* 
nm*  cup1?  nn*(m)  S*n  nb  bic^’i  Dip*  mm 
*31  bn  Kin  by”  mo’o  byi  ps*  mo*o  by 
23  ipn  noi  ntyo  nyi  nntyil  bn  noy  btnty* 
it ybt<  Diipb  no’pm  ytym*  n*  ini  nn*  nm* 

1 Before  iCNl  on  marg.  tiDt??  t|P . . 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXVI.  60— XXVII.  8.  70 

ximax  m ana  n»  pnx1?  nVnxi  : pnnx  pno  «° 
ximaxi  ana  rroi  : nornx  m nry^x  rr  6< 
pma’ao  11m  : mn*  Dmp1?  nxna  c*x  pnianpxa 
(n^n  by^i  m*  nao  nan  *?a  ef?x  poyi  nnbn 
fV?  aw  x1?  (n)*7n  Vxna?’  un  laa  iaonn  x1? 

: ^xnty*  *aa  laa  nabs 

’an  rn*  laon  nana  mybxi  ntro  *a’3o  p*?x  «j 
>-6  pVxai  : inn’  pn*  by  axio  nypaa  ^xnty*  s+ 

’3a  it  iaan  nana  pnx?  ntro  *a*3D0  tyax  mn 
mo  pn1?  mn’  not*  (njbn  ; ’3*d  nanoa  Sxnir*  «5 
nVx  naa  pnao  nmn(x)  xbi  manoa  pma* 

: pa  na  yenmi  naa*  na  aba  fx 
na  nv^a  na  nan  na  nna^v  rnaa  *anpi  xxvu.  ■ 
f’^Ni]  ^di*  na  rncyao  pa1?  nsyao  na  n*a[o] 
invnm  [na*70]  nban  nyai  nbna  nnaa  nno & 
DnipVi  n:na  [n?y*7X]  omp1?!  n^o  Dmp1?  *opi  a 
mo’o1?  nyio  ^.nx  nnna  [nneua]  bai  rn*n*D3 
nntwa  laa  mn  xb  xim  nnanoa  n’O  faiax*  3 *>..«. 
rvo  n[’]ona  l^n  nnp  (nty)aaa  mn*  by  lmoxn 
faiax  oty  nxam  no1?  ; nb  mn  tib  paai  faiax  ♦ 
na*7D  nanD  1a1?  an  na  n1?  n'b  V?n  nana  labo 
Dmp1?  pan  rn*  n& 0 anpxi  : faiax  *nx  laa  5 

i min’ 

' naa  maty  j nova1?  ntyo  oy  mn*  bboi  «,  7 
laa  na*?e  rnanD  pn1?  fnn  f[no]  fbVoo  nnabv 
Dyi  : pn1?  pmax  naSa  n»  naym  pnnx  *nx  8 

1 After  n;a  on  marg.  . i>n'  nCDJ. 


Digitized  by  Google 


69 


5»i 


fbl.  jj.  b. 


NUMBERS  XXVI.  42-59. 

4*  ’KDmtP  'pa  Dnwb  pnanaV  p aa 

43  pnaaai  ’Narntr  ana  *?a  : pnanaV  p ana  p*7N 

: pt*a  ynnN-i  t\bx  pnan  nynnK 

44  pa  nw’b  aaa*  pn  raa*1?  pnana1?  new  an 

45  wnnn  pa  nnn*7  : 'nra  pa  myna1?  »w 

46  : me?  new  nnn  can  : 'bs'Db 0 pa  bwoba1? 

47  pe>am  nn^n  pnaaa1?  new  an  am  p^N 

:pND  ynnxi 

48  ‘’n^Nnv*  pa  pnana1?  'bmu  an 

49  pa  mVa'1?  'my  pn  ny1?  : wju  pa  am*? 

50  n&yan  pnaaai  pnana1?  ’*?nsj  ana  p*?N  : waiter 
s,  *7Nnea  an  aaa  p*?N  : p«o  ymrn  t\bx  pynntn 

; pn*?m  pxa  ynea  ^ni  f\btn  pxa  ne? 

53  nVann  p*?N*?  : nava1?  ntra  ay  nirv  b^ai 

54  nnnVs  aDn  [*]mD*?  ; patr  faon  nn*?sn  nynK 
nnn’  laao  odV  ca«  [rn]m*?o  nyrn  rnwVi 

55  nna^b*  nynx  n*  n*?fl»  rnjn  [pn]  :.— im*?D 

56  jVd’  ntna  ID’S  *?y  : pnbsn  pnnnt*  ’tone? 

: my?1?  anD  pn  nmVo 

57  wjiern  pa  penn*?  pnana1?  wv1?  aaa 

58  ana  p*?x  : ’nnna  pa  nna1?  wnnp  pa  nnp*? 
pm  »n*?na  pm  wjinnn  pm  ’mn1?  pa  a b an 

59  Dan  : may  rv  n^in  nnpi  nena  pm  nnnp 
n )bb  nrv  (rw)bn  »V?  nan  anav  may  nnt* 
na  ne’a  na  pn#  rv  may1?  nn*?n  onyan 

1 After  pa  on  marg.  . . pc'PP.  * So  MS. 

5 Before  on  murg.  'sb. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXVI.  24-41.  68 

pa  vnoc?1?  ’nxatyv  pa  atrv1?  : ’nxia  pa  h 
nymx  prrwo1?  iatrt?’  ’pa  pbx  : ’ntopot?  a* 

: pxo  n*?m  t\btt  pntp 

pa  pbttb  'NTio  pa  tid1?  prvpa1?  phot  *n  *6 
pbar  ’pa  pVx  : 'nbxbir  pa  bN^rv1?  ’NmSn 
:pxo  tpom  *)bti  pne> 

n«wo  »ji  : DnOKi  niwo  prrpa1?  tpv  * »»  •«,  39 

pa  lybi  rv  -?Vin  *vaoi  ’N*vao  pa  "raoV 
pbn1?  ’tnin  pa  "itynx  nySa  ’ja  i,1?n  : 'taybi  3° 
pa  Datsn  ’nbKriKW  pa  ^npbw  : ’xpbn  pa  31 
: ’Xian  pa  -ism  ’wrap  pa  yrotp  : ’Noasr  3* 
pa  in  n^N  pn  nb  mn  xV  nan  -o  ina^p  33 
: nmm  nabo  n*?an  nyji  n^no  -rne’re  nn  Dtrn 
yatin  h*?n  ptram  pn  pm*:o^  niyjo  ’pa  p^x  34 

: pnd 

♦nSm»  pa  nVmtp’?  pn’pab  dhsn  »ja  a pbxi  35 
»:a  pVx  .*  ’onn  pa  Dnn1?  ’xnaa  pa  -mb  3« 
D’lflN . »3a  ’pa  pbx  t *x ny  pa  pyb  nbnw  37 
*ja  pbx  pxo  B’om  t)btt  pnbrn  pan  pn’yaob 

: prrpab  tpv 

b’atyNb  ’xyba  pa  ybab  prrpab  com  *n*  38  .m.m. 

pa  osityb  ; ’xo-m  pa  D-vnb  ’nb’aiyx  pa  39 
’VPN  pa  -nxb  .*  ’NCflin  pa  DDinb  ’ndoip  4» 
prrpab  D’O’n  oa  pbx  : ’xjoya  pa  pyib  4I 
: pxo  run  p)bx  D’yanxi  ntyan  pn’yjoi 

1 Before  ’33  on  raarg.  B"i .... 

J Before  |*7N1  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 


Digitized  by  Google 


67 


NUMBERS  XXVI.  6-23. 

6, 7 f»*7»  t 'KOH  pi  ’0-0*7  W»1  pi  plOTlS 
p|*7N  pymtn  nn^n  pnMMD  11m  ’johni  wo 

: pr6m  pxo  yien 

8, 9 fm  ’ tolDJ  3N,l7N  Mil  .*  IN'1?#  K1*7D  Ml 
vrotn  nneMi  mot  q-i’ini  fm  Nm  dtini 
by  pnnDNi  mp  neMii  pnK  *?yi  rwo  by 

10  njnx  fin*  nybn  nos  n»  nyiN  nnnsi  ; mm 
peon  m mp  m nnew  bioi  nneMi  mon 

n nrvo  xb  mp  mu  ipnyV  nm  mi  pn»oi 

11  'NblOJ  pi  ‘JNIOJ1?  WyOi?  poV  pyoc?  Ml 

13  pi  Wo**?  'umi  pi  mt1?  I’wi’  pi  * pi*1? 

14  r\bti  pDvi  pm  wyoty  Mni  p1?#  ; 'NViNty 

: pnxoi 

15  pi  'in’?  ’toisv  pi  psv1?  pnMmV  m mi 

16  np  wn  pi  mtn1?  .*  wit?  pi  Mie>*7  ’Kin 

17  pi  'briN1?  'tnVlN  pi  HVW1?  .*  ’NIV  pi 

18  v\btt  pyin#  “prraoS  *n  mu  pbx  s'^kph 

: pND  eom 

19 : ivai  jtini  pint  ny  moi  pitti  ny  nmm  Mi 
10  *3NVty  pi  nbwb  [plmmS  min’  mi  nm 
foLja.b.  21  mi  nm  .*  »smt  pi  m6»  [']sps  pi  psV 
.* ’.n^Nion  pi  ^xion1?  wnvn  pi  pnvnV  ps 
« p^t*  pyien  mnty  priMMo1?  min'  mu 

; pNO  com 

13  hnid1?  wVin  pi  ybinV  pnMiiS  mew  mi 

’ After  on  nmrg.  .1  n)5>B 
1 So  MS. 

K 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


NUMBERS  XXV.  io— XXVI.  5. 

nrybN  nn  Dnys  : no’ob  ntyo  Dy  nin’  * bboi  io.  ” 
bNnty*  on  by  p ’non  n*  n?n  mnn  pnN  nn 
on  n*  rnooDN  nVi  pnun  ’nNJp  rv  rwupn 
♦nnn  n*  nb  nm  njNn  ion  fDb  : »ntupn  bxnty’  i« 
Dbyb  mnn  ’nnn  mnn  nynrbi  nb  ’nni  :Dbty  *j 
teen  :bNno”  on  by  nbDi  nnbxb  opn  nnn  »♦ 
nor  nn’NJ’-ro  oy  bepn  nb’ep  nbxnty’  mnn 
n(nn)N  Don  : ’NJiyotrb  nN  nn  mo:  Nibo  nn  J5 
noiN  tyn  mx  nnn  rvnrn  nnwno  nnb’op 

: Nin  pen  nN  nn 

wo  n*  ip’yN  : no’ob  ntyeoy  mm  3bboi  i«,  n 
pmbnjn  fin1?  p:x  4 np*y n nbn  : pin*  pbopm  is 
nnn  »nrn  bboe  byi  mys  bboo  by  pnb  lbnrr 
by  nnsoo  Dm  (rn)b(epNn)  pnnN  pno  n*D3 

nnsoe  nnn  mm  : mys  bboo  x*vi.  i 
pnN  nn  nrybN  oyi  ntyo  ay  mm  s bboi 
bNnty*  on  neon  bo  diod  n*  nD  : no’ob  mnn  * 
psi  bn  pnnnN  m*nb  bybi  6(n):ty  pnDy  nno 
pnoy  mono  nrybso  ntyo  bboi  ; bNoty’n  Vn  3 
pDy  nno*  tno’ob  inn*  pn*  by  nNie  nypnn  4 m.3,. 
bNoty*  om  ntyo  n*  mm  npsn  non  bybi  pity 
oni  bxnty*  mnn  piNn  : onjfo  ynN  fo  ipsrr  5 
: ’nNibs  pn  tobsb  ’Noun  pn  ion  fmxn 


1 Before  on  marg.  . . mi’3  N^n.  1 So  MS. 

3 Before  on  marg.  ncpD ....  * Altered  into  IP'JJK. 

* Before  W>Dl  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 

* Originally  pc'. 


Digitized  by  Google 


65 


NUMBERS  XXIV,  22— XXV.  9. 


1 :p  nfl’ll  ’1PD1  1 Ilia  p’Dy 

« iniinn  (mtyK)  fa  rnno  pp  nyi1?  *n»  fK  Kbn 
(n)  ajya  »rrr  fa  nVi  nasi  (ma1?)^  faiD3i 
34  "i  it?«  (nj)DnV  *Km  *ik  fa  fnpDNi 

■a’  mno  ron  t)Ki  i ay  (n3)oib(’i) 
»s  biK  pbi  t]Ki  mnN^  ityi  Viki  Dy1?!  Dpi 

: nyiiK1? 

XXV.  I dv  'nwma1?  nay  »ien  D’aiyi  bKitr*  inii 

> iViki  in’nbN  mib  nay1?  *pyn  : iNia  nn 

3 byib  bKia”  *3ia  3iaa*Ki  : fmnbK1?  todi  ’iay 

4 njyo1?  nin’  naKi  : bKitr’i  mn*  nn  npm  nys 
nnn  nys  ‘lyiV  noaifKi  nmi  n*  p^Dp’i  iok 

5 “aN’i1?  ntro  ioki  : btnty’o  mn*  nn  pin 
niyfl  bvzb  naavNi  vjmk  n»  in  ibop  S*rw* 

« n»  vnK  t1?  snpi  nnK  ^mty*  *aio  ill  Km 
bKity’  *31  naaa  Vi  »3*ySi  ntyo  ’3’y1?  nn’K3’ia 
foM.-b.  7 11  Dm’5  mini*  :iyia  bnx  mm  pai  p3Ki 
iD3i  rrntmi  ii*?a  Dpi  n3ni  pnK  11  irybK 

a 11*7  nKt?tntP»  mu  ini  *?yi  : mxi  nan 
nn  nK^Kity*  mu  n*  finnn  n*  ipm  (nip) 
*3i  by  fa  nnana  nivynKi  nn’pi  by  n(nn)K 

9 fnDyi  nyiiK  nnouai  m»oi  mm  : ^kiss” 

: *f?K 

* After  ntO“TO^  on  marg.  , , , n\  1 So  MS. 

’ A letter,  probably  3,  appears  to  have  been  erased  at  the  end 
of  nCQSK. 

* The  K is  written  over. 

5 N has  apparently  been  erased  before  p. 

K 


Digitizedby  Goc 


NUMBERS  XXIV.  10-21.  64 

tpm  : Dibs  tbnSi  r ,Dn:i  T3"on  10 
i »ai  n*  span  o ySiS  pSi  uno 

xni  - ]b  npyi  ’in  oxSoS  DySiS  pSi  'ooxi 
lib  oipn  nil  : t’Sio  nnSn  p *tioi  n:n  *« 
to  mrv  in*1?!  khi  tiopix  op’x  noox  *pnxS 
TnSo’S  f\s  ?<Sn  pSiS  oySi  ooxi  : op’x  ■» 
niSo  pSi  ’S  fn»  tx  : oo’oS  nSSo  n*S  nnStyo  «j 
oo’o  rv  miyoS  Vox  sb  im  ’x  tpi  nrt’i 
’oy  nirr  SSoh  ’1S0  run  ’x  mo  oiyoS  mn’ 
*pi[S]oxi  nrtx  »oyS  S? x n:x  nn  .•  SSon  nn’  •< 

? rvov  ipyi  toyS  tQpn  noy  oiyn  n» 

4"nyi  3noi  DySi  p’no  -10x1  n(jDS)ty  p *iDn*  15  «•»«. 
bs  no’o  yoty  pno  lty  (oiyo)-r  mu  p’noi  •« 
nn»  rt(oa)  nno  f vSy  nyo  (oin)i 

1 01  x1?!  nyrnx  t mrn  ’Sn  Sso  n 

1 py’o  no  5 (n)o(x)  1 np  sbi  njyityx 

1 xio  ’nxi  ’yoi  b xoty’o  oitr  oxpi 

n m*  mix  ’no  n v 01  Si  Dim  >s 
S’n  oiy  Sxotro  1 ’in  io*y  nnov  ’no 
nnopoo{ynxTax(o)  1 py*o  (oStspi  19 

ooxi  n(JoS)ty  fo  idji  p Soy  n’  ntm  »° 

oix’  mnD  nn’xom  p So y n’xu  nityxo 
oDxi  n(:oS)ir  p iwi  n xrp  n’  n?m  »« 

* Before  3DK1  on  marg.  3BTWO .... 

5 r6no  r6ffi  is  written  over. 

3 The  n is  written  over. 

4 After  ny3  on  marg.  . . 3 'jnn. 

3 There  is  a line  over  3. 


Digitized  by  Google 


63  NUMBIJJtS  XXIII.  28— XXIV.  9. 

; fona  ’b  nanbi  D’nb kd  mrna  neont*  nb  piy 
*b  dtip  by  (p’*t)ot  mys  wnb  oyba  n»  pba  nam 

.•  poem 

pna*ra  'nyaty  pa  ’b  ’jna  pbab  Dyba  now 
pba  nayi  pnan  nyaen  pfl  nyaty  pa  *b  pat 
: nnano  by  nan  no  poxi  Dyba  bbon  noa 
nannob  mm  mrna  aa  (n)bn  Dyba  mm* 
*m(wm)  poub  pra  pra  bm  kVi  bfniy’  rv 
> vyy  rv  Dyba  (n)b m : vet*  nanab  »wi 
rm  vwby  mm  ventyb  (paty)  bmty’  rv  mm 

: D’nb» 

3 mya  Pa  Dyba  fO’[n]a  "ioni  (nbno 3 nbm) 

4 nm  npa)  unon  ; i(?n  *w)an  maa  p’(nai) 

5 apy*  laatro  paa  mo  t rn  ’bai  baa 

e f »a’V:  pbma  b rnty’  i *"|(”ntyo,i) 

mm  cCo'np  pjatyaa  a ru  ’(i)b(y)  pjaa 

7 (n)  ’bno  pa  (’bp’  ] *o  ’O)b(y)  prwa 

n aba  mma  oan  » aD  poa  pjrvm 

8 onvoo  maain  Pn  n mabo  (’bn)nm 

vvnbn  ppia)  «i*d*  n b nan  nOtnay)a 

a bfl’  vaboi  d na’  pmonai 

9 n jo’P’  io  mo:ai  n nto  non  (’ypa 

1 After  ny3B>  on  marg.  . . . «!>. 

’ So  MS.  apparently. 

8 Before  r6m  on  marg.  nntcn  [ICJT. . 

* The  n is  written  over. 

8 Apparently  badly  altered  frorii  I'JSiS’DV 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXIII,  15-27..  62 

n :ni  innty  by  D0ipn«  pbzb  noto*  «s 
♦iki  DyVa1?  mir  inVo  pyn  nan  pnm  16 

f (,ok)'i  pb2  rvb  nrn  noto  nosa  bboa 

DVtcp  Nnn  r<ni  m,l7  rnnNi  * L“?  So  an  n 

n b notfi  nay  aNio  ^ani  nnnby  by 

: mrr  bbo  no  pSa 

*y  oen  pVa  Dip  natti  (n*?no  nbni) 
a nan  Vn  kon  n1?  nisif  Jma  nna  n»vtt 
nay  k^i  nox  t<mn  (*  n)inn  eon  nai 

4(*inaDj)  manaob  p<n  d wpo  n^i  Woo  « 

apy*a  naiy  n^anDN  sb  n ntn  nVi  ton 

may  nn^s  rr>rr  b »nen  nymn  mn  nVi 

Dnyaa  ppatn  St  n a nobo  (mttns)Ni  » 
apy’a  tynj  tt1?  (m)*7n  n b nam  (mnsya)  >3 

apy’b  noNn*  pta  b tntyo  ddp  ttVi 

d{ i)p*  n’(aVa)  (n)ay  f.n  b s byo  no  SnefS  34 
Daa*  ny  (aaty)’  a nan(n»)  nnNai 

n a«’  pSop  am  Vap 

5ltti  n^abn  n*7  onOS)  in  aySaV  pba  naNi  *5 
N*?n  pbzb  naNi  ay*?!  myi  ; nianan  ab  ina 
nn*  O'nSn  bbon  Woo  Sa  no’o1?  lay  6nV7a 
nnttb  irons  *:  nnN  ayS1?  pVa  naNi  1 nayN  »7 

1 So  IIS.  * After  von  on  marg.  . 3D  DD2  HOC?. 

* The  n is  written  over.  4 So  MS. 

“ After  f|Nl  on  niarg.  . , . n3OT. 

4 Tliere  ia  a trace  of  n after  n^D.  , 


Digitized  by  Google 


61 


NUMBERS  XXIII.  4-14. 


bbaxi  aianb  D*nbx  fair  nnb  nnxi  “innby 

4 fxba  yptyxi  : catyba  brxi  "|b  nm  aun*  r ra 
miD  mnana  nyat?  rv  nb  naxi  ayba  n*  o*nbx 

5 bbaa  mn*  nxba  nen  : nanaa  nam  id  npDxi 

6 ntm  :bban  f(na)i  pba  Tb  nrn  naxi  ayba  Daa 

: axia  »33i  bai  xm  nnnby  by  oxp  xm  nn*b 

7 fba  pba  a(n:a)  dko  naxi  (nbna  nbm)' 
nnxi  apy*b  oixb  nnx  *ma  nxaa  fa  axi a 

s nai  bx.  naxb  xbn  aibx  na  : bxnp*b  fyiao 

9 f*mo  jyn  fa  (m)bn  : mn»  spD  s:bn  fpDX 
nty*  lHinb  3 nay  fn  myatrx  faba  fai  ro*tnx 

» pa  apy*  nay  [aa]  fa  : atynn*  xb  n’(xia)ai 
*n*m  f’yatya  f(*)ma  *(rai  man  bxnty*  nyana 

: nma  (*n*)xnn 


*>  ♦ b may  na 

1 na  nana  xm 

i*  *aaa  mn*  ntm  5n*  (n)bn 
« 3 a nnx  pba  mb  naxv 


I 

» 

b 

n 

r 

n 


an  fa  nrrnn 
inn  xb  nbai 
pnb  mam 
noD  cynb 
*nana 
nana 


Dybab  pba  4naxi 
innan  *aan  axbab 
n axi  myi 
nbbaab  nnax  nn* 
f my  nnxb  *ay 
*rnn  mao  piat? 
f ana  *b  naibi 

D *3¥ 

n yacr  mai 
by  nam  na  pDxi 


1 Before  r6pt  on  marg.  pKOK  ...  * So  MS. 

5 n is  written  over,  as  a correction  of  1. 

* Before  iDtn  on  marg.  [VVy ....  5 JV  is  written  over. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXII.  32— XXIII.  3.  60 

n»  rvya  no  by  mrv  n^a  nb  nam  : von1?  3* 

1 i(n)mji,y‘7  npD3  »djk  nh  pbn  nnbn  p ijhn 
nooi  runx  *ntm  : ’^mpV  nrviN  ntr(’)a  (n)*7n  33 
♦a’npba  nniDD  'bbti  pbn  nr^n  p ’a-npba 
naso  : n’Nin  nm  nbap  in’  via  (n)Vn  34 
(n)Sn  naan  xb  (n)Vn  n»an  mn'  "iN^ab  ay'n 
*l(’:’y)n  pn  fN  nai  nynm  ^jairV  dnp  nn# 

i'b  mtn 

3nna  cay  bra  Dy'nb  mn*  n>6a  natn  35 
: nV^aab  *ian  nn*  nay  ^VaNn  nbVaa  n*  p-iacn 
tin  (n^n  pVa  yecn  p'n  aan  Dy  DyVa  Vint  36 
mnn  *?yn  atna  nnpV  njionb  pan  oyba 
Nbn  cyba1?  pba  -laNi  : nainn  -lOD’Nan  pin  * 
rrnN  k1?  na b -jV  pyra1?  *p*y  nnba*  mVty 
pSaS  Dyba  naNi  1 "irmpa  VaiN  nV  [p:o*]Nn  *rb  j® 
dpt, a ‘Aaa  bOiajN  4l?a(an)  na  nr1?  ^’dn  nh 
: nbboob  -ion  nn*  *a(s)a  ot6n  nrt  nb^aa 
: vn  n(iHa)1?  n'wyi  p*7a  ay  oy^n  bmi  39 
naaa'7,i  oy'n1?  nben  fyi  pin  p'ya  (Da3)i  4° 
npDNi  oy^a  n*  p^a  nan  meva  mm  ; najn  4i 
:nay  naa  rv  pna  mm  Vya  naaV 
pane  nyaty  pa  * b nay  p^ab  cayba  neNi  **m. « 

“ra yi*  : pan  nyacn  pD  nyasy  pa  'b  pai  a M.„.b. 
no  caySai  pVa  pdni  oy^a  ^an  naa  p*?a  * 
by  Datpnn  p^aV  tayba  naNi  : nanaa  nam  3 

1 Altered  apparently  from  ■)!>  mvyob-  * So  MS. 

• After  nnaj  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss.  4 So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


59  NUMBERS  XXII.  ai-31. 

pno: y brn  Dip  rrm  mx  *ib  py rob  p mb 
« Dpi  : nayn  nn*  -py  bbaxn  nbboo  n»  pai 
j inio ’nn  oy  *yrt«i  nanK  n»  ’itn  mova  oyba 
.*  iKbo  DoipnNi  Kin  bw  (n)bn  mm  ran  f)pm 
njnN  by  aan  Kim  nb  1 nntyyb  nynwa  mn* 
*3  niff  *iNbo  rv  nanK  mrm  : noy  ran  pirn 
nanK  j-iodi  nma  ns’bcy  nanm  nymxa  dkp 
nanK  rv  Dyba,  nyai  nbpna  nabm  naniK  p 
•4  pona  bntra  mm  -|Kbo  Dpi  : naniK  nniDDb 
25  -|Kbo  m nanK  nrm  : pa  (nann)i  po  (nan)n 
oyba  ban  m mnbi  nbma  a(iab)  nsnbi  mm 
t«  min’  -pbo  pjntei  : myoab  ()?iki  nbma  * (iab) 
po»  ’DDab  yniN  m’bn  pnb  nnNa  Dpi  nay 

37  nyam  mm  ixbo  rm  nanK  mrm  : bKODi 
nanK  rm  nyai  oyba  ram  (pro  Dyba  mnn 

: ntaiya 

38  oybab  moKi  nanKn  nos  n*  mm  3 nnsi 
jpban  nnbn  p ’aroyo  (m)bn  -jb  may  ns 

„ ann  m«  ibK  »n  nnpty  (n)bn  nanKb  Dyba  noKi 
foi.19. 30  oybab  nanK  nnoKi*  : 1’nbop  ina  (n)bn  »ma 
nor  ny  -pm  p ’by  naann  -pnK  naK  xbn 
} sb  noKi  iKan  ib  nayob  nbaDK  ibaDK  pnn 
31  mm  -|Kbo  n»  nrm  oyba  ’yy  rm  mm  ’bai 
' naDi  npm  nnxa  no’bcy  manm  myniKa  DKp 

* D apparently  has  been  erased  between  b and  y. 

* Altered,  apparently,  from  b. 

5 Before  ruiDi  on  marg.  I2iy  i>D^. 

I 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XXII.  9-20.  58 

no  now  oy*70  yfy  D’n*7N  (nn)m  : oySo  9 
pbo  D’n'jK1?  Dy*7o  now  : -py  p^an  Proa  » 
pflj  noy  ?<n  :*t*7  n*7ty  owo-i^o  may  no  ,t 
♦*?  01*7  nnN  hoi  runN  mrn  n*  *ooi  onvoo 
: rtmew  no  nroo1?  Von  nnV 
kVi  *pnoy  Vrn  DySo^  D’n^N  now  ,a 
oy^o  Dpi  : wn  i*no  (n)*7n  noy  n*  oV?n  >3 
(n)*7n  poynN1?  iVin  p*70  oonV  noNi  nnevo 
»jon  3 ioypi  : pooy  ino1?  1 ojnob  mrr  wo  »4 
tin  Dy*7o  ’Nyo  now  pSo  tV  ww  owo 
ponon  pnbty  rhv  p*70  my  *pw  : (f)joy  *» 
n*7  now  oybo  V?  inw  j p*7N  p pn*pn  >« 

»n»o  ’bonn  4o  *?n  noy  no  pbo  noN  (pON) 

’*7  no*m  boi  nnty  pnpiN  np’N  (n^n  : n'b  n 
njyi  :]0)nn  noy  iv  ♦*?  oinV  nty  nnw  *noyN  l8  fol.  jS.b. 

DyVo 

N 1*70  pbo  **7  fn»  IN  p*70  noy1?  now 
n » nnoyoV  ^oin  n*7  orn  *n  tpo  nn*o 
non  *n  nmyr  noyo^  ’n*7N  mm  no’o 

Doyw  pV7  pnN  *in  po  o ion  noi  «» 

* oy  V?oo  mn»  *itv  no 

now  ’V’bo  Dvbo  n,l7  com^N  in*70  5 nnw  *« 

1 After  prop  on  marg.  .1  pittK 

* Apparently  altered  from  'is  (lusV 

’ Tlie  final  1 ia  written  over. 

* Altered  into  '3t?. 

8 Before  nnttt  on  marg.  b3  ico  ;ci> .. . 


Digitized  by  Google 


5 7 


NUMBERS  XXI.  33— XXII.  8. 


xxii 


ft)  1.  a8. 


a my  psm  pa(ra)  yiK1?  ipSDi  u(onK?)  : fonn 
nmp*?  nay  Voi  xm  (pi)o’r1?  pjm  Wo 
34  mo  ‘jmn  ‘w  ncyo1?  mn'  *ioki  .*  'mu'? 
rnn»  m nay  W m nm  mn’  *pKn  (n)*?n 
njnion  noVo  pn’D*7  mnyn  non  n*?  nnym 
J5  k1?"?  ny  nay  bo  mi  nn’  V?epi  : pnernn  nirn 
. 1 an  V?om  : nyiK  n*  inmi  nvcy  n1?  mntyK 
: inn’  wrrt  myo  nKio  nypnn  man  Skip’ 
» bsnv'  nnyn  bj  n*  nay  nn  pbn  * nim 

3 V?n  nncy  nay  ompo  okio  bnm  : nxman1? 

4 noKi  : bsiv'  an  ompo  okio  p»vki  Kin  uid 
Vo  n*  ](j)nn  nVnp  in’?’  no  pro  ’nDV  okio 
may  nn  pVm  mn  p*i’  n*  min  inVo  (i):mnD 

5 DyVn  mV  pnVcy  nVm  * : K’nn  ptn  okioV  iVo 
pay  an  ynKV  nnna  Vyn  Jn(cmn)  nyn  nn 
»do  Km.  onyoo  psi  Dy  Kn  no’oV  nV  pyio1? 

e nnK  inoi  : ♦VmpVo  nn’  Kim  nynK  mrn  n* 
ao  Kin  i’pn  (n)Vn  t(3)nn  nay  n’  ’*7  onV  'icy 
nVn  nynK  p nmoKi  nn  (Vop)  Viok  ’in1? 

• B’bi  tmVnn  mi  T>no  pnnnn  m nonn 
7 pmoDpi  4 pro  3,n(KD)i  okio  3’o(kd)  i^tki 
:pVn  ’Vo  nay  1VV01  DyVn  mV  inKi  pmn 
» Woo  pom  nrm  pV’V  non  wok  tin1?  noKi 
oy  nKio  am  inn*i  *oy  mm  Won  non 

1 Before  ntni  on  marg.  '3T. ...  • * So  MS.  apparently. 

* There  has  been  a line  over  the  letter  displaced  by  N. 

4 After  [HO  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 


Digitized  by  Google 


56 


NUMBERS  XXI.  23-32. 

ram  naa  : ’bana  nny»v  mnb  ’nato  »b  fnn 
: namya  pntm  ’asiai  nba.ia  pnann  iay  aa  »b 
: nainna  nay  bana”  n*  pn’D  an'  nVi 
n»  fanipb  ’an’  nnty  'in  naab  mn*  'nasi 
eaai  : nyn#  n’  nn’ab  m*  na  nyns  nn  pn*D 
nnanab  bsna’  panb  pan  nay  ba  n*  pn’D 
n»i  bsna’  nbapi  : *7t<-ity*a  n’asi  nvn’b  (’n)si1  2* 
nyn#  n»  inm  ann  cab  nay  ba  nn  v:a 
Qinn  *|’pn  (n)bn  pay  aa  ny  pa’  ny  pnsa 
pbxn  n(nn)p  ba  n»  bxna’  aD:i  : pay  aa  *s 
baai  paarna  ntniatt  nip  baa  bsna’  mi 
ntniannaba  pn’Dn  nnnp  paan  (n)bn*  : nraa 
ba  n’  aD3i  ’sanp  asia  fbaa  rvato  mm  N’n 
n’D’ba  pna"  fa  by  : fans'  ny  nns  fa  nyns  *7 
(n )bn  : pn’Dn  nnnp  fj(ian)m  man  paan  ’bsy  *« 
nbai<  pn’D  nnpa  nanb  paan  fa  (n)psj  as* 
nna«  ama  ib’i  : fans  maa  »anDo  ama  ny  >9 
4,aaa  nnjai  n’Q’ba  vaa  an’  asa(a)  3iay 
n(nasa  panns'p  : pn»D  nsman  nabob  J0 
hv  as  naa  nno  pnai  pan  ny  fiaan 

: Kan’a 

naa  nbai  : nsman  mpa  bsna*  snm  31.3a 
rwman  n»  ianyi  nn:a  laaai  *viy»  n*  nbb’ab 


1 The  words  from  1DN1  to  nyiK  are  to  be  found  in  Deut.  ii.  31. 
1 After  an'  on  marg.  mi.  3 So  MS. 

* n is  written  over  after  ' 

3 Before  mi  on  marg.  njfin  nmi” , . 


Digitized  by  Google 


55 


NUMBERS  XXI.  13-22. 

oV?  *nb  (r-i)Vn  nmv  -|l ? pay  »»  yiN  p 
1 3.  pnN  -inya  mi  -nr  broo  -6011  : nmv  nnnn’ 
prw  (n)*7n  ntnios  oirrno  pen  rra-ro  *7jn 

14  naan*  p by  : hniidn  pn  inid  pi  inio  Dirin 
’:6(ns)  Dyi  nsiDi  noyn  dv  nin*  nmp  iddi 

15  pvsnxi  rt(’)np  "inoV  Dtnm  pjaba-n  : pm 

16  noNn  r-nsi  x’n  mm  pnai  : into  pinnV 

:pa  pnb  jnNi  nay  n»  >b  boo  n^oV  mn’ 

17  uy  mNi  *pD  mn  nnm  n*  ^Nity*  -v&’n  'mn 
ibi..,.  is  tu)i*  noy  n*m  nNiay  pm  n-nsnn  -ini  : nb 

19  ‘JN’.ifl1?  ’nnmaai  nrunab  manaa  .‘K’jiani 
« bprm  nxu1?  nnoNi  pi  j nnoNi1?  ’Vnu^d  pi 
: paty’n  tzmp  by  (npn)o-r  nnoo  trn  inio 
*?m  4n’  nayi  iVidi  iaip  nsyob  mrr  3-ioni 
pntrn  n*7o  prvo  n*  -p’l  run’  • ’tn  pnN 
: nmp  no  -hdi  m’  m nynN  m nNman 
’SN  by  -jn^nm  ^no’n  on’  m |0)nn  nov 
-|yotr  n»  pyasyn  npicy  bz  ninm  npoy 

.*  TOTipo  pVibm  pynan  • 
*■  nN-noN  '‘no'p  pn*p  yb  pnbty  Vnib”  nban 
« noba  ynNi  lynsu  -oyN  t “iopV  abv  'bo 

bpni  DUN  f<V  ‘PNODl  PO’  PDN  "JHN 

flDDl  POI  *70’N1  OTOn  fpZU  ‘pP  DIOIT 

1 Before  mn  on  marg.  TO  m . . ’So  MS. 

’ These  two  verses  are  in  Deut.  ii.  24,  25. 

‘ After  IV  on  marg.  *n  nnC'N. 

* After  nai>D  on  marg.  . . rt>D  i>3. 

* These  two  verses  are  in  Deut.  ii.  28,  29. 


Digitized  by  Google 


54 


NUMBERS  XXI.  5-12. 

bboi  :nynixa  may  tys:  1 (n)nvpi  amx  ynx  s 
naab  onvao  pnpsx  nob  ntyooi  D’nbxa  nay 
np’va  prop  va  n»bi  ’an1?  mb  nbn  manaa 
n(’BTU)  m noya  mir  nban  : b(pbpxn)  nanba  « 

: bxna”o  ’.id  ay  mai  nay  rm  map  ppion 
1*7*70  nbn  p’an  maxi  nep  mb  nay  nnxi  t 
ncro  rm  ivby  p ’OD’i  mmb  »bv  "pi  mna 

:nay  b’no’nea  ’bin 

nn’  nan  mp’  nb  nay  n&yob  mm  3naxv  8 «■»«■«>• 
ntya  nayi  : ’nn*  nn’  ’inn  ma:  ba  ’nn  4*dd  by  » 
n(tyyj)  dd:  jx  mm  4’DD  by  nN’ian  tsrun  crm 
ibop  : *m  norm  ntyrob  banDxi  twx  n* *° 
unsaa  man  maxa  ibop  : maxa  men  bxnty*  n 

: niya’ty  mna  axia  Dmp  byn  nnanaa  ’xnay 
bxi  axio  n’  nxm  bN  ntrab  mm  *naxi 
nnnv  nynx  p *|b  pix  >*b  (n)bn  na  min 
pna  : nnnv  neniy  n’  nan*  Bib  ’jab  (n)bn  i* 

:nnr  bma  men  iboj 

pv  nay  nnx  : no’ob  ntro  ay  mm  6 bboi 
ua  baipb  anpm  : neniy  n*  axio  ainn  m» 
inx  xb  (n)bn  pna  nun  bxi  prwpn  bx  pay 

’ Another  n is  visible  at  the  end  of  the  word.  4 

* So  MS.  ’ Before  1DN1  on  marg.  ,n  by  in . . . 

* A letter,  apparently  D,  has  been  erased  before  D. 

e Before  idni  on  marg.  inc\ , . This  verse  is  to  be  found  in 
Deut.  ii.  9. 

* Before  ^D1  on  marg.  nnt<  *1)3  nrtbtt.  These  three  verses  are 
to  be  found  in  Deut.  ii.  1 7—19. 


Digitized  by  Google 


53  NUMBERS  XX.  22— XXI.  4. 

:vby  10  btn»»  (pnN)’i  nainni  ni y bN*uy’ 
^ (no)1?  nnam  bi  bfnty*  na  ibyi  anpa  ibaji 

:n-na 

J5  b y m»  (-na)i  pntfbi  nrab  mrv  nasi 
24  nay  by  pnx  (tyji)n’  : nap b arra  yns  oinn 
foi.»6.  ^y*  btnty*  *nb  ninn  nynsb  by”  xb  (n)bn 
>5  pnx  o’  11m  : myn  ’ab  na’a  rv  pnnan 
26  ybtrm  ; n-na  "nab  pn»  pDm  rra  nrybN  m 
rra  "ilybK  rv  pj^ibni  vypn  n»  pnx  p 
>7  nai  ntya  myi  : pn  niD’i  (Bni)n’  pnsi 
jnnani  bi  *yyb  nma  mob  npDNi  mn*  npsn 
28  n*  pn*  Kabto  vypn  n*  pn#  p ntra  ybew 
ny:i  nma  cm  pn  pnx  n’oi  mi  nrybtf 
19  (n)bn  nncni  bi  urn  : nnic  p nrybNi  pupa 
to  bi  dv  pnbn  pn#  n*  1311  pn#  Dbiy 

: btnp* 

**i.  1 nbn  1 nom  in(h)  -ny  -jba  ntuyji  yacn 
ran  bNnc*’i  y*un  rventw  y*riK  bNnsy*  (tin) 
» IN  uni  mrrb  *nj  btaty*  nn:i  : n*nty  H30 
rv  Dim  hni  apnn  nay-  pi*  pn  pa 

3 rv  inn  bmty*  bpi  nin»  yacn  : pn(n*n)p 
rsnpi  pn(nn)p  nn  pn’  Dim  ,—nNi  nioyja 

:nann  nnn#  naty 

4 n*  nnDab  3*pD  d*  ymtt  nma  mao  nbon 

1 After  TOPI  on  marg.  njwm. 

2 The  3 is  written  over. 

5 After  t)1D  on  marg.  , , CTOD1. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XX.  14-31.  52 

rv  fpfli  :.pn  nrrv  rv  "oyn  x*7  -bn  im’yo 
noy  D~npb  my’  xin  x*?n  nv’yi  nsprn  ysyirv 
: unm  nynx  rv  pn*  .1*73’  xmi  pn 
rv  pnnD  'po*7  miD  no’o*7  ntyo  Dy  nin’  *?*7oi 
oo9o*7  nps  noy  nn  : an:iDy  pDV  ms  (prrn  nmo 
n*7o:n  pnxm  ityy  mo  po’nx  Diyno  pnoy  pnx*  w.»j 
pno  pnmin  *7X  : nnty  pio:nm  po:o  p*?n“n 
Dvro  -t y nmv  pynx  ;o  po*7  tnx  x*7  (n)*7n 
n*7o:  “no  rv  ran*  ury*?  nmv  (n)*7n  Vn  fp 
poonn  po  ixi  pbo’m  idoo  pm*?o  prnon  pro 

: piniym  spoo  pm*70 

□nx  1*70  t*7  BHpo  pn*7ty  n&a  3n*7tyi  M 
*73  rv  noon  nnx  bxnty’  iinx  nox  i(:n3) 
Dnvo*7  mnnox  iny:i  : (i):nyptrxn  nniy*1?  .5 
’XTi,o  (1)3*7  ityyoxi  mo  pov  cnvoo  (i)3vn 
n*7en  (i)3*7p  yarn  rnrrb  COran  : (i):nnox*7i  ,6 
nmp  0”"Tp3  (i)3n:x  xm  onxoo  (i):psxi  n’*7ty 
bpno  my:  x*7  iyixo  m my:  : loinn  noD’Xon  ,7 
r<*7  in:  n3*70  ymx  om  »o  *n^:  r^i  cmoi 
n*7  10X1  : loinn  ioy:*T  ny  *7xod:  po*  »dd:  .s 
: (i:io,r)*7  psx  mnn  nj*7“t  *o  myn  x*7  nnx 
Too  dxi  pD3  nono  *7xnty’  mo  n*7  nox:  >» 
*7*700  rv*7  4(-n)*7  pn*on  tnxi  mmpi  n:x  nnem 
n:io’t*7  mix  ps::  myn  x*7  noxi  : myx  »*7P3  30 
rv  on’  dvtx  ’noi  : ns’pn  nxoi  n»p»  oyo  » 

1 After  on  marg.  , . *in.  1 b is  written  over  before  V. 

9 Before  nlJS’l  on  marg.  . 1 . . . 4 So  MS. 


51 


NUMBERS  XX.  7-13. 


7l  s mow  n*  no  : oo’ob  no*o  dv  mn’  'bboi 
pbboni*  *pnx  pnxi  nnx  rnnom  n*  omi 
to  t’O  pnb  pom  *i*oo  fn*i  pn*i*yb  nso  toy 

9 no?o  iDii  .*  pn*yn  m nnom  n*  *po*m  nso 

10  itrioi  : mpm  noo  mn*  ompbo  mow  n* 
pnb  noxi  noo  3 orrpb  nbnp  n*  pnxi  no*o 
pob  pDNi  4 pm  noo  to  Kn  nooo  *j  wot? 

11  mown  noo  n*  nyoi  mu  n*  noo  dixi  :po 

: powoi  nnooo  nnen  od  po  ipsn  toot  pon 
•*  o proo’n  sxb  in  pnxbi  no*ob  mn’  10x1 
n*  pbxyn  k1?  pb  bxoo*’  on  *ryb  *noopob 
13  mu*n  *o  tun  .*  pnb  non»n  nynxb  6pnn  nbnp 
7noxi  : tmo  oopi  mn*  oy  bxno”  on  i”u*nxn 
■pov  n*  nxtnob  noo*  nnx  mn*  otto  roo*o 
ro’oioo  bx  ton  rrnc’pn  -px  n*i  imon  'm* 
o nayx  : *t(nxmoo)oi  "poiyo  nnyo  nyoxm 
noo  mio  n:no*  novon  nnoo  nnx  n*  uyxi 

: nimbi  pnn 

bboo  8tt?in  bx  “|b  oid  no*ob  mn*  noxi 
(*bn)i  nnoD  o*ob  pD  :pn  nbbooo  my  *oy 
*tm  nmnobi  nonnbi  nnsxbi  nonyob  "|p*y 

* Before  bVci  on  inarg.  an  illegible  gloss. 

* D is  written  over.  * So  MS.  4 3 is  written  over. 

e After  tb  on  inarg.  . . !>a^.  * 3 is  written  over. 

1 These  verses  are  not  in  the  Hebrew,  but  are  to  be  found  in 
. Dent.  iii.  23-28,  and  ii.  2-6. 

* After  ejTin  on  marg.  . . 3">V 

II  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XIX.  17— XX.  6.  50 

v*?y  pirn  nmVD  nmp*  nay  p anD(n)“6  poD’i  >7 

“m  1*03  ln0’3  11TN  1D(’1)  i p0  by  t’TI  I’D  «« 
(’)'m  nnersa  byi  n*3o  byi  matyo  by  *-m  »a*r 
’N  n*oa  ’N  Vopa  ’N  o*m  aopn  Vyi  ton 
rmmVn  nova  naoo  by  rw’aa  **n  jnapa  «» 
ymi  rwy*aty  nova  rm^D’i  nxy’aty  norm 
nVi  anon  coni  : ntrona  omi  poa  ’yon  rypn  30 
(nV?n  nbnp  u6o  N’nn  ntys3  ipynm  n^nD’ 
vby  pnr  xb  m3  »o  a(x’D)  mm  errpo  (rv) 
m3  ’o  hoi  caty  nmta1?  po1?  *nm  : Nin  aDo  « 
bai  ; ntron  -t y anD’  m3  ’oa  anpm  vypn  ym  » 
anDn  (njmp-r  ntyS3i  anD’  naDO  na  anpn 

: niyon  ny 

nrrva  tv  nano  nnaoa  ba  btnty’  oa  1 ibyi  **• 
nno  ton  nmoi  empa  noy  mi  naonp 
leoantn  nntria1?  po  mn  nVi  : ton  a nnap(m)  j 
■noso  niyo  oy  noy  nvnNi  : pm*  Syi  ns?o  by  i 
: mm  cmpb  vn#  o’woa  (1)30^  nVi  no'ob 
‘moo1?  3p“rn  mano1?  mn’  bnp  n*  pn»n*n  nobi  4 
n^yoV  onvoo  (i)3npDN  noVi  ; umyai  urnt*  ton  5 
tea  n3*n  ynr  -tn»  n1?  pan  mr»a  mnxb  (i)3n* 
ompo  pnto  ntyo  Wi  : ’ntro1?  n'b  poi  pom  6 
•tnnsi  pmstt  by  ibsji  nyio  bn#  yn nb  nbnp 

jpnV  mm  maa 


’ Before  'bjft  on  marg.  ni3w*p  . D. 
a So  IIS. ; it  letter  lias  apparently  boen  erased  after  3. 
5 3 has  been  written  over.  * 1 is  written  over. 


49 


NUMBERS  XIX.  5-16. 


foL  24. 


.*  pi?  nyatr  nans  p nyio  'jnN on  VnpV 

5 m non  no  (nitra)  n*  lo’y1?  nma  ri*  npvi 

6 TON(n  Di’p)  ninl  ID'1  npID’  nTlS  by  HOTN 

7 yno  : nms  nmp*  Mb  *an*i  nnv  myn  ii?ni 
Sy”  inn  van  mDi  n*  »yD*i  nini  vypn 

s nn*  npiarn  : neon  ny  nini  inD’i  nnntro1? 
ny  inD’i  t*ei  mbi  rv  wi  i*di  vypn  y- 1* 

: ntran 

9 'ni1?  non  nms  cap  n*  on  noi  com 
*7Nntr»  01  ncoib  *nm  on  nnNi  nnntraa 

10  n*  colon  yno  : K*n  m^D  nnj  ’aV  rnnoob 
*nm  neon  ny  anon  vypn  yon  nnns  Dap 
.'D’jy  rnn’Lib  pain  non  mvi*7i  bNnc”  oib 

11  :i*av  nyio*  mo*  coni  c?Di  biV  n*ai  mpn 
•a  nKyoty  norm  nNn’Vi  navi  ni  nbnD*  Kin 

morn  nNn’Sn  nan  r6nD*  ini  *an*i 
*3  coNn  trail  n*ai  mpn  Vi  : on*  n*7  nNy’ic* 
npynm  in(*d)  nin*  ptra  n*  n^na*  nVi  mm 
v*?y  p*nt  n*7  nn:  *o  nVn  *7Nnc?*a  N*nn  nc*ai 

: ni  nmiD  my  *n*  ioa 
'4  ^yn  *^1  pc'ci  mo*  in  con  nmmn  nm 
*5  *7ii  : i’ov  nyitr  inD*  niitroan  *711  niic’eS 
•6  *7ii  : Nin  ioa  vby  mrtri  pov  N^n  (dv*p)  ino 
in  n*ai  in  nn  Vapi  nn  1 *3N  by  mp*n 
b-  :i*ov  nyitr  ino*  nipi  in*  con  pn  onu 

1 After  on  marg.  KIDD  i>2Dl. 

5 After  73  on  marg.  , . , Id. 

H 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XVIII.  24— XIX.  4.  48 

netm  mrvb  penn  btnev  aa  novo  rv  (n)bn 
aa  m pnb  mo«  p by  nabob  *ttvbb  nnarr 

jnabo  tubs*  tfb  btnav 

bban  »t»vb  oyi  : na*ab  ntra  dv  mn’  ' bbei  *5,  ^ 
mayo  rv  bmer»  aa  mba  paDn  id  pnb  no’m 
rv  pud  panm  paaboa  pmbo  pab  narvn 
pa1 *?  aemnn  2 mDvao  (-idvo)  mrv  matnK  v 
: nnnvya  p nmbaai  rrrw  p n:ana  panomw 
panoyo  baa  mn»  man**  n»  pnn  ponn  p 38 
mantt  n*  roe  pjnm  bmer*  aa  mba  paDm 
ba  n*  pann  panano  baa  2 rona  pnxb  mrv  *9 
ia*m  2 (rue)  'nerrpK  rv  nrtan  baa  mrv  mente  3° . 
♦Nibb  aennn  ruo  rnnan  rv  pamonta  pnb 
baa  nn*  pba’m  ; mvya  nbbyai  ims  nbbya  3* 
(*l)bn  pab  t<n  na#  (n)bn  pa*nai  pntc  nn« 

’an  vby  pbapn  r<bi  2 rona  bn#a  patratyn  3> 
btnen  aa  *enp  m roe  nnan  rv  pamenKa 

2 iiman  Nbi  pbbnn  #b 

m ; na’eb  pnK  oyi  ne*a  cy  mn>  3bbei  **•  ».» 
aa  dv  bba  na’eb  mrv  npon  nnnw  rrvra 
na  rvbn  nebty  npioD  ms  ib  paan  btner» 
nrybsb  nn*  pinro  21a  n*by  pba  Nbm*  Die  3 
2 vampb  nm  aian  nnntyoa  nab  nm  pen  mro 
nay  n»i  rnyavto  name  p runa  nryb#  aon  ♦ 


1 Before  bbt31  on  raarg.  bv- 

1 Altered,  apparently,  in  MS.  to  nniEHptt. 

s Before  ^D!  on  marg. 


Digitized  by  Google 


fol.  33.  b 


47  NUMBERS  XVIII.  13-23. 

pnwtn  (p)n  (eo’)i  nai  Vai  (aoi)  not 

: finin’  i1?  nm’^  pinn 

13  Vd  ' »m  ~\b  mn^  prvn  prism  *7D  nm 

14  .*  vr  i1?  bsitra  Din  *7D  m^D”  *yraa  on 
■5  neasa  mir*?  paipn  iDa  bib  Dm  n(in)D  ‘id 

ooa  rv  pisn  npios  pi  1*7  m’  rrnanaai 
.6  nipisi  : pion  nnaDa  nnana  niaa  n»i  nsas 
’f’^pio  rwan  c\dd  (n)as*iya  pion  m»  no 
n iin  iidd  pa  : sin  (ni)i  pDV  ncnp  *?pnoa 
pis  enp  pisn  s*7  ty  iidd  is  isds  iidd  is 
imn  pain  no  nnno  by  pun  pais  rv 
■8  nriD  *1*7  ’n*  piDm  :rrm’*7  niyi  nn  flip 
.9  rvenp  mans  *7D  : »n*  lb  ni’O*  peoi  nmssisi 
iniabi  i’ll1?!  ib  non’  mrrV  bsicr  an  ponn 
Diip^  s-on  oby  n^a  DS’p  dVv  pVinb  lay 

: -jay  iintSi  i*7  nw 

ao  pbim  3ybsn  xb  pyisa  pnsb  mrv  nasi 
an  na  imbsi  ip^in  as  pniaa  i1?  »n’  k*7 
ji  ‘isitra  iDya  *7D  nan’  r<n  a5?  aaVi  : Vsitr 
tratyn  rv  ptracya  pisi  ptraem  abn  11*73*7 
• » ^ns1?  *?sitr  aa  ny  paip*  s*7i  * : nyia  *7ns 
*3  sin  nsv*7  ram  : n(i)aa*7  on  n*7apa*7  ira 
mm  pnoin  p*7np’  pisi  iyia  *7ns  rawi  rv 
: na*?Q  paVfl*  s*7  *7Sitr  aa  liar  pam*?  D*7y 

1 After  VP  on  marg.  mb’  nab. 

1 The  D is  written  over. 

1 After  3^Dn  on  marg.  [?]pjN  by. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XVIII.  1-12. 


46 


lay  tqn  n»n  -pii  nnx  pn#b  mn» ' *idki  *viii.  i 
pbipn  -joy  "pm  nn#i  ncnpa  my  n»  pbipn 
any  nb  aity  Tinx  n’  ini  .*  pin^ni  nn  n’  * 
nnxi  "picyotyn  -|’by  pianD’i  lay  mpn  ton 
lnma  pian  : nnNinnD  fitra  ampb  nay  -pn  j 
Nb  nnmabi  ntnp  ’iab  pi  nmira  Si  nnaai 
pianon  1 pnN  r\x  pjN  t\x  pnia’  r<bi  pmp’  4 
nnmy  bib  nyia  bnN  mNDa  n*  pna*i  I’by 
n*  pnom  : pan*b  mp»  ?<b  »nhi  miiya  5 
"ny  »n»  nVi  nnma  mxoa  nn  ncynp  niNae 
pi’riN  rv  mn  nN  »:ni  : bxnw  m by  »)vp  6 
mn’1?  pi’ir  mno  pi1?  bNnty*  »n  uba  »Ni’b 
1’in  nnNi  : nyia  bnN  ty’Dtrn  n’  Hcrntyab  7 
nnma  bbaa  Sib  pinjni  rv  pnon  foy 
fDN  mno  tr’Dtyn  pvsvm  nnais'?  iNibabi 
: bapn’  npn  (n)Nnn  pinjm  n» 
n*  i;b  mn»  nN  »jni  prw  d y mn’  Jbbai  s 
pnin*  I1?  bNnjy*  m nsrrp  bib  'nmo  nnNaa 
’trrpa  lb  *n»  p : oby  pbmb  TJibi  mb  9 
bibi  pnroa  bib  pjmp  bi*  nntyN  fa  mtynp  m.>3. 
lb  penp  i*np  *b  pinn’n  pae?N  bibi  pnbD 
bi”  mn  bi  mbi’n  n’trrp  errpi  : Y»bi  Nin  *« 
bib  pjna  mans  ■ |b  pi  ; ib  ’n*  tynp  nn’  n 
in:ibi  -pibi  finin’  -jb  bNntr’  »:i  niSNJN 
bi  : nn’  bi”  in’ii  mn  bi  oby  pbinb  lay  » 

1 Before  IQNI  on  marg.  nn’3  HX , . . 

’ Before  bbt21  on  marg.  DX'p  .... 


Digitized  by  Google 


45 


xvii. 


foL  11.  b. 


NUMBERS  XVII.  1-13. 

i,  3 '*13  ay  bba  : n a*ab  ntra  cy  mm  bbai 
mbo  3N  n*ab  aaiy  aaiy  pmba  3Di  bNicy* 
maa  poiy  iDynn  pnnat*  n’ab  pmn’DJ  ba 
3 pns  a&  rm  : nmaiy  by  anan  not?  n* 
rra  &”"6  in  maiy  (n)bn  *ib  naiy  by  anan 
♦ nn*mriD  mipb  nyia  bnaa  pinani  .*  pnnatt 

5 (n)w  na  ‘man  nty’N  *n*i  : fan  ")b  fanmn 
pam  btne»  on  *(3’3-i)  rv  ’by  to  fpm  nis* 

6 ian*i  b?ne>’  un  Dy  ntya  bbai  : pa*by  p(33*n)o 
nn  rTD3b  naiy  in  n’Dib  naiy  pn’n*D3  b3  nb 
133  pnt<  naiyi  paiy  nD ynn  pnnat*  rvab 

7 mn*  DTipb  nnaiy  n’  ntya  (n’)3*o  : pnnaiy 
s mtya  byi  nnan  fa  mm  : nnNinnb  fatyaa 

*ib  n*ab  pnN  naiy  mfl  «m  nntmno  ptyab 

9 rv  n»o  petti  : pnb  bDm  p \*3ni  nne  potti 
uni  bttnty’  ’33  ba  mb  mn»  DTipba  nnaiy  ba 

jmtny  naa  iaD3i 

10  DTipb  pntt  naiy  rv  nrn  ntyab  mn’  3natti* 
rv)  oaDNi  nnaa  ’3ab  fD’Db  nnttaab  nnttnnD 

*«  noa  mw a nayi  : pmo*  t<bi  ’by  p 4p(3»3"i 
i2  banty*  *33  natti  j nay  fa  mn*  min*  npsn 
: (i)3*i3K  (i)3ba  (i)3i3N  (i)3abty  ttn  na*ab  nsyab 
1 j 4[f]3a*n  bapn*  min*  fatrab  anpn  amp  ba 

: obtyab  i(3ab)tyn 

1 After  ’33  on  marg.  *JQ  nr6t<.  ’ So  MS. 

’ Before  tBttt  on  marg.  p3 . . . 

* So  MS.  apparently. 


Digitized  by  Google 


44 


NUMBERS  XVI.  39-50. 

*pnpi  pn*  nsyi  pntron  p*7K  (main)  nK*nno 
mm  Dmp*7  pnsipK  n*7n  nnsio*7  rsn  pDo 
ity*7K  sdji  : *7Kicy*  03*7  p*D*?  pn  'ltripKi  j» 
mmp*  isipKi  neru  nK’nno  n*  ruro  pnK  13 
*7Kisy*  03*7  pan  : nraia1?  vsn  pjK  pipn  +o 
Kin  pnK  into  K*n  »kis  isa  sip*  k*71  *7*13 
mp3  *n*  k*7i  niir  Diip*7  ’nnw  rrmio*7 
: n*?  njy o iks  mn*  *7*701  nos  nntsossi 
ntyo  by  “ins  p *7Kitr*  os  ncyjs  *73  3un  41 
: mn*  Dy  rn*  pnVop  pnK  10*0*7  pnK  Vi 
(i*7snD)Ki  pns*  ‘syi  nco  by  nntws  tsuss  mm  4J 
:mn»  mss  *?nnKi  mny  nK’Ds  Km  iyio  *7nK*7 
J iyio  Vik  Dmp*7  pnKi  nsyo  by-\  4J 
tsVo  lOKinn  : 10*0*7  rwo  oy  mn*  *7*7oi4  44,45 

: pn*fiK  *7V  iVsji  f|oys  pn*osDKi  mn  nneos 
m*?y  sm  nn*nno  n*  sd*  p,iK*7  nro  ioki  4«  «.». 
nneos*?  *i£>3  *7tKi  rrmK  *ien  nreno  by  p tvt* 

*1  v mn*  Dmp*70  nsyp  psj  (n)*7n  pn**7y  n*7Di 
13*7  omi  ntro  *7*701  nos  pnK  sdji  : nsaj  47 
nmiKin  n*  am  noys  nsaa  nty  khi  n*7np 
n**n  psi  n*n*o  ps  Dpi  : noy  *-?y  n*7Di  48 
nno’303  in*oi  mm  : nno*ao  rmtynm  49 
by  in*oi  p is*7  pKo  yscn  ps*7K  PoiysiK 
*7nK  yin*7  ns?o  sri**7  pnK  ityi  : nip  *7*700  5° 

miyynK  nno’soi  iyio 

1 The  K is  written  over.  * So  MS. 

5 Before  U11  on  marg.  H2D3 . . . 

* Before  5>boi  on  marg.  $>D3  p . , . * So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


43 


NUMBERS  XVI.  25-38. 

35  mnto  ibtxi  d*vini  fm  mb  brai  n^D  Dpi 

26  ’:  idd  na’ob  nncaa  ov  bbai  .*  bNip*  ’a*3n 
*73i  pnnpn  Vni  pb#  nwi  n’"Q3  *J3t?a  bvo 

27  p ipbnDNi  : prvnm  *731  psnon  p-ibn  pbn 
firn  inD  p di*3Ni  fm  nip  pvo  (by) 
pmcm  pnaatya  jnni  patfp  ip33  Dnato 

: pn’bfloi  pmm 

28  ‘mbi?  mn*  (n)bn  paayn  mna  nt?o  *ia*o 

39  ft*  : ’i*70  n*7  (n)bn  pbp*  nnaiy  *73  n»  nnyab 
neutt  ba  nnDai  pb#  pmo’  neat*  ba  mas 

3°  na»  pro  pi  .*  ’nbt?  mn*  p<b  pn*by  noon’ 
ba  n*i  fin’  vbim  nae  n’  njns  nnsm  mn’ 
inn^a  (n)bn  paanni  bv^b  f”n  pny”i  pbn 

1 mn»  n*  pbttn  mnaa 

31  pbxn  n*ba  ba  n»  nbbaab  nmaaDtta  mm 
roLn.b.  12  rv  njnt*  nynei*  : pn'mnm  nnant*  nypaai 
mp*n  ca#  *73  n*i  pmnn  n»i  pn*  nybai  nas 

33  bve?b  f”n  f 1*7*1  Vai  p3N  injai  .•  mnv  *73  n*i 

34  bai  : nbnp  mba  inatn  mint*  pn*by  nx’Dai 
?<bn  max  nbn  pbpb  ipny  finnnDn  bNnc?’ 

3s  n*  nbaxi  mn*  ntnba  ps:  two  : nn»  pjyban 
: a nnrtNiN  anpa  *133  pnxai  pjyan 
36, 37  itvVk*?  net*  i na*ab  n»a  dv  mn*  bbai3 
n’Tp’  a’io  nnN’nna  n*  onn  mna  pnx  m 

38  rn*  : ltrrp  (n)bn  bnb  mn’  nii  nnm  n*i 

1 After  'nb&  on  marg.  . by  nnbti.  * So  MS. 

s Before  ^D1  on  marg.  VDTP  i>3.  In  the  Heb.  text  chap,  xvii 
begins  here. 

G 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


42 


NUMBERS  XVI.  13-24. 

xb  1-10x1  nx’bx  00  Di’nxbi  fmb  pyrob  ntyo 
nn’(i)o  yix  fo  (i)jnpox  (n)bn  nytn  : pDJ  u 
nominx  (n)bn  moioo  (i)jbapob  can  nbn 
obn  nn’(i)o  yixb  xb  ^x  ; (noioinx)  t\x  iyby  i+ 
did  ix  bpy  mbs  (i):b  nomi  (i)jnbxy  ean 
'mn(x)i  :pw  *<b  ooyn  pixn  moo  ’yyn  «5 
xb  pnroob  (bonD)n  bx  mmbioxi  me?  ntrob 
in  (m)  ntyynx  rsbi  noDJ  puo  ini  man 

: puo 

onpb  nn  -jnooo  *701  nnx  nipb  ntro  idxi*  >« 
nnnno  ioj  iodi  : mo  pnxi  p:xi  nnx  mm  .7 
100  mm  Diipb  poipm  3nxm  pmby  pjnm 
100  pnxi  nnxi  fx’nno  pnxoi  psron  nmnno 
e?x  pno  nmi*  nn’nno  100  iodji  : nn’nno  is  m.,.. 
ntroi  iyio  bnx  vino  iopi  nxm  pmby  nn 
ymb  nneoo  bo  n*  nip  pmby  s^odi  .*  pnxi  «» 

:nneoo  bob  mn’  noo  ’tnnxi  iyio  bnx 
rio’ob  pnx  dvi  ner 0 Dy  mm  bboi  »° 
.’pjayo  fin’  dodxi  mn  nneoo  iobo  Pensnn  « 
bob  n’rrrn  pnbx  bx  noxi  pmex  by  ibsji  a* 

: mn  nncoo  bo  byi  »an*  in  box  xn  moo 
snnBOO  Dy  bbo  :io*ob  ntyo  oy  mn’  bboi  *3,54 
: Di’oxi  fm  nip  ptyob  smD  fo  ipbnDX  10’ob 

’ The  n is  written  over. 

5 Before  "1DN1  on  marg.  TI33  ....  5 So  MS. 

* After  ICHQnn  on  marg.  . p mjn. 

* After  nn»33  on  inarg  'ID  nnbt«. 

* There  is  a line  over  ft. 


Digitized  by  Google 


41  NUMBERS  XV.  41— XVI.  12. 

41 10  pan*  npstn  panba  mm  on  ipanbNb 
mm  o>e  D’.abNb  pab  mob  Drava  yaN 

t panbN 

xvi.  1 '[mi  ab  an  map  an  any*  an  nap  ami 

* iopi  : pun  an  nba  an  pNi  nmbN  on  oamNi 
priNOi  pcran  bNaer’  ono  panrn  ntro  amp1? 

3 iKoanNi  : f(n)otr  man  (nnD)  o’or  nneoa  ttdj 
(n)bn  pab  ipiD  pnb  iooni  pnN  byi  nsro  by 
nooi  ram’  (p)i_mi  ptrnp  (p)*aa  raneon  ba 

4 by  ban  ratro  yean  : nm*  bnp  by  paanann 

5 ao’ob  ranooa  *aa  cm  nap  cy  bboi  .*  van 
foi.  ao. b.  nap’  ’ntrrap  ran  nba  ra»  mn»  earn  aev  • 

e me  nay  raa  : na’b  nap*  nn  annra  no  na*b 

7 era  pan  mm  : nneoa  bai  nap  (i)N’nno  pa*? 
racr’N  mo  ana  mn’  empb  rryiN  pmby  nan 
.'a1?  on  pa1?  *ma  Hemp  Nin  nm*  annra 
s,  9 myr  : o’?  on  o iyotr  nap1?  racro  3 aoNi 
neoaa  pan’  bNatrra  n.nbN  trnsN  (n)b,n  paio 
tr*otrn  m nirocrob  rrt’b  pan’  nnapo1?  bNati” 
.*  pnerotrab  nneion  omp1?  4 epabi  mm  ptro 
io  in  pn’ym  lay  ab  on  i’nN  ba  na  in’  napNi 
«i  by  f’a’Doa  inaoa  bm  an#  a’Dtr  s^b  : mono 
” nbem  : vby  plan  (n)bn  r-on  no  pnNi  mm 

* After  pn  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 

’ The  n is  written  over. 

3 Before  1DN1  on  marg.  nili'tO  ntJ-Q. 

* So  MS. ; a letter  has  been  erased  after  p. 

G 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XV.  27-40. 


40 


rrn  rv  nnpm  intro  *onn  mn  trsi  ‘[ni  *7 
nntr)*i  ntrsj  by  mno  nVD’i  : mVDV  nntr  a3 
nVnD’i  i*Vy  nnVooV  mn*  ompV  mi  m(om 
poinn  nm  mrnVi  Vnio”  »nn  mix’  : nV 
ntrsr  : intro  mynV  pu*7  (’m)  mn  min  3° 
mn’  rv  mvi  pi  nniy*  p non  ini  mym 
: moy  nVo  r<’nn  ‘ ntren  npynm  tpno  tssin 
npy  Von  imps  n»i  ?’o»  mm  Woo  n*  (n)Vn  3« 
mo  noin  N»nn  n^si  ipynn 
'Pffpo  naa  lyptrtti  nmion  Vjna”  on  nm*  33  M.„. 
nn’  lyptrjn  nm  nipNi  : nrimtr  ovn  pt*y  33 
.*  nnooo  Vo  mVi  pntt  mVi  ncro  mV  pt*y  ertrpo 
miym  no  cns  r»W  (n)Vn  moon  nn’  motti  34 
• mi  mnn  Vopm  Vop  ntr oV  mrr  *ioni  .*  nV  35 
: nnntroo  mV  nnoon  So  Oman  nn’ 
nn’  lorn  nnntroo  mV  nneoo  Vo  nn’  ipsxi  3s 
triiro  n*  mm  “lpon  noo  Vopmi  pnnttn 
Vtno” 1 *  3on  oy  Wo  .*  no’oV  ntroV  mmnoNi  37,38 
pmypn  »-idd  by  pjs  pnV  pmyn  pnV  no’m 
inVonn  nrcy  moo  no:v  by  pinn  pnmV 
Vo  n*  pmmi  pm  p?nm  p:vV  poV  jmi  39 
mn  4pnnn  t^Vi  pn’  pmym  mn’  Hips 
Via  : pnnn  pit  pnm  pomy  nnm  ponV  4° 
pomp  pnm  nips  So  n*  pmym  pnonn 

1 Before  JX1  on  marg.  [Nine  i>3D. 

’ After  WptJ  on  marg.  . . p31. 

5 After  '33  on  marg.  . l[?]  nai>  nn3.  * So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


39 


NUMBERS  XV.  12-26. 


«7, 

fot.  iy. 


u pnayn  pjnoa  : (n)’rya  (n)nNONn  ' rvpjb 
ij  nay’  m nv*  Vo  .*  pjnan  nnb  pnayn  i(na) 

: mn’b  myn  n*n  pip  nanpab  pbN  rn*  pnan 
m nayn  iamb  paaan  ’n  nva  paOoy)  nan*  pi 
: -tny’  p pnayn  rnaa  mn’b  myn  nn  pnp 
*5  oby  n*va  -nan  nmabi  fab  “nnn  rrm  nbnp 
16  rnn  : nw  ompb  »rr  rrnaa  pano  pamb 
jpaoy  ivu  nmabi  tab  ’sv  nn  pm  mn 
is  na  oy  bba  : na’ab  ntro  Dy  nw  bboi3* 

^ bxyo  nan  mynxb  paby’aa  pnb  no*ni  bNitr’ 

19  ponn  nynt*  cnbo  paba’oa  ’nn  ; pnb  fan* 

20  pann  nbn  panta»y  m&wn  : mn’b  nasnx 
»'  mraia  :nn’  iann  p mn  rmanxa  naNnN 
22  po  : pamb  natott  mn’b  4p:jnn  4pantni*y* 

mn’  bban  pbt<  rrmpo  ba  n’  pnayn  tfbi  prn 
*j  pb  ncro  nta  paib  npsn  ba  n»  .*  ntra  oy 

24  n’ya  \n  ’nn  ; pamb  vmbi  mn’  npsn  nov 
na  ns  nnana  ba  pnayn  mb  (nnaynK)  nncna 
pna  vaDii  nnmai  mn’b  myn  nnb  nn  pmn 

25  nona  ba  by  mna  nbDn  : mbob  nn  pry  n’svi 
pjNi  r<’n  m (n)bn  pnb  nbnon  bxna”  na 
mn’  campb  pnbm  mmb  pnp  p:anp  n»  wv*t 

26  nmabi  bmp*  na  nana  bab  nbnon  : pnm  by 

iwa  nay  bab  (n)bn  paias  man 

1 The  n is  written  over.  ’ So  MS. 

3 Before  bS>El  on  marg.  nnt ....  • So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XIV.  43— XV.  11. 


38 


(n)*7n  :pa*aan  D^p1?  pnann  x1?:  pom  mm 
anna  pbam  pa’onip1?  pn  nx:y:ai  nxpbay 
niir  »m  n»*7i  mm  nnaa  pnn»y  p by  (n^n 
njyo:  mn’  pnto  nmo  trn1?  pDD1?  isi’yi  : paoy 
nx:y:a:  nxpVoy  ny:v  : nmntyo  ubo  pD3  ttb 
HDD  pn’  iDnm  pnD’?1?  r<mn  mica  nxnn 
ntyi  nonn  ny  *p:nai  pjiyoi  mbo  *nayn 

: nmntya1? 

**:a  d y V?o  no’D1?  ntro  oy  mm  bbsi 
panvro  ynx1?  p^y’n  na  pn1?  no*m  Van;?* 
in  n*?y  mm1?  pnp  Inayni  .70*?  am  uxn 
naya1?  panyiaa  ’N  myn  ’n  mu  ntynoa1?  nan 
anpn  :n?y  p ’N  mmn  10  mn’1?  myn  nn 
D’Da  may  rnbD  nn:a  mn*1?  n:anp  n’  anpan 
ro’N  myan  id:1?  nam  :ntya  n:*x  rmyana 
*n  : nn  nxaN1?  nan1?  *n  nnby  by  nayn 
D’Da  pmoy  pnn  m^D  rnn:a  nayn  3rnnanl7 
n:’N  rnnbn  id:1?  nonv  :4n:’y  mnbn  ntyaa 

.•mm1?  myn  mn  anpn 
rnanss1?  snan  *n  n*?y  pnm  na  nayn  na: 
nn:a  nmn  na  oy  anpn  imn’1?  yobty  ’«  nn: 
:6n:’n  rru^D  n&?aa  D’Da  prniDy  nnbn  rn^D 
myn  nn  pnp  n:*n  nubs  id:1?  anpn  nam 
’N  nn  nan1?  »x  nn  mn1?  nayn*  j(:na)  : mm1? 

1 So  MS. ; there  is  an  erasure  after  3. 

* After  ’:3  on  marg.  .’3  Blip.  5 The  n is  written  over. 

4 So  MS.  * After  R3T  on  marg.  3k  n'3K. 


4) 

44 

45 


xr. 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

S 

9 

10 
IX 


37 


NUMBERS  XIV.  32-42. 


32, 33  nooni  : tO)nn  maian  pVs*  tin#  panaw* 

fbl.  18.  b.  , 

n*  iibap’i  pt?  i*ya*i»  mman  ]*jn  tin* 

34  pan  : mman  t^nas  po1^’  iy  Ton(mjT) 
nntrb  ov  pai*  vvnn^  nyiN  n*  pnptun  n*ov 
tiaaym  ptr  t*yait*  rc*mn  n*  p^opr*  nntr*7  ov 

35  iny#  mn  xb  in  nV?a  mn*  on  : ’nabtrin  n* 
nman  'by  ttdn[i]  mn  nna**n  nneon  *73*7 

:pma*  pni  peto’  pn 

36  liryi  runt*  n*  mnb  nv a n*7cn  ' nni:i 

: nyiN  by  m npsab  nntsoa  ho  n*  vbv  ainNi 

37  riD’aan  3nty*n  nyiN  nm  ’pea  maa  in*ai 

38  ms*  in  3*731  p3  10  yanmi  : mn*  Dmp1? 
: nyiN  n*  trnaS  i*7?ni  pwn  nnna  to  4(innN) 

39  btnty*  an  ho  oy  phNn  rt*h>a  n*  nca  h>h>ai 

40  cmb  ip*7Di  mexn  laipNi  •,  not?  nay  lhonNi 
mn*  natn  nmNh>  6(pd:i)  spn  ia*ah>  nno 

: 0)i*an  (n)h>n 

fsi^i  ppDn  ?<h>  pn*7  natt  ntyah>  mn*  7iaNi 
ompb  p*iann  N*7i  poiaa  on  n»h>  (n)*7n  pn*nn 

41  n*  poy  tint*  p nah>  ncya  naxi  : tio’onn 

42  n*h>  i*7n  tipDn  h>N  .*  nh>yn  Nh>  N*m  mn*  ia»a 

1 Before  mail  on  marg.  nrt  npV  |D. 
a The  K is  written  over.  5 The  n is  written  over. 

* So  MS.  5 A letter  has  been  erased  before 

* Apparently  altered  from  the  participle : }’  is  still  legible 
after  p. 

1 Before  tDXl  on  marg.  DK . , , and  underneath  pa  ... . This 
verse  is  not  in  the  Hebrew,  but  may  he  found  in  Dcut.  i.  42. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XIV.  19-31.  36 

byi  pwvbn  by  pn  by  pa#  am  nps  or  nb 
mana  f(j)-rn  nay  (n)amb  a nbD  ; pfty’an  *» 
nyi  Dnvoo  j(:)nn  nay1?  n(bao)n  naai  i(aia) 

.*  nan 

‘un  m (DriN)i  : -pbaa  nn^D  mm  natn  io*a« 
(n)’naa  ba  ibn  .*  nyn#  ba  m mm  maa  nbai  » 
Dnvoa  mayn  ’(man  nn)  ’(np’tf)  n*  ltm 
lyajy  kVi  jaat  nnDy  p »n*  idji  nnanaai 
pnnaitb  nyantytn  nynx  n*  p?m  ab  : ’bpa  *i 
aba  nayi  : mum  t>jb  nnao  bai  pnb  pab  ** 
mbtfyi  nna  »bai  nay  mn  mn  rnm(n)  apy 
nxpbayi  { mm*  nynn  pnb  byn  nynjtb  *s 
nnanab  pab  ibai  us  nna  npaya  nxn  n#jy:ai 

:*pD  D’  ynw 

*ny  :na’ab  pn»  oyi  ntya  oy  mn’  bbai  *«,  v 
’by  (pun)a  0)i0»n)  nnn  nnty’a  nntr:ab  naN 
jnyap.’by  *ftan)a  pjjn  birw*  aa  (aan)  m 
noa  j«*b  p mn*  0)a*no  ms*  m pnb  nas* 
pn  nnanaa  : pab  nay#  p ’yiatyaa  pnbban  *9 
naa  psjaa  bab  panniDKD  bai  psnas  pbs’ 
pby’n  pDN  !<b  : ’by  pmnn  bybi  fat?  pay  3° 
s*bn  na  pan’  ntnsrab  »ns*  ay  nanscn  nynscb 
irnnaxn  psbeai  : p na  ytcimi  mo’  na  aba  \a  31 
pnp’Xtn  nyns*  n’  paayn  pn’  bs*yi  *n»  nrab 

: na 


1 After  '3X  on  marg.  |'T  biy". 

* After  ~iy  on  marg.  , ,3  J'yut.  5 So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


35  NUMBERS  XIV.  7-18. 

7 bob  noxi  : pmypi  iyxo  run#  n»  mtyicro 
000b  no  unoyi  nyix  no’ob  bxicy’  un  neuo 
• s (f)n  ’jnnx  fx  .*  mity  mty  nyix  mo  nm 
yix  (tpb  nomi  mn  nyixb  (fpn*  bxyoi  nin' 

9 p-non  bx  mm  po  : trom  obn  nono  n 
(t)3onb  (n)bn  nyixn  noy  p pbmn  bx  pnxi 
bn  (f)ooy  mm  pmby  p nobs  hod  tux 

10  pjoxo  tin’  Doiob  nneoo  bo  100x1  : pbnin 
uo  bo  mb  iyio  bnxo  unnx  mn*  mooi 

: bxien 

11  oono’  (f)nx  iy  iD’ob  ntyob  mm  ioxi1 
m(JD’D)  boo  ’o  pjo’ir  xb  (pnx  iyi  (f)rrn  noy 

*»  *(n:oim)  n(n)ioo  ny(n)ox  : moo  mart 
: roo  bvm  00  00b  piox  rmo  no  in’  noyxi 

>3  npDX  nbn  ’nixd  pyoem  mmb  myo  ioxi 

M nyix  ivnb  piom  : mooo  pin  noy  n*  tb*no 
irm  pm  noy  100  mm  nnx  nbn  pyopn  mn 
moyoi  pmiby  coxp  *pjyi  mm  nnx  unno  uno 
tyx  moyoi  noo’xo  pmonpb  »nx  nnx  py 

15  pinm  in  tyoxo  (prtn  noy  m bopm  : ’b’bo 

16  isbn  p : io’ob  iyoty  rm  pyojyn  m(xio)  * 
nyixb  (f)3in  noy  n*  nbxyob  mm  nbo’ 

«7  b»n  *3  *om  hoi  : moioo  poooi  finb  yontyxi 
«•*«•  >8  ’oidi  pton  p'ni  mn**  : io’ob  nbboi  noono 
3,(toi)i  pxonbi  fytyobi  poinb  ’bn  uo’m  (oio) 

1 Before  1DX 1 on  marg.  T . , 3 , . * So  MS. 

3 So,  apparently,  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  XIV.  1-6. 


34 


nto  an*  pab  onxo  jhn  p (i)jpflK  0)3n*  mm 
(i)rnKi  pp*?D  (i)jrait  pb  : (i)3nt<2rroV  mom# 

(fKn)p  (i)aa  »aim  nn  oy  na*ab  (i )nb  n»  lbsiy 
0)3’tn  wpay  an  nbttbyn  fb*bm  pin 

: fan 

'xVi  p[na]vn  i^b  bmty*  anb  na*a  natn 
Km  pn*ampb  ’ns  pnnbi*  mn*  : pnao  pbrnn 
: pna*yb  D’mfan  pnay  Tin  bnn  pnb  nu* 
nan  *;nbN  mn*  pbnDn  nn*im  mnnani 
pnnbnr  ninx  bnn  mn  n*  nnn  3bnD[*]n 
pn  nbbaoni  .*  pnn  mn»  ny  pn*n*a  ny ' 
pn’ampb  *nx  : pnnbtf  mn*n  faa*na  f*n*n*b 
*b*bn  awn  pnrwna’ab  nntt  fin1?  ana b nynwn 
rnaym  nn  pnnrn  (nynwn)  pnn(nrn)a*? 

.•  naawn 

nay  nnm  pbp  n*  nm  nnaan  bn  rw’nawi  xiv.i. 
an  *73  pnx  byi  na*a  by  am  : tonn  rrb’bn  * 
ynxn  (’i)in’a  nnb  nnaan  bn  pnb  netn  banan 
mn*  nabi  : (i)3n*a  anb  pn  nnnnan  w Dnira  3 
p*aa*  nnnn  bsab  nnn  nynxb  (i)jn*  b«ya  *>1. a. 
: onvab  nnrya  ab  na  Nbn  nrnb  pn*  fi’bDD’i 
bsji  : Dnvab  n?yn  am  pi  vnxb  nnn  maxi  4, 5 
naan  bnp  bn  campb  pmo#  by  pn*n  na*a 
fa  mo*  nn  nbm  fa  nn  yannn  : btna’*  an  « 

1 After  t6l  on  marg.  . . .ipV. 

* There  is  an  erasure,  apparently  of  one  letter,  after  the  0. 

* There  is  an  erasure,  apparently  of  ouc  letter,  before  anil 
after  the  D. 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


xiii. 
fol.  1 7. 


33  NUMBERS  XI.  19— XIII.  34. 

"idi  mrv  fn*i  nnvan  (i):b  no  ibn  non 
'9  xbi  pov  ^nn  xbi  pbn’n  -rn  av  xb  : pbs’m 
*°  ny  : nr  pioy  xbi  pov  may  xbi  par  nrart 
irn  n(x)-i(n)b  fob  *rv>  pn(sx)a  ps’  ny  pav  rrv 
rampb  pnom  pmmnn  mrv  n*  pnpnfx  (n)bn 
a ■ nr  nro  naxi  .’Dnvaa  ups:  p nab  na’ab 
matt  nnxi  nun  n:xn  nay  ’xbnn  e\bxn  pxa 
»»  mini  nay  : par  nn*  pbn’’i  pnb  fnx  non 
aanm  no’  au  bn  m fx  pnb  psoi  pnb  on:rv 

: pnb  psDi'  pinb 

aj  nnx  (nyp)n  nin1  nxn  nrab  mrv  nasi' 
a4  bbai  nra  ps:i  .*  >*b  fx  ’ba  -pyny’  fx  nnn 
*aon  fa  nnn  pynr  earn  mrv  ’ba  n’  nay  ny 
as  f:yn  nin’  ny:i  .*  n:nra  mnD  fin’  D’pxi  nay 
’nyor  by  nnn  vbyr  nmn  fa  bvxi  nay  bbai 
nmn  pn’by  nnrn  nn  mm  maon  nnn 
******* 

33  bxnty’  anb  nn»  irnn  nynx  nun  ipsxi* 
nbnx  ynx  nn’  rnab  nn  (i)nnyn  nynx  na*ab 
: nytro  nnn  nmn  (i)r?nn  nay  bm  X’n  nnn 

34  pnm  nnnm  fa  p:y  an  nnnm  n’  (ip’tn  fam 

jpna’yn  pan  pi  pxopn  (i):a’yn 
nx:Dn  3 maxi  pnanron  bxnr’  an  i[:nn]ia 


' Before  10N1  on  marg.  'br\'  ncUJ. 

* This,  and  the  following  six  verses,  are  not  in  the  Hebrew, 
but  are  to  be  found  in  Deut.  i.  27-33. 

* After  TONI  on  marg.  . n 'pn\ 

F 


Digitized  by  Google 


32 


NUMBERS  XI.  9-18. 

nbo  ny’aai  : nnvzn  mb  cayaa  naya  mm  9 
niya  yan  : vby  n:a  nyi  *b’ba  nnnira  by  10 
*priNi  rwatya  yin1 *?  cpk  lpnab  02  nay  rv 
: tyya  ntya  p’yai  mty  mm  ran 
nabi  ‘ ynyb  ntyyax  no1?  mmb  n&*a  nasi  " 
ba  (baa)  n»  nsatyab  I’yya  3p  ‘(nyptyn)N  sb 
ds  pm  nay  ba  n*  roan  ms*  ; ’by  pn  nay  ” 
naa  *pya  (nbaa)  ’b  na’n  4 * (id)  nm b*  rot* 
nyantytn  nynsb  mp3’ m’  '(nsan)  (b)aDH 
pm  may  bab  pab  naa  »b  p:a  : mnnasb  >3 
sb  ••  baoi  non  (r)ab  an  na’ab  ’by  iaa  (n)bn  m 
(n)bn  pm  nay  ba  n’  baaab  mnb  njt*  biat* 
bap  ’aty  obap  ’b  -ray  nntt  (pas)  pi  : pa  *vp»  >5 

*’na”aa  mtt  sbi  -jp’ya  (D’jn  nyptrnte)  pi 
p naa  pyaty  »b  tyja  n&yab  mm  “las'!6*  »« «•>*■«>• 

vnsai  nay  ’aon  pjtt  sbn  naam  btnsy’  *o’an 
nay  pn  paaipmi  nyia  bnttb  pn’  nami 
I’bjrt  mnn  p bvtn  ran  -jay  bbatti  ny’tti  17 
8baDn  t*bi  nay  7(ba)oa  nay  paDp  pn’by  ’irai 
pba*m  mab  isynpnn  na’n  naybi  : n’Tinb  nntt  is 
(i)jba”  pa  na’ab  mm  yiatyaa  pn»aa  (n)bn  iDa 

1 After  ■psyi*  on  marg.  [1]  nor?  ntsa.  a So  MS. 

5 This  has  apparently  been  altered  to  D'l  for  D'jn. 

4 There  are  traces  of  a b between  3 and  “I. 

6 So  MS.,  with  traces  of  HJ  after,  in  an  older  hand. 

4 Before  U2N1  on  marg.  .1  by  ,3D. 

1 A letter  has  apparently  been  erased  between  3 and  D. 

• The  b is  written  over. 


Digitized  by  Google 


31  NUMBERS  X.  30— XI.  8. 

30  *ynxb  pbx  nn'N  s*<b  mb  naxi  : Stosp 
3!  [x]bn  nn*  pntw  n bn  naxi  nnx  *nnb*nxbi 
nb  n*im  prana  uwitpo  naan  p by 
3*  r<inn  r dud  *n*i  nay  inn  na  *mi  .*  pamvb 

33  mn*  maa  lban  : ib  no*ii  nay  mm  ao *h 
ivanpb  bai  mn1  dx*p  pnxi  pav  nnbn  ymx 

34  mn*  pyi  : * mnia  pnb  trxnab  par  nnbn  ymx 

35  mini  : rnntra  p pboen  oa*x  i[in*o]x  by 
pmrn*m  mn*  maip  nra  naxi  minx  baaa 

36  noxn*  ' nnuaii  : i*onpa  i*id  ppnyn  i*am 

;bxn&”  *obx  nxian  mn*  nain 
xi.  1 [y]atyi  mn*  yiatyan  ty*n  pnaa  nay  mm  * 
nbaxi  mn*  a*x  pna  nnyii  nun  ipnxi  mn* 
foL  16.  3 nca  *bm  nc*ab  nay  yam*  : nnntra  naDxn 
3 xinn  nnnx  Da*  (n)npi  :nntyx  3nysaxi  mn*b 
< nsDODi  : mn*  ax  pnn  nnya  (n)bn  4nn*yno 
bxna**  *ia  laai  n?yi  mann  mannx  nrai 

5 pbaxn  nn*n:  n*  pnanx  : nDa  s pba**  p maxi 
nn*yn  n*i  (“rnanan)  n*i  (mxitr)P  n*  pa  anvoa 

6 mnba  ba  n*b  ncy*a*  (pitysi  mai  .*  n*ainn  n*i 
7nniTm  xin  (nn)n  yn?a  mai  : mvaD  mab 
s D*n*na  untDi  ltopbi  nay  i(oxa*)  .*  nbnn  nitna 

fbny  nn*  nayi  mnpa  iba*n  oinaa  lam 

1 So  IIS.  s Before  nvn  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 

s The  X of  njJEDW  is  written  over. 

4 Tlie  ' is  written  over. 

* Apparently  altered  from  as  has  l>een  often  done  in 

this  ehnpter.  * So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  X.  11-29. 


30 


pnoyo  'mpn  nnmo  rnrppn  nnn  mm  *1 
:nnNvrnD  pcvo  Sy  p .—pay  pVddn  nmo 
ip]cn  p*d  "mao  pmboo1 *?  ^Nnty’  pa  tai  »* 
mm  no*o  by  wonpa  V?oji  ; fNna  nanoa  nay  u 
’onpa  nmm  pa  nnpo  [odd]  '7D3i  : ntro  nt*a  m 
*vn  byi  : anvoy  na  pttro  nVn  byi  pm’vn'?  i5 
oaty  V’n  byi  : nyiv  na  Vtom  natyty*  pa  oacr  16 
ibaji  motyo  ny’nxT  : fVn  na  aN’bw  fbiar  pa  «7 
[oao]  bon  : rt2D& 0 ’no:  ’[njno  pm  pcyna  pa  .« 
na  mvpN  n'vn  byi  pmVrP  fawn  pa  mra 
na  bN’o^tr  pye»  pa  oasy  V’n  byi  : mtt he.*  .9 
na  pjd’^n  na  pa  oajy  Vn  byi  : nnrmt  20 
rn»  iD’pNi  ntynpo  pdj  wnnp  ibon  : Vnyn  >. 
pa  nnpo  foao]  Von  : pVy’o  ny  rpatyo  ^ 

: annoy  na  *ptym  nVn  *7jn  * pnVnV  Dns»  «..s.b. 
Vyi  .•  mx’ns  na  VN’Voa  nctpo  pa  oaty  V’n  Vyi  23,  *+ 
Von  : piyna  na  p’ON  d*opo  pa  oaiy  Vn  25 
pmVnV  nnxntyo  bib  ty:ao  p pa  nntyo  odd 
oacy  Vn  Vyi  : rrrty’oy  na  mynt*  rnVn  Vyi  >« 
pa  oaty  Vn  Vyi  : pay  na  bN’yaa  nty«  pa  27 
Vsnev  pa  *Voo  pVtt  ip*y  na  ymrw  >VnD:i  »s 

nVon  pmVnV 

von  rnwno  VNiyn  na  aainV  ntyo  notn3  29 
fntt  nn*  mm  noxn  nnmV  pnw  pVoj  ntyon 
by  oo  Wo  mm  nVh  iV  odpi  poy  nm  poV 

1 After  nj’jn  on  marg.  ppnoi  • ’ So  MS. 

s Before  "'ONI  on  marg.  fD’ , . and  underneath  3130 . . [?]. 


Digitized  by  Google 


29 


NUMBERS  X.  i-io. 


X.  I 


fol.  ij. 


,»  fmn  n1?  nay  no'o1?  ntya  tay  mrr  bbnV 
pyta1?  ib  im  pm  nayn  *n:u  span  psw 
3 pna  pypnm  : nntfntra  rv  Vaabi  rancaa 
♦ po  : nyia  Vhn  yanb  nnaaa  ^a  Ti'b  pjanm 
’D1?#  win  mrrw  tt,17  paanm  pyprr  mm 
5 ;n«en  nnx’atya  jSan  nyacw  pypnm  : bant?’ 
« nnN’ntra  t^ton  nuan  nyet?#  pypnm  : nyaaa 
7 trnaai  : pm^ea1?  pypm  nyatrN  misva  paNtyn 
a nana  pn» ’m  : ptyyan  nVi  pypnn  n^np  m 
: pann1?  D^y  mn:1?  pa1?  jmi  nmv’xna  pypm 

9 p’yan  npNy  by  payaxa  map1?  p*?y*n  nai 
mrr  amp1?  3paanm  3nnNavvna  pjyyam  pan’ 

10  pamvTn  ’arm  : pa’aan  ;a  pxsnm  pan^x 
nnNavvna  pypnm  * pa’na*  waai  panyiam 
pan1?  pa1?  pm  pa’abty  ’nan  ^y?  pan*?y  by 

.•pan1?#  mm  ax  pan1?}*  mm  amp1? 
paxa  5 pa1?  ana  ao’a1?  ncra  ay  mm  ‘Vbai 
nxmaN  maS  iWi  pa1?  ibiai  us  : pan  nmaa 
naiana  nnVett’ai  nmaa  nnypaa  viatya  Va1?? 
nan  nnm  ay  naaaabi  njoy:a  ya«  na’  syiyai 
iViy  nyax  rv  pa’aaip1?  nan*  an  : rnna  an: 
onaaff1?  panna^V  nyana’Na  nynx  ra»  vm 
ipana  pyatS  pa1?  apy’bi  pm’1? 

* Before  ^>?D1  ou  marg.  . V i>32  ;'N . 

* A letter  has  been  erased  before  and  after  1.  a So  MS. 

4 This  and  the  two  following  verses  are  not  in  the  Hebrew 
text,  but  are  to  be  found  in  Deut.  i.  6-8. 

1 After  |«i>  on  marg.  3KD  ntM3. 


Digitise  je 


NUMBERS  IX.  13-33.  28 

mna  Vn  m Iran*  k1?  crui  naif  iv  mo 
mini  on  Kim  coni  : nn*  pniy*  nnps  13 
K’nn  ntyflj  npynm  nnps  nnyob  ppi  mn  nV 
min  vjitni  mpn  nV  mm  pip  (n^n  moy  p 
my*i  nu  pioy  mm*  ]xi  JKinn  nty*N  bap*  >+ 
nmu  my*  p vjhpi  nnoo  mna  mn*1?  noa 
:nynm  ruix*’?!  nnviVi  pib  *n*  mn 
*rv  njjy  *oin  njiiyo  n*  npnm  ovn  i5 
njptyo  ^y  *n*  njyonn  nnxnnD  ptyob  njityo 
irm  nj*oi*  njjy  mn  *n*  p .*  nev  ny  m imp  m 
njiiyo  bya  mjy  nipViott  oaVi  :*y?i  m i7 
tan  piy*n  mnsm  Vtnty*  *ji  pbo*  p mn 
pbo*  mn*  no*o  by  : Vmty*  *ji  pity*  fon  njjy  «s 
ptyn  pov  b i pity*  mn*  no*o  byi  bsier  01 
by  mjy  rroniNii  .‘pity*  mityo  by  nm  .9 
nnNDO  n*  ‘wity*  *ji  pnon*  *.ip  pov  mp^o  fou,.b. 
by  pj.pi  pov  mjy  *n*  ini  : pbo*  kVi  mn*  30 
mn*  no’o  ‘jyi  pnty*  mn*  no*p  by  mityp 
p^r  p*i  nsv  ny  typno  mjy  »n*  ini  : pbo*  31 
njjy  pbnp’i  *VVi  *dp*x  *n  p*?dp  maxi  njjy 
3mimiNi  pov  *n  nn*  *n  pov  pin  *n  : pbon  » 
bNnsy*  *ji  pity*  vby  ptyo1?  .mityo  by  mjy 
mn*  no*o  by  : pbo*  r-tmpbnotai  pbo*  kVi  33 
mn*  rriNOO  n*  pbo*  mn*  no*o  Vyi  pity* 

: no*o  ini  mn*  no*o  by  vwdj 

1 After  n*  on  marg.  . . 1 . . [1]n”1. 

1 Altered  from  DDV.  3 So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


27  NUMBERS  VIII.  25— IX.  12. 

rmia  nb’n  b’nb  bNy*  bybi  (n)3ty  pDin  tyon 
»5  nrrny  b*n  p ity»  pty  ptyon  1307  : iy7D  bnN 
a6  iy7D  bnN3  vns*  'ay  vam  ? my  i3y’  r<b7 
*nyn  j(73n)  ’W  *<b  nT3jn  rnttoo  iDob 

: pmDDn  wvbb 

nntri  »3’D  13103  nra  oy  mm  bbo7* 
nNoip  nnra  onxo  yiN  p pn’psob  nm’jn 
a :3vnn  nrtDfl  n*  baity*  *33  ivnv’i  :io*ab 
j tnay*  mtyoi  *3*3  pn  nmo  dv  iDy  ny3iN3 
: nm  p-avn  m b337  nnma  *733  van  nn* 
4. 5 7i3y7  : nnDS  i3yob  bNity*  *33  dv  ntyo  bboi 
*:*n  nm*b  ov  ioy  ny3iN3  nN0ip3  nnos  n* 
13  rw o n*  mm  ipsi  *733  »3*d  13103  mtyoi 
6 1 y£>3b  V3D0  urn  1*133  vim  : bNity*  *33  rny 
laipi  N7nn  dvi  nrtDS  i3yob  7*73*  Nb7  ty3Ni 
«..«.  7 71DN7*  :N7nn  no7’3  pna  ompbi  ntyo  tmpb 
nob  boni  t y33b  i*3Do  prUN  mb  pno  mi33 
733  37’33tN3  mm  pip  il*  PQipob  Nbl  1X303 

8 mo  nyottw  707p  ntyo  pnb  idn7  : bNity’  ’33 

:p3b  mm  ipa* 

9,  «o  ’33  4Dy  bbo  : io*ob  ntyo  dv  nin1  bbo7 

*N  B’fl3b  3D, 3 ’0’  IN  ty3N  C’3N  IDPb  bNity’ 

:mmb  odd  ioy*7  pomb  *n  pob  np’m  jmao 
ii  rrtyoi  *3*3  D7»  iDy  ny3iN3  m3’3n  mm*3 
14  pl’ty*  Nb  ; H37b3N’  t’17107  IPS  by  770’  pi3y* 

' Dy  is  written  over.  3 Before  ^^01  on  marg.  pnbt<  m . , . 

3 So  MS.  3 After  Dy  on  marg.  Nice  i>3Dl. 

E 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  VIII.  u-24.  26 

rv  njyatrab  pmi  bunty*  ’an  nsibn  mn*  dti?1? 

Vn  by  pmn  n*  pDOD’  ’Nl’bl  ! HIH'  tt?'OC’D  •> 
mn’1?  nby  in  rvi  mbD  in  rv  nny’i  nns 
pnx  ompb  ’Nvb  rv  D’pm  : ’Nvb  by  nnbDab  .3 
tnani  : mn'1?  nsNatt  pm  *|’am  van  ompbi  m 
nnni  .'  ’Nvb  *b  pm  b«n»*  ’an  mba  *Ni*b  n’  i5 
nyia  bn#  evotyn  n*  rurapeb  ’Nvb  pbtty*  p 
pn’m  pn*m  (n)bn  : nsNatt  pn*  spam  pry  pim  16 
mnD  nnn  bn  mnn  btocv  ’an  in[b]a  *b  pax 
bn  ’b  (n)bn  : *b  pn*  mm  btotr»  ’ann  Dm  ,7 
nbapn  Dvn  nnannni  neato  btnty’  ’ann  mnn 
:>b  pn’  nenpi  onvo  ynxn  nnn  bn 
• bantr  * ’ann  nnn  bn  mnn  ’Nvb  n*  mnn  ,8 
*an  m[b]n  vanbi  pnxb  pn’.n  *Nvb  rn*  nnm  ■» 
bnan  bsocy*  ’an  cy’atyn  n’  mra&yab  b^ntr 
’ann  *,n*  r<bi  buna”  ’an  by  nnbDobi  nyia 
nnyi*  .*  nKnpb  btntr’  ’an  nnpan  sp  b^nty*  J0  <bi..3.b 
bnn  ’Nvbb  btn^’  ’an  mean  bm  pnw  n&o 
’an  pnb  my  p ***vbb  n&o  rv  mm  npon 
pnt*  spin  pmypn  iyn  *Nvb  inbnDto  ; btntr’  a, 
pn»  pn’by  nbDi  mn*  ompb  nsNaK  pn* 
n»  ntyaiyab  *Nvb  iby  p nnm  : pntonab  « 
van  Dnpbi  pnt*  nnpb  nyio  bnxn  peratrn 
: pnb  my  p *to*b  by  ntya  n’  mn*  npon  nan 
nna  ’Ni’bbn  m :na*ab  ntya  oy  mm  bbai*  a}, 

1 After  '333  on  marg.  'Kli>  i>pi. 

8 Before  bbd  on  raarg.  IDT  hv  JH3. 


Digitized  by  Google 


25  NUMBERS  VII.  89— VIII.  11. 

89  bnxb  rttro  by’sai  : n n*  ' n[m3]i  inn  nrtmo 
p nay  bbao  nbp  rv  yean  nay  nbbaab  nyio 
inn  ’3’aa  nnN'nnD  iru*  byn  nms:  nxby 

.•nay  bboi  mana 

viii.  it  2 pnx  oy  bbo  : no’ab  ntra  ov  mn*  bboi1 
’on  baipb  oy  rri’iro  rv  "inipDNi  nb  na»m 
3 pn.v  p nayi  :rmin  nyoty  pv:’  nnnma 
-rps-r  naa  n’3’3na  pDN  nnnma  ’on  bmp1?  oy 
-1  ny  am  Pm  nnnmo  nmy  pi  : ntro  n’  mn’ 
mn*  um  mrna  tun  Pm  n’nno  nyi  nn*am*o 
.•nnnmo  n*  nay  p na\a  rv 
5)  s wb  n’  man  : na’ab  ncra  toy  mn’  bbai4 
m.,3.  7 pnb  nayn  pnai  * : pn»  »anm  bN“W’  ’ja  m[b]a 
by  eyioy  pnayn  mbD  »o  [r]mby  ntt  pnNanab 
s na  no  pnD’i  : pami  pmypn  pyvi  pnDa  ba 
na  p3n  noi  ntraa  D'Da  nbD  mnnjrai  pin 

9 bnx  ompb  ’Nvb  n’  anprn  : mbDb  aDn  pin 

10  anpm  : bjtnty*  ’3a  rntma  ba  n’  tsoam  nyio 
rv  bantp-aa  paaD’i  nvr  ompb  ’Nvb  rv 

i,  mON3N  ’Nvb  rn’  pn«  tp’i  :*ttvb  by  pmnN 

’ This  expression  occurs  several  times  in  this  chapter ; in 
verse  I it  is  impossible  to  decide  wliat  was  the  original  reading,  the 
page  being  much  blotted ; in  10  the  original  word  has  been  erased 
and  ntPDK  inserted  by  a later  hand ; in  84  the  word  has  been 
entirely  erased,  leaving  a blank  ; in  this  place  only  the  first  and  last 
letters  have  been  left,  three  letters  apparently  having  been  erased. 

2 Before  on  marg.  , . tjm  nn  . , . 

s A letter  has  been  erased  liefore  and  after  1. 

* Before  on  marg.  n3H  ~»n[3]. 

E 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  VII.  77-88. 


24 


pi2i  pn  pin  rvo1 bv  nmbi  : mbDb  in  pry  77 
p ntron  n3J?  ’32  pnaa  ntyon  puny  ncynn 

: pjy  in  btf’yas  pip 

yi’nte  ’32b  (r<)’DJ  dv  iDynn  dvd  ?s 
n(N)oi  pnbn  m(n  *)D2i  n)ny  nmpi  : p’y  12  79 
nenp  bpnc2  bp(n)  py2ty  *pp  in  ire  nbpno 
*bN’D  : nmob  hto2  D’D2  nbD  pbND  pnnn  so 
pin  12  in  13  j nmR  n’bo  2 m niDy  rnn  s. 
pry  i’svi  : nbyb  ’nr.(y)  12  in  irate  in  121 
pi3i  pin  pin  n’obs>  n2ibi  : mbDb  in  s} 
p ntyon  n3Cf  ’32.  p(te)ott  neon  p3ny  nsyisn 

j P’y  12  yi’nte  pip 

nn’  [nnm  n]3V2  nn2io  n33n  [m]*  84«..xk 

’iDymn  tp2i  pnv  breiE”  ’(te)’D3  ’/nteibD 
r’lpy’mn  2ml  pteb’s  iDynn  *p2i  p33’3 
[in]  133  praen  *p2i  n[i]n  nv  nyo  pnbn  s5 
bpnn2  pND  y21N1  psbtf  pin  n’3ND  t\D2  *72 
unite  pbteo  ’iDy’nin  2nn  p*7N*3  : ntyip  86 
211  *72  ntrip  bpno2  “nn’teb’D  mDy  niDy 
iDynn  nnbyb  nnm  *72  : nyoi  piDy  ’nmteb’3  s7 
iDynn  n3ty  ’32  pinote  iDynn  p2i  pi3 
nn  *723  t mbob  iDynn  pry  n’3«i  pnmoi  ss 
pnty  pi2i  pis  ny2iM  pioy  n’sbty  n2i 
n23n  m pntr  n3«y  ’32  pirate  pne?  psny 


1 After  'i>nw  on  marg.’an  illegible  gloss. 
* So  MS. 


Digitized  by  Google 


23 


NUMBERS  VII.  60-76. 


H niyan  mty  an  pian  ntyan  pony  wan 
: iwnfl  in  Vtt’^an  pip 
«°  in  put*  tavnan  an1?  (t*)’Dj  ntty’tyn  nevn 
nyai  pn*?n  (my  *pa  n)ny  ninipi  : aiyia 
ntrtp  Spnan  *?pn  pynty  fpn  in  -p’s  nbpna 
63  ’Sn'D  : nma1?  n&»an  D*Dn  n^D  pbtta  pmn 
pnn  in  in  is  mmt*  .nba  nm  mDy  mn 
«4  pry  i»svi  : nby1?  nna?  in  in  mat*  in  im 
«5  pirn  pin  pnn  nabty  nm1?.!  : n^D1?  in 
p ntran  mty  an  pmat*  n^an  pony  nryan 

raiyin  in  put*  pip 

«6  -a  iry’ntt  p an1?  (>»)’DJ  ntti’Dy  navn' 
e?  n(t*)ai  pnbn*  n(iy  *pa  nny)  nmpi  : nw’ay 
Vpnan  (p)'?pn(a)  pynty  tpa  in  -p’s  nbpna 
: nma1?  ntyan  D'Dn  n^D  p^tra  prvin  nanp 
<•8,  #9  in  in  is  : unit*  n’ba  nm  may  mn  ’bx’D 

70  nsii  ! nbyb  nw  in  in  mate  in  mi  pnn 

71  pirn  pin  pnn  n’a^tr  nm1?!  .*  m^D1?  in  pry 
p ntran  mtr  an  pmat*  neran  psny  ntran 

: mty’ay  in  iry’ntt  pip 
7J  in  WaD  wx  anV  (n)’Dj  dv  iDy  in  ovn 
73  n(tt)ai  pnbn  m(n  *pai  n)ny  mmp  :pny 
^pnan  (p^prCa)  pynry  spa  in  "p’D  n^pna 
.•nma1?  wan  D’Dn  nbD  pVtta  pnnn  ncrrp 
73, 7j  in  in  is  : unit*  n*1?(K)a  nm  niDy  mn  ’btuo 
76  nom  .*  n^y1?  nncy  in  in  mat*  in  im  pnn 


1 Before  riOV3  on  marg. . . J3 


NUMBERS  VII.  42-59.  22 

r Viyn  -a  sp*1?#  na  aoV  (n)’DJ  nNn*nty  dvo 
nbpno  nyo  1 pn^n  (mn  *pon  n)n¥  rompi  43 
pnnn  nttnp  bpnoo  ‘apn  pynty  spo  in  "p’O 
mDV  mn  ,1?n’0  : nnw1?  ntyoo  D’Dn  hVd  p^o  44 
nn  non  pin  no  nn  no  : mniN  n»bo  am  45 
nn  pry  mom  : rnSyV  nnty  no  nn  nnaN  4« 
nsyon  pnon  pnn  pmn  rmo^iy  non1?!  : m^Db  47 
pnp  p rnryon  nary  ao  pnno#  ntyan  pony 

:*nyn  no  sp^tf 

yaty^te  'DnoN  ao1?  (t<)’Da  nxyary  novo  48 
pnbn  mn  (fpon  n)ny  maonpi  : mmoy  no  49 
*?pnoo  *?pn  pyoty*  tpo  nn  -p»o  n^pno  nyoi  w... 
; nnaab  niyao  D’Do  n"7D  pbo  pnnn  ntynp 
no  nn  no  : mnitf  n,(?o  om  may  mn  ♦Swo  50, 5« 
!pnV7  nnty  no  nn  nno#  nn#  non  pmn 
pnn  pmn  mobty  non*?i  : ni^D1?  nn  pry  mom  s>,  » 
ntyan  n:ty  ao  pnnox  ntyan  pony  ntyan  pnon 
:mn*oy  no  yoa^N  pnp  p 
no  ‘aN’boa  naaa  ao*7  («)’oa  nxa’on  novo  54 
nyoi  pnbn  (my  spo  n)nv  naonpi  j mmno  55 
nanp  ^pnao  bpn  pyoty  tpo  nn  *p*o  nVpna 
^N’O  : nnao1?  ntyoo  d*do  nVD  pVo  pnnn  56 
no  nn  no  : inmt*  n(N),l?o  om  nnDy  mn  57 
mom  : nbyb  nnty  no  nn  nnoN  nn  non  pmn  58 
pnon  pnn  pmn  mobty  non1?!  : mVDb  nn  pry  59 


After  D"EN  on  raarg.  pi3  H3  and  underneath  rPpD, 


21 


NUMBERS  VII.  25-41. 


*5  ,—i(n)oi  pn*?n  (mn  s\dd~t  n)ny  naaipi  : fVn 
nenp  Vpiaa  bpi  pyaty  *pa  in  *]rs  nbpia 
*«  ’bx’2  : nnaab  ntyaa  D’on  nbo  pba  pnnn 
*7  pm  ia  m is  : nmK  rrVo  am  niDy  mn 
js  pry  i»dvi  .‘nVyb  nnty  ia  m max  in  nan 
29  pan  pin  pm  n’D^ty  naibi  : mbDb  in 
H ntyan  nary  »aa  pinat*  ntron  pimy  ntyan 

1 fVn  ia  dn^n  pip 

jo  ia  twVk  pun  ’aa1?  (tt)*Da  nay’ai  nova1 
jt  n(»)oi  pnVn  mn  (spa  n)nx  naaipi  : iinner 
nenp  bpnaa  ^pi  pyaty  *pa  in  "p’D  nbpno 
...  3*  ’bx’D*  : nnaa1?  ntyaa  D’Da  nbD  ph>o  pnnn 

33  pin  ia  in  id  : aims  n’*?a  am  may  mn 

34  pry  -vein  : nbvb  nney  ia  in  ina#  in  nai 
js  ntyan  piai  pn  pirn  n’aVff  naibi  ; nVaob  in 

pip  p ntyan  naty  »aa  pncN  ntyan  *psiiy 

:n»nty  ia  iwbrr 

36  in  'js'obw  pyoer  'nb  (k)’D3  nNty*on  nova 

37  pnbn  (mn  tpai  n)nx  naaipi  : mtymif 
‘apioa  4pi  pyaty  *pa  in  ia*a  nVpna  n(tf)ai 
: nnaaV  ntyaa  D'Da  nVD  p'aa  pnnn  ntyip 

38, 39  ia  m 13  : rrmw  n^a  am  niDy  mn  ’bt^D 
40  i’DVi  : rfovb  nnty  ia  in  mot*  m iai  pm 
4,  pan  pn  pirn  rnabcy  naibi  : niVD1?  in  pry 
p ntyan  naty  *aa  pnot*  ntyan  pony  ntyan 
: mtymy  ia  ‘jN’a'aty  pip 

1 On  marg.  before  TO'3,  '3  by  [IJig’N. 


* So  MS. 


NUMBERS  VII.  1 1-24.  20 

(n)’Dj  ntyob  mm  notti  .•  nnaio  tompb  pmp  « 
najnb  pimp  rv  laipK  or1?  in  (n)’DM  dv1?  in 

; nnaio 

pom 1 nmp  n»  nxcip  nova  aip(N)i  mm  ” 
*pa(i)  a(nyy)  maipi  .*  min*  oaty1?  aivoy  1a  >3 
pyaty  rpai  in  -p’o  nbpno  nyoi  pnbn  mn 
D’Da  nbo  pbo  pmnn  nonp  Vpnoa  (p)bp(no) 
n’Vo  am  moy  mn  ’Vtua  : nrooV  ntyoa  *♦ 
la  in  mot*3  in  nai  pm  ia  in  1a  mm#  »s 
naiVi*  ! n^D1?  in  pry  -van  .*  nby1?  nn» 
ntyon  pamy  rijyon  piai  pin  pmn  moVty  • 
1a  pitym  pip  p ntyon  n:ty  oa  pinoN 

.*  airoy 

(n)’dj  iyiv  ia  *7K3nj  aipn  mon  nova  18 
n(in  fjDai  n)nv  n:aip  n»  aipn  no trcr»  19 
p(y)aty  tpa  in  “pa  nbpno  n(N)oi  pn*?n 
D’Da  n^D  pbo  pinnn  nonp  bpnoa  bpiCo) 
n,l70  am  niDy  mn  'btua  : nnw1?  ntyoa  »° 
ia  in  inoN  in  ion  pmn  ia  in  ia  : rmtt 
nai1?!  ! nt^D1?  in  pry  mam  .*  nbyV  nnty  »,  >j 
ntyon  pany  ntyon  piai  pin  pmn  moVty 
la  btonj  pip  p ntyon  n:ty  »aa  pinot* 

••  iyvf 

1a  aN’1?#  pVar  oa1?  (n)’DJ  nxn’Vn  nova  u 

' After  rump  on  marg. , , rvax.  * So  MS. 

’ This  has  been  altered,  apparently,  into  trtN  tBK  : in  this 
and  the  following  verses  the  n of  triDN  has  been  erased,  but  is 
still  legible. 


Digitized  by  Google 


19  NUMBERS  VI.  22  — VII.  io. 

rrro  csd  rrw  ’osm  mb  mu  by  mmb 
:mt3  nmn  by  *ny*  p nn 
*•»  >s  pnx  ay  bbo  na’ob  ntyo  ay  mrv  bboi 1 
bxitr’  ’33  n*  p:mn  vdk  iD’ob  vaa  Dyi 
>4, 45  nmyi  nm»  m3’  : inon  mn’  133*13*  : pnb  ion 

26  ib  nem  iTb  vqk  mn’  ’bn*  : i3[onjvi  i*i*b 

*7  btntn  ’33  Sy  'S&  n*  i3en  .*  Dbty 

.*  fl3313N 

*«•  * roDtyo  n»  nopob  nsro  niD3D»  Di*a  mm 
nnno  m 1*30  bo  nn  nn*  tnpi  nn»  ntyoi 

2 »k»d3  mpNv  : pn*  enpi  funtyoi  V3Q  b3  nn 
p3s  n’03ty  *(«)*D3  p3K  pnnntt  n*3  wi  btnty» 

3 mn’  Dnipb  p33*ip  n’  inw  : n*3’3D  by  f’DNpn 
pnb  nb^y  pin  noynni  brn  fboy  rw 

: niDtro  Dmpb  fin’  innpNi  nnab  11m  n’(N)*D3 
4. 5 pnn  1 fimbo  3D  : nn’ob  ntyob  mn*  *idni 
’Nvbb  pn*  fnm  nyio  bn#  vrawn  n*  ncyotyob 

6 nn  nnxb3y  n*  nsyo  3D3i  : nn*3y  Dobs  wxt 

7 nn  nntfbjy  f*nnn  n*  : W’bb  fin’  3nn  nmn 
.*  finny  DDb3  pera  ’33b  3n*  nmn  rmaiN 

s am  nmn  nnsoin  nn  nnxbny  nyan#  nn 
pnx  m3  non’N  *tn3  pn*3y  Daba  mo  ’33b 

9 neap  may  nbn  3m  ><b  nnp  *33bi  .*  mna 

10  n33n  n*  m(N)’D3  lanpNi  :(fib3)D*  ncnaa  fin*by 
n*  n’(N)*D3  i3npRi  nn*  (ntyoN)  nova  nnano 

1 Before  i>^01  on  marg.  . . YU  ’J)3. 

’ After  on  marg.  . , CTN  PJK. 

D 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  VI.  9-21. 


18 


trn  'anon  [jn]n  rpya  yby  mo  mo*  po  9 
nity’aty  nova  nnvai  Dva  nim  iddi  mo 
*n  pm  pm  *n**  ntwon  novai  :roiDD* ,o 
iayn  ; lyio  bnx  n:na  tV  p*  oa  pin  «« 
nom  p vby  n^Di  n^yb  *rm  rv^D1?  in  nma 
10m  : xmn  nova  ncm  m tyipn  ntrn  by  ■ » 
dcn1?  nniy  ia  aiNen  *n**i  mo  *ov  n*  mn’1? 

: mo  nnDs  1 bn  p*7oa*  *Noip  n*ovi 
mo  *ov  3mo*?tyN  Dva  m*o  nmn  rm  u 
roanp  n*  aipi  njno  *7hk  mn1?  rtn*  *n**  >+ 
mnoNi  nVy1?  in  nntr  ia  inoK  mn’b 
obw  in  nan  mVD1?  no*?ty  nntr  ma  mn 
ntroa  p»Da  pbn  n^D  tod  pj[pi]*  *5 

: pn’aiDtn]  pnmoi  ntyoa  pnero  [tod  *pnpii] 
mi  nmbD  n*  iay*[i]  mn*  on pb  n:na  aipi 
nay  mn*1?  poVp  nai  iay»  mai  ni  : nnby  ,7 
: vaiDi  mi  nnmo  n*  nina  iay*i  m*0D  pap 
aDi  mo  trn  n*  iyio  *?nK  mna  m*o  iddi  ■» 
nai  mnm  nntrx  by  fnn  mo  cm  iyD  n* 
mai  p nVtya  njniN  n*  mna  aDi  :n*oSty  .9 
jni  in  tod  pnpn  n:op  p in  tod  r\b m 
pn*  f)Oi  : m*o  n*  iDnotn  ma  m*o  *dd  by  « 
*n*  runaV  Nin  cnp  nm*  oiipV  nDNjn  mna 
mai  nnioiNi  npty  byi  nn'DiNi  nyo  by 
n:aip  iti  m*o  nvnn  m : ion  m*o  nncM  *■ 

1 After  3TID1  on  marg.  nnrttJtsn.  * So  MS. 

5 After  ntD^C'N  on  marg.  fJian  and  underneath  . . VtBI 


Ibl.  9.  b. 


Digitized  by  Google 


17  NUMBERS  III.  16— VI.  8. 

“130  ooo  bo  pnooob  pnnaN  rvob  ob  oo  n* 
■«  oo’o  by  no’o  pn*  moi  : p3oan  bybi  rrv 
•7  pnnosyo  nb  oo  pbN  nm  : nopoo  nos  mm 
is  peno  oo  ronojy  pbNi  : nooi  ronp  ptyoo 
19  may  pnooob  nnp  ooi  ; ’yoen  oob  pnooob 
so  ’bno  pnooob  ’“no  ooi  : bN’ryi  poon  omn 
f'lonob  { pnnoN  mob  ’Nvb  ooo  p3N  pbN  ’trioi 
’no  pit*  pbN  »yoty  poi  wob  po 
33  pnooo  bybi  no*  ooo  ooo  bo  fooo  pmoiDoi 
*3  mn  ’N3iono  po  : pNo  tram  psbN  ny o» 
»4  »N3iEnob  on  n’o  N’D3i  .*  nooyo  p pits?’  motyo 

:bNb  33  t^D’bN 

******* 
foL  9.  vi.  3 nonnob  o*t3  333  330b  tno*  p nnN  ’N  333 

3 ’oyi  3on3  ’oy  onn*  'arm  oon  p : mn’b 
ronii”  Nb  D’oiy  an3iro  [b]oi  nnti”  Nb  nno3 

4 nor:  ’oi’  bo  : bo”  p<b  p’O’i  [flo’ao  po3yi 
r^b  3T  3yi  poiiN  p noon  poo  ooymo  boo 

3 n^’o  by  ooy’  Nb  *psn  noi3  333  *ov  bo  1 bo” 
’330  »n’  tynp  mn’b  o?3n*o  n’ov  niobo’N  oy 
e jy33  by  mn’b  nmon  ’ov  bo  : neon  oyD  yos 
7 Nb  innNbi  vnNb  noNbi  voNb  : by”  Nb  n’oo 
; nty»3  by  nnbN  ono  (n)bn  pmoo  pnb  onD’ 
s : mn’b  Nin  wnp  no?3  *ov  bo 

1 There  is  a line  in  the  MS.  over  the  n in  this  and  the  follow- 
ing cm. 

* The  1 has  been  written  over  and  it?  erased  between  0 and  t?. 

D 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS  III.  1-15.  16 

ntyo  Dy  mn*  ‘Won  dvo  pn*t  nnV’in  pVto  hli 
onj  nmoo  pnK  *jo  nnot?  pVto  : *:*d  moo  * 
pnK  *jo  nnaty  pVtn  ,*  non’Ni  ntyVjN  tomoxi  j 
on:  n*oi  : nmoV  pnnx  dVkh  lntrotn  n*:no  4 
rrin*  ompV  niria  pmonptto  t<irroNi 
myVtf  fno(to)  pnV  nin  :>:V  p:oi  *:*d  ooodo 
JpnoN  pnN  (*ok  Vy)  non*Ki 
©oiy  n*  oopn  .*  -©*dV  n&o  Dy  mn*  VV01  5, « 
:nn*  ppoem  nmo  pnN  ompV  nn*  D’pm  *1*7 
ompV  nntrjo  Vo  moo  n[n]*  nmeo  n*  pno*i  7 
pnon  : motro  trotyn  n*  npotyotV]  nr©  Vnx  « 
V*ntp*  *jo  moo  n*i  ny©  Vnt*  *jnd  Vo  n* 

*kvV  n*  fnm  : naotp a wavn  rv  rwapoV  9 
:Vtntr  *jo  i©- 3 *V  pj#  po*m  po*n*  vjoVi  pnxV 
*nooi  pnmo  n*  p*©*i  *:on  v:o  n*i  pn#  m 10 

:VDpn*  onp’T 

mm  hn  *jni  :*©*dV  ntro  Dy  mn*  Wm4  n,n 
n[in]s  moo  Vo  mnn  Vnoit  *n  iod  *nvV  n* 
j’NvV  »V  pn*i  pn*  pn’jpns  V{ntr  *:oo  cnn 
jnjo  moo  Vo  nVopn  dvo  moo  Vo  *V  ?<Vn  «3 
ny  e*3k  fo  Vtnero  moo  Vo  *V  ntynpx  D*m© 

:mn*  *jn  pn*  *V  nono 

*jn a : *©©V  *j*d  nonno  ntyo  Dy  mn*  Wot*  i4)  15 

* After  bbon  on  marg.  , . . nab. 

a After  t33ti’  on  marg.  , . 3H3. 

3 Tliis  seems  to  have  been  corrected  from  tibo,  as  in  ver.  1 2. 

* Before  bbtJl  on  marg.  'Nl'b. 

3 Before  bbci  on  marg.  bt<  n'3N. 


Digitized  by  Google 


15  NUMBERS  II.  18-34. 

■8  x'DJi  nniye  fa  pmVnb  cnex  nntya  Dno' 

>9  iaaai  nbm  : nn*o y in  yaiy’bx  disk  anb 

20  x’Dn  ntrjo  antr  vbyi  : pxa  tram  tfbx  pymx 

21  iaaai  nbm  mins  in  bx*ban  nwo  anb 

2»  k’dji  D»aan  onen  : pnxei  pnbm  pin 

*3  iaaai  mbm  : aiyin  in  pax  D’aan  anb 
3-»  naaa  *?a  : pxa  ymxi  t)bx  pnbm  n trarr 

nyai  psbx  maim  s\bx  nya  onos  nntyab 

:pba»  pxmbm  pmb’nb 

<*>'■«■  ^ [x’]d:i  prvb*nb  miDV  fa  p nntra  ana** 

>6  pn  iaaai  [n]bm  : rntr’ay  in  i?y>nx  p anb 

27  itrx  ma*  nay  pixem  : [f]ixa  ynen  *|bx  pntt»i 

28  [i]aam  nb’m  : pay  in  bxyns  itrx  anb  x’Dyi 

29  x’dji  ’bnsi  onen  : pxa  tram  tjbx  pynixi  in 
3°  nnbn  iaaai  nb*m  : fry  in  yi»nx  *bnsi  anb 

31  p mitrab  naan  bn  : pxa  ymxi  ^bx  ptynm 
nnpyb  pxa  ntri  f)bx  ptyam  nyntri  nbx  nya 

;3pn’DnDb  pba’ 

32  aaa  4 bn  pnnnx  nab  bxitr’  an  aaa  pbx 
pebx  nnbm  *ibxi  pxa  nv  pn’b’nb  nnxntya 

33  an  inn  uanx  .*>:b  *xvbi  : piyam  pxa  tram 

34  an  nnyi  :nra  n»  nin»  ipsi  man  bxity* 
fin’Dnab  lit?  fn  ntra  n*  mm  ipsi  bnn  bxiKi 

: nnnnx  rvn  by  namb  inn  ibai  pi 

1 Before  030  on  marg.  no. 

5 "HD  is  written  over  030. 

s prmoV  lias  been  inserted  in  the  text  after  |VTD30^. 

4 After  i>3  on  marg.  n .'1. 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBER8  II.  i— 17-  14 

'naa  : na’ab  pns*  oyi  nsra  av  nm»  b^ai  «. 
torw*  *ja  pnen  pnniN  n’a1?  ’pOa’oa  vwb  by) 
ptcanp  fnsttr ti  { finer’  nyia  ‘mx1?  nnD3  ‘nipVa  3 
'nb  n’dji  finin'?  min*  nntya  Data  nyrraa 
rnyanjt  vauai  rfmt  : nnyay  *12  perm  min'  4 
Die>  nov  pntfuni  : pxa  ntri  pyatri  5 
:nyiy  na  Sj«ni  natrer’  aa1?  iss'DJi  naerer’ 

: fwo  yaiNi  t\bx  p»om  nyaiK  vyjai  nVm  * 
n[a]  aN,l?K  fV?ar  aab  rs’DJi  p*?ar  oatr[i]»  7 
yanxi  f)b[N]  ptram  nyatr  vmai  nVm  : fb’n  s 
t)b$  nya  mw  nnaa’i  rryjo  ’aa  1 ptto  9 
pn'VnS  pan  yanto  pob[K]  nneri  p:aim 

jp^B’  fwanp 

K'DJi  pn'S’nb  narn  fa  fawn  nntra  Dao  1° 
nner  vraei  nVm  1 nwner  na  hv'^k  fawn  aab  .> 
oatr  may  pern  : fwa  a’am  t\bt*  pyanjn  <» 
: rrrermf  na  lw*a,?tr  fiyatr  aa1?  k'dji  pyaer 
: fwa  rnbm  ptram  mytrn  vyjai  nVm  u 
nVm  : btny~r  na  *p'bx  na  aab  tran  na  oatri  •< 
: ptyam  fwa  rntri  t\bx  pyanai  ruran  vraai  15 
ptram  nrwi  *)*w  nya  fawn  rmtrab  maa  *?a  ><» 
j p*7D'  pyjni  prrVnb  ptram  fwa  yansi  r\bx 
naa  pnanera  laa  wvb  nnera  nyio  br\n  Vmi  n 
jpn’DaoS  "nnnK  by  naa  pbo'  fa  pnern 

1 After  133  on  marg.  IV3  Dlip. 

' There  has  been  a letter  between  the  3 and  ' of  |'3D'D3  with 
a line  over  it  and  the  ' following. 

’ There  is  a line  over  n in  inD.  4 After  mnt<  on  marg.  n'lioi’. 


fol.  7.  b. 


Digitized  by  Google 


13 


NUMBERS  I.  41-54. 


: b»n  potu  bo  bybi  pty  poy  102  poty  poo 

41  com  s\b*c  pyoun  in  new  ootcb  pn*3’30 

: pno 

4»  pnnot*  nnb  pn’3iob  prnbin  *bns3  ’30b 
: b*n  poio  bo  bybi  pty  poy  110  poty  poo 

43  ymto  *ibtt  ptyom  nnbn  *bnfi3  ootyb  pn’3’3Q 

} pNO 

44  btoty*  WD31  pntn  nco  n:oi  n’3’3o  1 pbtt 
rvo 'ootyb  in#  ootyb  inx  100  -m  "iDynn 

45  pn’b’nb  baity*  *jn  »3»30  *?d  nm  :i[i]n  prim# 
foi. 7.  46 11m  :btnty*o  b*n  pD3  *72  bybi  f*3ty  piDy  “no* 

tyom  pobtt  nnbm  [py]bta  pao  nty  n’3’30  bo 

4?  p3on»  r<b  pnmK  ootyb  [»K]vbi  : ptyom  pNo 

: pmoo 

4»,  49  *ib  ooty  n*  pn  .*  io’ob  ntro  oy  mn*  bboi 
• btnty*  on  ion  ODn  t*b  pooND  n*i  oon  ?<b 

50  bo  bin  nntmno  ptyo  by  »»vb  rv  fo*n  nnNi 
n’i  motyo  rv  *pboD»  p3N  nb  n*tn  bo  byi  100 
: pmtc”  ruotrob  inoi  .—oityoty’  p3Ni  V30  bo 

5*  n[v]iEwoi  *«i*b  nn’  prmv’  n30tyo  mbottoi 
:bopn’  oipi  *nioi  *Nvb  nn’  po’p’  n30tyo 

5’  by  "looi  nxntyo  by  000  btnty*  00  pen 

53  ptyob  onD  pity*  nxvbi  .*  pn’b’nb  rnn« 
b*nty»  *3o  nooo  by  *pp  »n’  «bi  nnsrrno 

54  noyi  : nntmriD  ptyo  moo  n*  *tn’b  pioi 

:noy  p ntyo  n*  mn*  ipsi  boo  btnty*  00 

1 Before  "Sn  on  marg.  . p i>3 . . ’ The  b is  written  over. 


Digitized  tw  Google 


f 


NUMBERS  I.  27-40.  12 

*)btt  pyaai  nyans  min’  anab  pnaaa  ; bn  n 

mind  nai 

pinna#  rra1?  pnannb  pmbm  nnaa’  anb  *b 
p3Na  bn  byba  (n)aa  piDy  ma  paa  pm 
paom  myna  nnaa’  anab  pot?  paa  : bn  »» 

:p»o  yanaa  f\ba 

pnms  n* nb  pina*mb  pmbm  pibnr  anb  3° 
p3*u  bn  byba  (n)aa  p-iDy  mo  poa  paen 
f] b«  paom  nyna  pibnr  anab  pnaao  : bn  31 

JplKO  ymKl 

n*nb  pinamb  limbin  onstt  ’an1?  *pv  ’an1?  s> 
bo  byba  paa  I’idv  [ma]*  paa  pan  pmmN  w.*.* 
F\bx  pymtt  onflK  anab  pna*[aa]  : bn  p3#a  33 

; p[«o]  tram 

pnnn|>]  n*nb  pinamb  pimbw  naaa  *a[n*7]  34 

p3Ka  bo  bybfi]  paa  pmy  .ma  pea  paon 
t)bn  pnbm  .pin  naao  anab  pinaaa  5 bn  35 

: pnKO'i 

pinnnrt  mob  pinamb  pimbin  na’oan  anb  3« 

.*  bn  pBrra  bn  byba  pair  pmy  ma  pair  paan 
ynnto  r\bn  pnbm  naan  a»oan  ana1?  pnaaa  n 

: piNO 

paen  ptnnn#  mnb  pmannb  pimbin  p 'an1?  3b 
:bn  p3^a  bn  bybi  paa  pnoy  nna  poa 
: pt*a  ynai  *\btt  pnai  pin  p anab  pinaaa  39 
pmnn»  mb  pinamb  pimbin  na»  anb  40 

1 Before  '»!>  on  marg.  nan  in3D. 


Digitized  by  Google 


11 


NUMBERS  I.  13-26. 


fol.  6. 


.*  pay 

12 

ta’lttD 

ItS’K 

*7 

: *7ttijn 

22 

sp’*7tt 

13 

*7 

.*  iVn  ’ 

12 

jrrntt 

’*71203 

*7 

16  *trtn  iirmt*  ’oats*  *n*D3  nntwa  *3*or  1**7# 

17  n*i22  rv  pntn  rwo  2D3i  : p:«  *7tntr*  *0*7# 
»8  *rnn  W33  nncoo  *73  m : potso  11*131  i**7Nn 

unnnM  n’2*7  ip*323  bv  PiinDNi  rt3*3n  nm**? 
1 jmbubib  bybt  pts?  poy  120  jnw  poo 
19  J*3*D  13102  IWJOOl  ntTO  fl*  fTO*  ipDl  203 

« firms'?  iimbin  *?tno**  ti22  pitn  02  nm 
limtoW?  121  bD-  pots*  1*302  pnroK  rrnb 

21  112*3*30  J3b*n  pax:  *73  [flats*  pov  120 

.•[fliNO  tram  e\bs  paim  nnty  pitn  [o]2t£7*7 

22  pnrntt  [n]*2*?  1.12*313*7  iim*?in  pjw  *33*7 

120  131  *73  lint^lsW?  pD»  1*332  pnmiDKD 
2J  02^  *112*32*30  ;*7*n  po3  *73  bybi  (i)3ts*4  pwr 
nwo  nbm  t)bx  I’erom  nvcrn  iiyoe? 

24  i*3D2  iirratt  n*2t7  112*313*7  iim*?in  12  *32*7 
.'Vn  pON3  *73  *7^*71  (n)3»  I’lDV  120  pot? 

25  11K0  fWl  rfrtt  1*V21N1  2tS*0!l  13  D2tS**7  [12*3*30 

: i*irom 

26  imroN  *n* 2*7  112*313*7  [ini*7in  nnn*  *32*7 
pfitM  *73  SyVl  (n)3tS*  pDV  220  pots*  1*302 

1 So  MS.  ’ The  n of  lYffiDK  is  written  over. 

’ A letter  has  been  erased  in  this  and  the  following  verses 
after  !>'n. 

4 Formerly  pc',  as  in  following  verses. 

6 So  MS.  4 After  r\'J?  on  marg.  , , . Clip- 

C 2 


Digitized  by  Google 


NUMBERS. 


a[yia]  bnxn  a*D  annan  ncya  a y roiro  [bbei]  *•« 
propi[sab]  nroan  nnea  roan  nm'b  ann 
rattan  didd  [rv]  mD  :aa’ab  D'a»*a  yat*  jo  * 
pat?  pan  pn mix  rr[nb]  pnaanb  btntr’  an 
bn  byVi  tat v patry  ana  : pnbnbitnb]  am  bn  3 
ran#  proVnb  pn>  aan  btntyp  bn  ps[j] 
era  am  raantfb  am  am  pro  pnayi  : pntn  4 
paipn  roam  nnaty  pbNi  : Nin  nnnnx  rronb  5 


pnay 


: awntp 

an 

aiv’bK 

piNa 

b 

: mt’nii' 

an 

bN’obty 

pyaty 

b e 

: naray 

an 

pero 

nairo 

b 7 

: ayiv 

an 

bton: 

anew* 

bs 

fpv  anb 

nbn 

an  nx’bN 

pbnr 

b % 10 

airoay 

an 

y atr’bN 

D’aSN 

b 

: aivmo 

an 

bN’ban 

neao 

b 

: aiyan 

an 

p’nt* 

D’oan 

b .. 

; naeray 

an 

aryntt 

n 

b » 

Digitized  by  Google 


9 


fol.s. 


LEVITICUS  XXVII.  31-34. 

3>  edn  pie»  np*iSN  ini  jmrv1?  crip  Kin  mrr1? 

: *in*  nenom  hidvdo 

3a  [n]inn  nnyn  ]nvi  0’)nn  idvd  Vdv 

33  ja  in’  k1?  : mn''?  ttnp  »n»  nN*VDy  nomw 
»m  nrm*  mm  jni  [nn]na*  K*n  erzb  id 

?[p]nsn»  nV  enp  »n»  minni  [n]ih 

34  ^nip*  mV  nvo  n’  mn’  -ipDi  nmps  vVn 

• *j'D  mm 


c 


Digitized  by  Google 


LEVITICUS  XXVII.  17-30.  8 

Vtroro  p(y)D  10m  jn?  rnnr  Deb  -ptw 
nbpy  Bnp’  nbiv  njcro  ini  : epi  i[*]bpno  n 
nbpn  trrp’  nVn*  nm  ini  ; Dp*  (n)D«*BO 
not?  *10*0  by  nQDD  rv  .—uni  nb  aun’i 
:(n)ON’B>  10  nunn  nbn*  nw  iv  nnmm 
*It[vi]  nn*  cnpon  nbpy  n*  pi3'  pnosn  [ini]*  >9M.(.b. 
P*id’  Nb  int  : [nb]  oipo  vby  *ion*p  *pa  Bnon  *0 
pis*  Nb  piy  mib  n[bpn]  n»  pr  ini  nbpn  n» 
nin’b  trip  nbivi  npsoi  nb[pn]  *m  : m v « 
:nn:nD  ’nn  mnib  noo[n]  bpm 
Bnp’  nrunD  bpy  p Nbn  nnr 1 nbpn  m ini  « 
(n)DN’P  dud  rv  mm  nb  imi  : mn*b  wn  »3 
enp  Ninn  on  (n)DN*B>  n»  inn  nbm  miy  ny 
noy  10  mirtb  nbpn  o?y»  nbii’  njiyi  1 mn’b  *4 
bpnoi  »n*  (i)on’v  bn  : yiN  mnD  nb  nb  °s 
: nbpno  nn[’i]  poy  ntsnp 
enp’  Kb  norm  mmb  hit-t  mm  bn  pi  *« 
nonn  ini  .*  Nin  mn’b  »pj  in  mn  in  nn’  bon 
Nb  ini  vby  nneri  »|tvi  (■QDN’Ba  pnenn  niDD 

: (n)oN’Ba  pin  poem 
nbn  bio  nin’b  bon  Dim  Din  bo*  pi 
Kbi  pit’  Kb  nmno  bpn  pi  nonn  bon  p 
mn  bi  ; mmb  Nin  I’tnp  Bnp  Din  bi  pisn’ »» 
j bopn’  bop  p*i£3»  Nb  nBON  p conn’ 
nab’N  nooi  nyiN  ynro  hpn  ooyo  bn  3° 

1 ' has  been  written  over  after  3 and  n after  ). 

1 On  marg.  before  |13,  [?]nrm. . 


Digitized  by  Coogle 


7 


LEVITICUS  XXVII.  4-1  ft. 


4 (n)oN’ty  ’nn  N’n  napa  pa  .*  nenp  bpnaa  *pa 
s pD y *aa  nya  pc'  pan  *ua  ini  : f^pna  ynbn 
nnapaba  j’^pna  pDy  man  (n)3N’P  »nn  pap 

6 pc?  pan  *o  nya  rrv  naa  pa  : pbpna  mDV 
nnapaVa  *pyi  pVpna  npan  nnan  iaN’P  ’nn 

7 pnp  naa  ini  :*pan  p'jpna  nn'an  (n)a«’P 
Pdv  npan  (n)aN’P  ’nn*  nan  p ^yVa  pap 

s ja  Nan  nys  pa  : pbpna  mDV  [nrjapaVi  pVpna 
nana  nn’  [oap]n  nana  Dip1 *?  nao’pn  *)3N’P 
: [njana  naaap’  mnNa  [i]n  ’Dam  na’a  by 

9 pn  *73  nan’1?  p-ip  naa  anp(n’)n  nana  pa 

10  nn’  pis’  nVi  naabn*  n1?  : pnp  »n*  mn’b  naa 
nana  pa*  *]a(na)  ini  aaa  p’a  »n  p*aa  an 

: crip  *n*  nmnsi  Nan  ’nn  nanaa 
” pnp  *naa  anp(n’  nV*t)  naDa  nana  ^a  pi 
.a  oapn  :nana  canap1?  nnana  rr  O’pn  nan*1? 

; »n»  p nana  DN’pa  p*a  paa  an  pa  nn*  nana 
13  pON’ty  by  npaan  *|ian  napne*  npNnsN  ini 
m naaapn  3 nin’1?  pnp  nn»a  n*  pnp’  (in)  paNa 
nana  nn’  taapn  naa  p’a  pa  aa  fa  nana 
>5  plan  fpan  nn*a  n*  pie’  pnpan  pa  : Dap*  p 

: nV  ’nn  a’by  (n)aN’P  *pa 
•6  nn  4 nan’S  paN  pnp*  nnanD  bpy  p pa 


1 * is  written  over  the  line,  after  1DJ). 

* After  ilJD  on  mnrg.  31 . 

s After  mn'b  on  niarg.  ..1.1. 

* After  ni!T^  on  uinrg.  !?E3. 


LEVITICUS  XXVI.  39— XXVII.  3.  6 

rnanxn  ‘pn’niyn  ppant?*'  pan  p-introm  39 
pmnn  : ppantr*  p(n*)  prim#  *myn  *|to  pn*nm  40 
*n  npEn  pnnptyn  pnnn#  *niy  jti  prrniy  n» 
non  pnoy  intt  natf  t\x  : no  *oy  anm  fpti  ** 
nbny  pro1 *?  yaa*  tn  *n  pn*nm  ymo  pn»  bxyi 

rpn’iin  rv  pyn*  “mi 

pn[V’]  *on*p  n*  ^ki  npy*  *dn*p  rv  m[am]*  ^ 

: n[anN]  yn«n  -oik  onniN  *on*p  rv 
pnao  nooea  n*nw  [n*3  'jnni  pao  pntyn  nynxi  45 
nn  ip4v[N]  *ann  im  ira  pmrnn  p py[m]  pa#i 
nynsn  pmnn  nnn3  ^to  : pntwaa  nDybn  *m*fn  44 
pnoaoob  pncaybn  t<bi  pnpnwe  >«b  piriai 
jpnbtt  mn*  *at«  nbn  pnoan  *as**p  nbtanob 
ynN  id  pn*  np£3Ni  paonp  en*p  pnb  nana’i  <* 
j mn’  *jn  D’nbtfb  pnb  ’.nob  n’tra  *a*yb  onvo 
na*a  mn*  nn*n  mnxrnm  mam  mn»rn  pbx 
:no'o  men  *j’D  mm  btnty*  ’an  pm 
♦an  oy  bbo  :no*ob  nro  ay  mn*  bboi4  *xv».  i,« 
(n)DK*ea  ma  ens*  p nnn  pnb  no*m  beenty* 
paty  pnoy  nno  man  DN’ty  *nn  .*  mn*b  jcysa  j 
(pbpno)  ptron  5(n)oee’ty  *m  pair  pnty  nn  nya 

1 This  ’ appears  to  have  two  dots  over  it. 

a After  jvraijn  on  marg.  , . E’p  nn?3. 

5 Apparently  corrected  from  mn3. 

4 Before  bbt31  on  marg.  [1]  pity  pi ... . 

" In  this  chapter  the  suffix  of  the  second  person,  as  in  the 
Hebrew  text,  often  appears  to  have  been  altered  into  that  of  the 
third,  as  in  the  Chaldee. 


Digitized  by  Google 


5 


LEVITICUS  XXVI.  25-38. 


as  nns)  »aa  am  pa*by  »nw  : pa*am  . yaaty 
namo  n^ew  [pannp]  iaV  ptyaanni  n(ON*p 
a«  may  pa*?  nann  : nan  ixa  pannm  panaa 
irynn  in  nana  paon*?  ptw  iDy  pdni  non*? 

jpyaDn  kVi  p'jam  bpnoa  paon1? 
a?  : no  »oy  panm  >b  pyotyn  ^*7  mna  1 ini 
roi.j.  as  naa  t\x  pan*  mtn*  no  nona  paoy  >imi 
a»  iDai  pa»aa  ioa  pVam  : [p]a’ain  by  yaacy 
3°  ipyto  i(ianNioi)  rv  ’xwi  1 [pVan]  panaa 
[t]ia*W»  nas  by  panic  n*  into  [pa*a]on  n* 
3>  tain  [pjan(n)p  n*  tn#i  .*  pan*  ’({yea)  byam 
: panim 1 nna  [n]n«  Kba  paenpxi  n*  Dtyjn 
3a  pa*nai  n’by  poNtyn  [njyiit  rv  nax  cnrai 
33  paina  taboNi  rr(tm)a  nniN  pann  : na  tntm 
3-*  ik  : tain  jn*  pannpi  noKty  payiK  *nm  am 
pn»i  nooty  *ov  ba  n*iny  rv  nyiK  *yim 
rv  »jnni  nyix  naiym  ik  pa*aai  yiaa 
35  nnaty  ss1?!  rv  nacyn  nooty  *ov  Va  :n*aty 

.*  n’by  fi3"nsa  pa’atya 

3«  nyiKa  3 paba  nano  bxyi  paa  pi’ntyon 
n’pnyo  ppiy»i  man  'by  bp  tin’  *pin  pn*aa*r 

37  Diipoa  vnxa  tyaN  pbpni  : rpi  n^i  pSsn  am 
□np*7  noipn  pa1?  ’.in  nsba  n'b  ppm  am 

38  yiK  pan*  (<y)Dni  n*(*m)a  tna*m  : pa*oai 

: pa*an 

1 Before  JN1  on  marg.  J'T  HQ , . . 
s The  MS.  has  a line  over  IN  in  panim. 
a After  pai>3  on  marg.  nab  nbm . 


Digitized  by  Google 


LEVITICUS  XXVI.  13-34. 


4 


5 dv1?  ’*?  linn  pnxi  to’nbx1?  po1?  *’xi  pooon 
onvo  ynx  p ion’  npoxn  pon*?x  mm  *ix  u 
n’mxi  pomi  noiy  mm  pay  jin’?  ’mono 

S 1’OOlpO  pOm 

nmpfi  "bo  m pnayn  xbi  ’*?  pyotyn  xV  pi  >+ 
bwn  *m  [n*  pi]*  pp’xn  'mnu  p pbxn  15 
rv  pobioa1?  mps  [bo  m]  nayob  x*n  potyfli 
po’by  -idoxi  pob  mn  nayx  [*ix]  uxo  : »ox*p  ■« 
P’odo  nn(jnp)  rri  nnonty  'rv  ib’[n  rmj 
poy[m]  npnb  pjnim  nips)  p’anoi  n’[i*y] 
pnnnni  poa  ’n[an]  pxi  : po’aan  nn^’i  n 
mbi  ppnym  po’iD  poa  poben  po’aan  ompb 

{pom  *prr 

pan*  ’"no1?  tpxi  *b  pyotyn  xb  pbx  ny  3 pi  is 

po’D’pn  ’bin  n*  nanxi  : po’ain  by  yiaty  19 
: ntymo  poynx  m nbniflo  pO’Oity  n*  jnxi 
nnbby  m poinx  inn  xbi  poboy  pnb  cbty’i  ao 
no  ’oy  ponn  pi  : m»u  in’  r<b  nna  ib’xi  » 
yiaty  nyo  po’by  fjnxi  »b  yotyob  pnnn  t**bi 
bonm  ptq  nn  n’  poa  nbtyxi  : po’aino  » 
loty’i  pom  nytm  pononn  rv  npym  pon* 

: poninix 

:no  ’ey  ponm  ’b  pmn  s-sb  pbxa  4 pi  33 
mx  tp  pon’  ’yoxi  non  posy  nix  «p  *]nxi  *4 

1 Perhaps  originally  vwi ; a letter  has  been  erased  after  'to, 
the  ’ of  which  may  be  by  a later  hand. 

1 After  bl  on  marg.  [ijn^y.  ’ Before  |K1  on  marg.  flpB*. 

4 Before  |K1  on  marg.  itap  ' . . . 


foL  >.h. 


Digitized  by  Google 


3 LEVITICUS  XXV.  51— XXVI.  12. 

5*  jx  :noy  »m  max  ova  pat?  pan  nyai  spa 
spaa  nmpnax  nry*  (p:xn  dd^)  maea  uid  my 
sj  r-6ia’  nw  ny  mea  nsynx  myt  tin  : mar 
:nmpifl»  tv  my’  vaiy  ‘nipSa  nb  aerm 
53  *ppa  nanbfl’  nay  *m  natya  nw  maxa 
w...  54  nbia*  natya  pen*  pbxa  pno’  xS  pi 

55  nay  pay  Vxnsy*  *aa  »*?  xbn  : nay  vaai  sin 
[m]m  ’ax  onxa  ynx  p pm  rnpax-r  [pax] 
xxvi.  1 naxpi  [*?Dfli]  pV?x  pa1?  pnayn  ns1?  : panVx 
paynxa  pann  ttb  [n*]aoa  pm  pa*?  pD’pn  x1? 
■ ’naity  m : pan1?#  mm  ax  [t**?]n  m*?y  naDa1? 

.•mm  ax  pbnnn  ’Krrpaai  [flnon 

3 pnavm  ' pnan  nips  n*i  pann  ’nmtaa  fx 

4 nnbbv  nynx  fnm  paan  panoo  pxi  .•  pm 

5 n(sap)  n*  nan  pa1?  *oon  t vms  in*  nna  jVxi 
yaD1?  paan1?  p^arn  nym  rv  ’taa*  n(sap)i 

e nynxa  obty  pxi  : paynxa  piyn1?  pmrm 
p .— tnty’a  rrn  ^aaxi  oyan  ’n’Vi  paanm 
? n*  inmm  : paynxa  nayn  aim  * nynx 

8 paao  pom  i ann1?  pa’ampb  pbon  pa’aan 
pbfl’i  ps-n*  pian  paao  nyoi  nya  neon 

9 noxi  pa1?  ’ynnxi  : ann1?  pa’amp1?  pa*ann 
.0  pba’ni  : paay  »ox’p  m ta’pxi  pam  aDxi  pan’ 
«t  pxi  :ppsn  nmy  ompa  npmyi  pnyn  p’ny 
■*  -ibnnxi  : pan*  (nyea  ayban)  nVi  paaaa  ’aaeo 

1 After  JlIBn  on  marg.  D'K. 

* Between  lines  ending  with  OJ»n  and  aim  on  marg.  y. 

13  2 


Digitized  by  Google 


LEVITICUS  XXV.  35-50. 


2 


nn  'ppnm  lay  m»  aiam  Tint*  id*  ito  35 
nntnba  ddd  btt  : "joy  "pnt<  th  anim  ivn  3s 
n*  : ioy  7m  *m  inbt*  p Vnm  pii  bmn  3? 

: *]bn*a  inn  t*b  pirn  bisnn  nb  inn  Nb  iddd 
esnxa  yiN  id  pnn*  npDNi  pnnbt*  mn*  dn  3s 
:D*nbNb  pnb  ’no1?  jyan  yiN  n*  pnb  inab 
nn  tyon]c’n  Nb  ib  pm  lay  *pnN  ho*  pi]*  39  f0,.,.b. 
iy]  *py  *n*  imn:  ipnd  : my  [»*oipn  40 
vm  [Nin]  lay  id  psp  t pay  -ay*  nbnv  [njtr  4« 

Nbn  ; ity*  nn[nnN]  n:nDbi  nnnb  "ity*i  noy  4, ' 
i^b  onxo  yiN  p p[n*]  npSNi  piN  nny 
bmm  *typn  nn  nbsn  t<b  2 *ny  pn[r]  pmt*  43 
n*Nin  nNiba  pb  pn*i  innDNi  “pinyi  : *pbN  p 44 
*pd  s)Ni  : noNi  my  pptn  pma  pnninoi  45 
pn’PDDi  pntn  pma  pnay  pnmnai  nnvn 
: njnDb  pah  pm  pnyiNn  nb’nNi  pnayi 
Dbyb  mnD  m*ab  pmnn  pnmb  pn*  pnbsm  ^ 
vnio  inn  bNity*  *n  pn*nNm  ptyonsyn  pnn 

j’typn  nn  nbnn  Nb 

nay  "pn^  *pp  lay  nmm  ivn  in  *aan  pi’  47 
mNn  : ivn  pn  ipyb  *n  *py  nmm  ivnb  pm  4s 
: mpis*  vnN  p in#  nb  *nn  npNiSN  pitta 
niDn  i*ay  p *n  mpis*  nn*ny  in  *n  nn*ny  *n  49 
ntrm  : pisni  niN  riNDD  *n  n:pis*  nroa  5o 
*n*i  nbn*  njp  iy  nb  pitta  nntya  n:nt  t ay 

1 After  t)pnm  on  niarg.  [1  cJcD. 

* Before  fttl  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss. 


Digitized  by  Google 


LEVITICUS. 


xxv.  a6  wen  [ms  »B]am  pno  nb  »n*  Kb  tn  kwi 
37  nryn  nmi  [*jp  n»]  atwm  nnpnflK  baipba 
3«  po  j nnjnDb  nr y*i  nb  [pn]  maab  “in kh  rv 
naiar  *nn  nb  nntyob  baipb  nnK  [nyptfK  Kb 
nbava  [p]sn  nb’av  rw  ny  nn*  pn  [nK]a 

: [nJmnDb  n?yn 

39  nmpifiK  ♦nm  '*m  nnp  mo  p pkp  jk  vm 
30  ]ki  : nmpnsK  ’nn  pov  nmr  njty  obtym  ny 
Dipn  nobt?  rue?  mb  Dbt trm  ny  pnsn’  r<b 
nn»  pnb  pnbyb  mty  nbn  nnnpan  nm 
3.  pnb  n’bn  pvnsa  ’nn  .•  nbava  ps*  Kb  vnnb 
’nn  npnsK  paenrv  nynK  nbpn  oy  nno  mty 
j»  pmnD  mp  ’na  *Kvb  mpi  : ps’  nbavai  mb 

33  »Nvb  t[o]  pnenm  : ’Kvbb  ’nn  oby  rmpnsK 
mp  ’na  ibn  nbava  nnjnD  Jmpi  ’a  pra  pen 

34  nano  bpm  : bKnan  ’3a  ua  pnanD  K’n  ’Kvb 

jpnb  N’n  oby  n:nD  ibn  pjar  Kb  pnnp 

1 After  Hr  on  marg.  an  illegible  gloss  beg.  with  1.  j 

5 The  first  3 is  written  over. 

B 


Digitized  by  Google 


2 *-bj9hv£h'irt3’T'trr  rriJi1o/thl*t**H'‘*  'h**±nm 
**’nr>r&-2qhe 

ec  v~‘n‘*~3-'zthh'V'rfrxof<x‘  ^ •<  ** 

■brtZtor*'*  xa>~J"*n^?flbb*J-*r2n^4^e  ■eKa’*v 

wnb  *nhho-  V'Wv-v 'rt  "C  :nrAnf2nc''X/xt>r.  nr  St 

' ttKt JTIAtW**  brrV‘j‘X‘rr-rrfjs-‘*K&'ir-frrwb*tVt,<'*-iufiiy 
" b '*o>^nt  -*<rrf2.%)bz]‘~‘ty2'?xhi}~“3-2u‘‘ztiih  ■*/ 

»>•'<*« *y*  **>*&•<  & 

*»/*»•■£«»<  ■h*t‘<“,*nt-'XH‘xni-‘B*a'ii'it-2.u  nr 

■•<  a.*,  <uh  'X'<'XM-+*(\m<mff+rrr  -b*2<9rtt->xht<^tn 

- ••■'*  ’ ■ *->' 

• '•  * 17 

ininX  hnjrmr  •rJH**'  -^r-T— Ti  i 
>2  zsjtKnrZ-bntbnmx^nrnc .-,  i£w?rc>'JbnC'<r4rte*  tf 
'X  fif^nt&h-H^nt2Z  h*h‘2a?.ffrnt*c  -A^CW/v  »* 

-•■3J 

sc  vAaa^ofAi^-or'itA^wft1  “a 

ij  Zontnc  .•/nntbnrht*-x«'&*~wb*<*tv+'*** 

sc  ’^Jj*ejivvr2inf+/x,L’nn  qr<v/»/y«\»~  at 

•\2j?wr'ar  'bnex'f^xim^ -6»<v.va  »f 

ij  a>rzf/%.-nfh£*<  /h<X~n%J!&f/"/*£+<b%nr-e*  f< 
mb  'X nr<  ■-  :qr/VAWy^^2r^ij*VY/V/7f 'Xnfb'X  a 
*V  9*iC  • -* 

sc  vA>s?  -2\r 

jsc  AWAst n*»»oei*b'<t~v4.s**<  -b*af">r-tarv* 
hxnvarrffK  *b*X<X&J+‘X><'xnt‘  'H*K>< bnfxxt— 
h •'-  •*tt**n*4nownrtr*nr&>*  'A*r— 
ir  nCxm»w*nH*-Atc*»&'<  b*i 


,■*  • i 


r I 


•>  • ~ J 


MS.  fol.  14.  b.  Text,  p.  28. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CORRIGENDA. 

Lev.  xxvi.  31  for  [p]3n('l)p  read  [p]3(n*l)p 
33  for  pannpi  read  p3(nn)pi 
Num.  iii.  1 after  pnx  insert  ntPQI 
ix.  22  for  pin  read  (pin) 
x.  2 for  pjroi>  read  (pyr)oi> 

8 for  nniyvna  read  n(n)ix'¥ra 

9 for  nnmwra  read  rtmtoirena 


* r*  Tlie  Iniroduetion  may  l>e  laid  separately,  price  5 «. 


Digitized  by  CjOOgle 


Digitized  by  Google 


