£(brarjp  of t:he  t:heolo0ical  ^tminaty 

PRINCETON    .    NEW  JERSEY 
PRESENTED  BY 


Mr.   Hoel   Lawrence  McQueen 


THE 

GOTHIC  AND  ANGLO-SAXON 

GOSPELS 

WITH 

THE    VERSIONS 

OF 

WYCLIFFE  AND  TYNDALE. 


PEEFACE. 


J.  HE  Scriptures  contain  the  revelation  of  God's  will  to  man, — God's 
word  addressed  to  all  mankind.  As  the  Scriptures  are  Truth,  the  closer 
we  adhere  to  them,  the  nearer  we  are  to  Truth.  But  the  nearest  ap- 
proach we  can  make  to  the  inspired  originals,  is  in  faithful  translations, 
as  they  express  the  sense  with  the  greatest  brevity  and  precision.  Hence 
good  translations  afford  the  best  helps  for  obtaining  a  true  knowledge  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  different  versions,  by  learned  and  religious  men, 
must  be  the  best  and  shortest  commentaries.  The  same  truths  are  there 
expressed  in  different  words.  Where  some  are  too  brief  and  obscure, 
others  may  be  more  full  and  clear,  while  together,  being  the  same  in 
sense,  they  mutually  illustrate  and  confirm  each  other. 

The  present  volume  contains  four  translations  of  the  Gospels.  These 
translations  were  made  by  the  leading  men, — the  intellectual  aristocracy 
of  their  day.  The  first  version  is  the  Gothic  by  Ulphilas,  in  the  4th 
century.  What  vigour  and  decision  of  mind, — what  a  clear  view  of 
the  future  extension  and  influence  of  the  Germanic  race,  must  Ulphilas 
have  had  to  induce  him  to  translate  the  Scriptures  into  the  vulgar 
tongue  of  his  people,  in  an  age  when  Greek  and  Latin  were  the  only 
languages  employed  for  literary  purposes !  Ulphilas  deeply  felt,  from 
his  own  experience,  that  the  power  of  the  word  of  God  to  convince 
the  understanding  and  to  influence  the  conduct  would  be  limited,  unless 
it  was  not  only  preached,  but  read  in  the  mother  tongue,  through  which 
the  best  affections  of  the  heart  are  most  easily  touched. — These  remarks 
are  equally  applicable  to  the  translation  of  the  Gospels  in  the  8th  or  Toth 
century  from  the  Vetus  Italica  into  Anglo-Saxon,  and  to  the  Wyeliffe 
version  of  the  whole  Bible  from  the  Vulgate  into  English  in  the  I4tli 
century,  which  was  the  dawn  of  that  scriptural  light  that  preceded 
the  Reformation.  In  the  i6th  century,  Tyndale  presented  the  Gospel 
in  a  still  clearer  light  by  his  translation  of  the  New  Testament  irom 

b 


ii  PREFACE. 

the  original  Greek  into  English^  so  faithfull}'^  that  it  is^  in  substance, 
our  present  authorized  Version,  which  constantly  uses  the  same  phrase- 
ology and  often  employs  the  very  same  words. 

These  versions^  extending  from  a.d.  360  to  1526,  are  not  only  of 
great  value  to  Divines,  but  deeply  interesting  to  the  philologist,  who 
is  here  supplied  with  ample  specimens  of  the  earliest  German,  and  of 
the  Anglo-Saxon,  as  well  as  early  English.  The  first  German  comes 
down  to  us  in  the  translation  of  Ulphilas,  made  about  a.d.  360.  Though 
the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  were  translated  in  735  or  before,  and  the 
version  printed  in  this  volume  is  from  a  MS.  written  about  a.d.  995, 
yet  we  have  an  earlier  record  of  Anglo-Saxon  writing,  in  the  Laws 
of  Ethelbei-t,  king  of  Kent.  From  the  Title  of  these  Laws,  we  learn 
that  "  they  were  established  in  the  days  of  Augustine  *,^^  that  is, 
between  a.d.  597,  when  Ethelbert  was  baptised,  and  the  death  of 
Augustine  in  604.  The  most  probable  date  is  599.  From  this  time 
to  the  present,  we  have  our  written  Laws ;  and  we  are  told  that 
Bede,  just  before  his  death  in  735,  had  finished  the  translation  of 
St.  John's  Gospel  into  his  native  tongue,  called  English  [Englisc]  in 
the  early  Laws.  The  Germans  have  the  first  written  specimen  of  a 
Germanic  language  in  Ulphilas,  and  we  the  next  specimen  in  our 
Anglo-Saxon  Laws,  and  at  a  later  date  in  the  Gospels.  The  English 
philologist  will  now  be  able  to  trace  many  words  and  phrases  from 
the  present  time,  1865,  to  the  translation  of  Tyndale  in  1526,  of 
Wycliffe  in  1389,  of  the  Saxon  about  995,  and  of  the  Gothic  about 
360,  a  space  of  more  than  1500  years.  The  Gothic  is  a  language  of 
Low  German  originf,  as  well  as  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  English,  we 
are,  therefore,  not  surprised  to  find  many  phrases  apparently  identical 
in  Gothic,  in  Anglo-Saxon,  and  in  modern  English. 

Gothic.  Anglo-Saxon. 

In  bokom  Psalmo.  In  the  book  of  Psalms.  On  tham  Sealme.  Lk.  xx.  42. 

Ik  im  thala  dam\  I  am  the  door.  Ic  eom  geat.  Jn.  x.  9. 

Langai  wheilai.  For  a  long  while.  Langre  tide.  Lk.  xviii.  4. 

Nauh  leitila  wheila.  Now  a  little  while.  Gyt  sume  hwile|.  Jn.  vii.  33. 

Whis  brothar.  Whose  brother.  Hwses  brothor.  Lk.  xx.  28. 

Kaurno  whaiteis.  A  corn  of  wheat.  Hwsetene  corn.  Jn.  xii.  24. 

*  Da  ddmas,  Se  iEJ:>elbirht  cyning  ^sette,  on  Augustinus  dsege. — Thorpe's  Ancient  Latas 
and  Institutes,  8vo.  1840,  vol.  i.  p.  2. 

+  Professor  Max  Miiller's  Survey  of  Languages,  2nd  Edn.  Svo.  1855,  p.  6^  ;  and  hit 
Science  of  Language,  Lecture  V.  p.  175.  J  Yet  some  while  or  time. 


THE   GOTHIC— ULP II I  LAS.  iii 

Gothic.  Anglo-Saxon. 

Harclu-liuirtei.  Hardness  of  heart.  Heortun  heartiness.  Mk.  x.  5. 

Hardu  ist  thata  waurd.  Hard  is  that  word.  Heard  is  theos  sprsec*.  Jn.vi.  60. 

Sibuu  brothryus.  Seven  brothers.  Seofon  5'ebr5thru.  Lk.  xx.  29. 

Wheitos  swe  snaiws.  White  as  snow.  Swa  hwite  swa  snilw.  Mk.  ix.  3. 

Yuka  auhsnc.  Yokes  of  oxen.  A'n  (yetymc  oxenaf.  Lk.  xir.  19. 

"Wlia  ist  nanio  thein  1  What  is  thy  name  ?  Hwajt  is  thin  nania  1  Lk.  viii.  30. 

Galeiks  ist  maun.  He  is  like  a  man.  He  ys  geVic  men.  Lk.  vi.  48. 

THE  GOTHIC  translation  of  Ulpliilas  is  the  first,  in  date  and 
importance,  which  claims  attention  in  a  brief  notice  of  these  fonr 
versions,  and  of  their  celebrated  translators. 

The   heathen    Goths    settled  in    Dacia,    on   the    north-west    of  the 
Black    Sea,    at   an   early   period.      While   resident   there   they   became 
Christians,  and  before  the   Council  of  Nice  in  a.d.  325,  the  Christian 
Goths  were   so   numerous  as  to    elect  their  own    Bishop,   Theophikis, 
whose  signature   appears  in  the   records   of  that    Council.     The  most 
celebrated  of  their  Bishops  was  UlphilasJ,  born  in  a.d.  318  among-st 
the   Goths  in  Dacia.     His  eminent  talents,  learning,  and  benevolence 
gave   him   unbounded,  influence   over  his   countrymen.      It,  therefore, 
became  a  proverb  among  the  Goths,  "  Whatever  is  done  by  Ulphilas, 
is  well  done.''^     This  favourable  impression  prepares  us   to  hear  of  his 
consecration,  at  the  age  of  30,   as  Bishop  §   of  the  Goths  in  a.d.  348 
by   Eusebius   Bishop   of  Nicomedia.     He   continued   to    discharge   his 
episcopal   duties  with  great   fidelity  for   forty  years,  and  in  a.  d.   388 
went  to  Constantinople  to  promote  the  interest  of  his  Church,  where 
he  died  at  the  age  of  70.     Ulphilas  wrote  in  Latin,  Greek,  and  Gothic, 
and  was   full  of  energy  in  the   j)ractical  application  of  his   learning. 
No    difficulty   or   literary   labour   deterred    him   when  he  had  in  view 
the  cherished  desire  of  his  heart,  the  translation  of  the  New  Testament 
from   the    original   Greek,   and  part  of  the   Old    from   the  Septuagint 
into  Gothic,  that  every  one  of  his  countrymen  might  read  the  word 
of  God  in  his  own  tongue.     It  is  most  likely  that  this  great  literary 
work  was  completed  before  a.d.  360;  because,  as  a  faithful  and  zealous 
preacher  of  the  Gospel,   anxious  for  the  instruction  and  edification  of 
the  people,  he  had  been  accustomed  to  translate  into  their  own  language 

•  Hard  is  this  speech.  t  Literally  A  team  of  oxen. 

X  Some  eminent  Germans  write  the  name  Ulfilas,  Ulfila,  Wulfila,  &c.     As  I  have  not 
seen  the  name  so  written  in  any  original  document,  the  old  orthography  is  retained.     See 
other  reasons  in  Origin  of  Eng.  and  Germanic  Lang.  vii.  §  7,  p.  n.s,  note  *. 
§  Waitz,  Ueber  das  Leben  und  die  Lehre  des  Ulfila.  8vo.  Hanover,  1840. 

b2 


iv  PREFACE. 

the  passages  of  the  Scriptures  which  he  quoted.  Ulphilas  drew  th-s 
water  of  life  from  the  pure  fountain^  and  delivered  it  to  his  people  un- 
contaminated.  He  imbibed  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  at  the  fountain 
head_,  the  original  Greek,  and  preached  those  doctrines  to  the  Goths 
in  their  own  nervous  and  expressive  Germanic  tongue. 

Ulphilas  had  always  'taken  the  greatest  interest  in  the  welfare  of 
the  Goths.  When,  in  the  year  376,  ho  saw  they  were  grievously 
oppressed  by  the  Huns,  he  hesitated  not  to  implore  the  protection  of 
the  Emperor  Valens,  and  pleaded  their  cause  with  such  success,  that 
the  province  of  Moesia  was  assigned  to  them.  Their  innumerable  tribes 
then  passed  over  the  Danube  into  Moesia,  now  Servia  and  Bulgaria: 
it  was  from  the  residence  of  these  Visigoths,  or  West  Goths  in  Mcesia 
that  they  have  been  called  Moeso- Goths,  and  their  language  Moeso- 
Gothic. 

Zealous  Arians  have  always  been  anxious  to  claim  Ulj)hilas,  as 
belonging  to  them.  Valens  and  his  Arian  bishops  would  naturally 
use  all  their  influence  with  Ulphilas,  and  he  would  be  disposed  to 
concede  as  much  as  possible  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  the  welfare  of 
his  people.  Further,  as  a  man  of  principle,  he  could  not  go.  In  the 
strife,  contention,  and  bitter  persecution  of  the  times,  it  is  difiicult  to 
arrive  at  the  exact  truth.  We  know  that  Ulphilas  was  not  only  a 
man  of  great  learning,  but  of  honest  principles,  and  practical  wisdom; 
he  was,  therefore,  with  his  cautious  and  judicious  antecedents — his 
early  and  extensive  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures — not  very  likely  to 
fall  into  fatal  errors.  We  are  certain  of  this,  that  so  far  as  the  trans- 
lation of  Ulphilas  has  been  recovered,  there  is  not  a  trace  of  Arianism  to 
be  found.  On  the  contrary,  in  passages  clearly  unfavourable  to  the  doc- 
trine of  Arius,  Ulphilas  has  honestly  and  plainly  given  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  Greek.  The  chief  point  in  which  we  are  now  concerned,  is  this, 
that  those  who  read  the  Gothic  version  of  Ulphilas  are  not  likely  to  be 
led  into  error,  as  it  is  a  faithful  representation  of  the  Greek.  This 
was  the  opinion  of  the  learned  Junius  and  Dr.  Marshall,  the  first 
editors  of  the  Gothic  Gospels,  and  of  Cardinal  Mai,  and  the  great 
body  of  learned  men  in  the  past  age,  as  well  as  the  present. 

Codex  Argenteus.  —  We  gladly  leave  this  subject  to  speak  of  the 
principal  MS.  and  the  chief  editions  of  the  Gothic  Gospels.  The  most  cele- 
brated MS.  is  The  Codex  Argenteus,  or  Silver  Book,  so  called  from  being 
transmitted  to  us  in  letters  of  a  silvery  hue,  though  the  letters  of  a  few 
words  in  the  beginning  of  .each  paragraph  are  in  gold.     I  once  thought  with 


GOTHIC— CODEX   ARGENTEUS.  v 

Hire,  Meenuan*,  and  others,  that  the  worcls  of  this  splendid  Codex  were  not 
written  on  the  velhim,  which  is  of  a  reddish  purple  colour,  but  that  each  word 
was  formed  letter  after  letter  by  metallic  chai-acters  heated,  and  then  impressed 
on  silver  or  gold  leaf  which  was  made  to  adhere  to  the  vellum  by  some 
glutinous  substance,  in  the  manner  that  bookbinders  now  letter  and  ornament 
the  backs  of  books.  On  showing  the  facsimile  to  Henry  Latham,  Esq.,  ]\I.A., 
of  Brasenose  College,  and  of  the  Oxford  University  Press,  be  observed  the 
letters  were  not  so  uniform  as  they  would  be  if  made  by  the  impression  of 
metallic  characters,  and  suggested  that  the  form  of  each  letter  Avas  more 
probably  drawn  Avith  some  glutinous  preparation,  and  the  silver  or  gold  leaf 
l^ressed  upon  it.  On  looking  minutely  at  our  accurate  facsimile,  I  saw 
variations  which  could  not  have  occurred  if  metallic  letters  had  been  used. 
The  word  at  the  end  of  the  third  line  of  our  facsimile  is  abbreviated,  to 
make  it  accord  with  the  preceding  line.  In  the  lotli  line  of  Dr.  Uppstrom's 
larger  facsimile,  to  prevent  a  confused  junction  of  the  long  stem  of  (b  with 
the  long  stem  of  t  in  the  preceding  line,  the  top  of  {U  is  bent  to  the  left 
in  such  a  manner  as  could  only  be  done  by  a  pen  or  pencil. 

Being  anxious  to  obtain  tlic  most  accurate  information,,  even  as  to 
the  colour  of  this  invaluable  jNIS.^  I  wrote  to  Pi'ofessor  Uppstrom.  Tsot 
receiving'  an  answer  with  that  pi'omptitude,  which  his  liberality  and 
kindness  of  heart  always  induced  him  to  give,  I  presumed  he  had  not 
received  my  letter,  and  wrote  again.  Tlie  answer  came,  not  from  the 
learned  editor  of  the  Codex  Argenteus,  but  from  a  mutual  friend,  A. 
Diedrich  Wackerbarth,  whom  I  had  known  long  ago,  as  graduating  in 
honours  at  Coi^pus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  I  may  add  that  he  has 
proved  himself  to  he  one  of  our  best  Teutonic  scholars  by  his  accurate 
and  spirited  translation  of  Beowulf,  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  into  English 
verse,  published  in  1849.  His  letter  gives  the  last  sad  tidings  of  one 
of  Sweden^'s  most  learned  men,  and  contains  so  minute  a  description  of 
tiie  MS.  that  I  feel  assured  my  readers  will  thank  me  for  introducing 

the  substance  of  it. 

"Uppsala,  May  6th,  1865. 

"  Your  two  letters  were  unfortunately  too  late  to  reach  Professor  Uppstrom. 
Our  good  friend  died  on  the  21st  of  January  last.  His  death  was  very  unex- 
pected, and  was  caused  by  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  Your  letter  of  the  6th 
ult.  was  accordingly  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Professor  of  Ancient  Xorthcrn 
Literature,  Prof.  Save,  who  went,  in  company  with  me,  to  the  library  two  or 
three  days  ago,  where  I  endeavoured  by  mixing  water-colours  to  get  a  few 
approximations  to  the  colour  of  the  vellum  of  the  Codex  Argenteus.     Since 

♦  Origin  of  Eng.  and  Germanic  Lang.  vii.  §  ro,  p.  116. 


vi  PREFACE. 

then  your  second  letter  lias  arrived,  that  of  the  28th  ult.  Professor  Save  is  at 
the  present  moment  exceedingly  busy ;  but,  being  desirous  not  to  keep  you 
waiting  for  an  answer,  he  this  morning  requested  me  to  go  up  to  the  library, 
re-examine  the  Codex  with  reference  to  your  questions,  and  make  my  report 
accordingly.  This  I  have  done  and  herewith  communicate  the  result." — After 
an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  give  the  colour  with  greater  precision,  he  sent  me  five 
specimens  of  the  pui'ple  shades  of  the  vellum  taken  from  five  diff'erent  parts  of 
the  Codex.  Our  facsimile  is  the  medium  colorn-.  My  friend  then  proceeds, — 
"  The  vellum  is  still  somewhat  glossy.  The  colour  varies  very  greatly  in 
different  parts  of  the  Codex,  in  some  parts  indeed  it  may  be  said  to  have  dis- 
appeared altogether  or  very  nearly  so,  whereas  in  others  it  is  even  slightly 
darker  than  the  darkest  of  my  imitations,  and  has  much  the  appearance  of 
ripe  mulberries.  The  leaves  seem  to  have  been  coloured  on  one  side  only, 
the  colour  of  the  back  of  the  sheet  being  that  of  the  front  showing  through. 
Calling  the  highly  coloured  side  of  a  sheet  the  front,  and  the  other  side  the 
back,  the  leaves  seem  to  have  been  so  arranged  that  fronts  are  turned  to  fronts 
and  backs  to  backs,  so  as  to  present  uniformity  of  colour  on  both  pages  of  the 
same  opening  of  the  book. 

'•'  I  now  turn  to  your  other  question,  namely  the  probability  of  Ihre's  con- 
jecture that  the  letters  are  stamped ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  book  is  in 
fact  printed,  only  letter  by  letter  instead  of  sheet  by  sheet.  To  this  conjecture 
I  cannot  assent,  and  I  may  add  that  Professor  Uppstrom  held  the  same  opinion 
as  myself,  so  does  also  Prof.  Save.  The  Codex  is  certainly  very  beautifully 
written  and  the  letters  are  remarkably  uniform,  but  strictly  uniform  they  are 
not.  .  .  .The  breadth  of  the  letter  N  is  usually  about  4^  millimetres  :  similarly 
the  letter  T\  :  when  the  wi-iter  has  been  a  little  pressed  for  room  the  n  and  H 
are  reduced  in  breadth  each  to  about  3^  millimetres.  Now  had  the  writer 
formed  his  letters  by  means  of  a  stamp,  he  could  only  have  contracted  the 
spaces  between  the  letters,  not  the  letters  themselves,  unless  indeed  we  suppose 
he  had  several  stamps  of  different  breadths  for  each  letter,  which  I  do  not  think 
probable.  It  appears  then,  that  the  Codex  has  not  been  formed  by  stamping 
the  letters  but  is  throughout  manuscript  :  a  most  beautiful  and  uniform  manu- 
script it  must  have  been,  worthy  of  the  pen  of  Brother  Sintram  of  St.  Gall 
himself,  but  written,  not  stamped. 

"Another  circumstance,  which  I  think  may  be  worth  mentioning,  is  the 
followino- :  On  comparing  Uppstrcim's  facsimile  page  with  the  original,  I  observe 
that  in  the  Codex  the  tail  of  the  silver  Q,  which  forms  the  first  letter  of  the  1 2th 
line,  goes  quite  over  the  arc  of  the  golden  H,  which  begins  the  next  following 
line.  From  this  I  presume  we  may  infer,  that  the  gilding  was  done  before 
the  silvering. 

"  I  may  mention  that  the  upper  part  of  the  ^f  is  not  unfrequently  slightly 
bent  to  the  left,  as  in  the  example  cited  by  you,  even  when  there  is  no  letter 


GOTHIC— EDIT.   OF   COD.  AUG.  vii 

with  which  it  would  otherwise  interfere.  Indeed  all  the  letters,  though  quite 
sufficiently  uniform  to  present  to  the  eye  that  regularity  which  constitutes  so 
important  a  portion  of  what  we  call  beauty  in  writing,  present,  when  examined 
with  a  magnifying  glass  and  a  fine  scale,  differences  of  form  and  diuieusions 
greater  than  I  think  would  exist  had  they  been  formed  with  a  stamp. 

'•  Prof  Uppstrbm,  during  his  last  journey  in  Italy,  cai-efully  collated  the 
MSS.  in  the  Ambrosian  and  Vatican  Libraries  as  well  as  that  of  Wolfenbiittel. 
These  he  prepared  for  the  press  and  had  even  just  commenced  printing  when 
death  put  an  end  to  his  labours.  The  work  will  however  not  be  lost  to  the 
world,  as  it  has  been  placed  in  able  hands.  In  fact,  it  will  be  edited  by  Prof. 
Save. 

"  I  may  add  that  the  Codex  has  evidently  been  ruled  throughout  with 
double  lines  for  writing  :  single  lines  would  have  been  sufficient  for  stamping." 

The  Codex  Argenteus,  containing  fragments  of  the  four  Gospels,  is  supposed 
to  be  the  work  of  Italians  in  their  own  country  at  the  close  of  the  fifth 
century,  or  the  beginning  of  the  sixth.  The  only  MS.  in  exactly  the  same 
style  of  writing,  is  the  celebrated  Gallicau  Psalter*  now  in  the  Abbey  of 
St.  Germain  des  Prbs.  It  is  of  the  sixth  century  and  is  said  to  have  belonged 
to  St.  Germain,  Bishop  of  Paris,  who  died  May  28,  576.  The  vellum  is  stained 
of  a  purple-violet  colour,  and  the  AVi-iting  is  in  silver  letters,  and  a  few  particular 
words  in  gold.  This  description  would  serve  for  the  Codex  Ai-genteus,  the 
vellum  of  which,  however,  is  purple,  exactly  as  in  our  facsimile,  of  a  reddish 
rather  than  a  violet  tint. 

The  Codex  Argenteus  was  preserved  for  many  centuries  in  the  monastery 
of  Werden  on  the  river  Rhur,  in  Westphalia.  In  the  17th  century  it  was 
transmitted  for  safety  to  Prague ;  but,  Count  Konigsmark  taking  that  city 
in  1648,  the  Codex  Ai-genteus  came  into  the  possession  of  the  Swedes,  who 
deposited  it  in  the  Library  at  Stockholm.  Vossius  in  1655,  when  visiting 
Sweden,  became  possessed  of  it,  and  brought  it  to  Holland.  Puffendorf,  as 
he  travelled  through  Holland  in  1662,  found  it  in  the  custody  of  Vossius,  and 
pureliased  it  for  Count  de  la  Gardie ;  who,  after  having  it  bound  in  silver, 
presented  it  to  the  Royal  Library  at  Uppsala,  where  it  is  still  preserved. 

I.  This  imperfect  copy  of  the  Four  Gospels,  beginning  !Matt.  v.  15,  was 
first  printed  from  a  beautiful  facsimile  made  by  Derrer ;  and,  with  the  Gothic 
Glossary  of  Junius,    published  by  .Junius    and   Marshall,    in   2   vols.    4to.,   at 

*  A  most  beautiful  facsimile  of  tliis  MS.  was  publislicd  by  Count  Bastard,  1843,  i"  ''i^ 
splendid  and  expensive  work  on  this  subject.  Another  is  given,  with  a  minute  description 
of  Plate  ex.  vol.  i.  p.  296  in  Universal  Paleography,  by  M.  J.  B.  Silvestre,  translated  from 
the  French  and  edited  by  Sir  Frederic  Madden :  Folio  Plates,  and  descriptions  in  2  vols.  8vo. 
H.  G.  Bohn,  London,  1850.  I  am  indebted  for  the  sight  of  these  facsimiles  to  Professor 
J.  0.  Westwood,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  author  of  the  very  beautiful  work,  P.al»ographia  Sacnt 
Pictoria,  &c. 


viii  PREFACE. 

Dordrecht,  1665.  There  are  two  columns  in  each  page,  the  Gothic  on  the  left 
column,  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  on  the  right ;  both  in  their  original  characters, 
the  types  for  which  Avere  cast  in  Holland,  at  the  expense  of  Junius.  The  same 
book,  apparently  published  with  new  titles,  and  a  reprint  of  the  first  sheet 
in  Vol.  II,  the  Glossaiy  by  Junius,  appeared  again  at  Amsterdam  in  1684. 

II.  Stiernhielm,  a  Swede,  republished  Ulphilas,  with  additions,  entitled, — • 
Evangelia  ab  Ulphila  Gothice  translata,  cum  versionibus  Sueo-Gothica  Norrajna 
sen  Islandica,  et  Vulgata  Latina,  Stockholmice,  4to.  167 1.  Sometimes  there  is 
hound  %(,p  with  it — Glossarium  Ulphila-Gothicum  per  F.  Junium,  nunc  Sueo- 
Gothica  auctum,  etc.  per  Georg.  Stiernhielm,  ih.  1670. 

III.  The  Gothic  Gospels  were  again  prepared  for  the  Press  by  Dr.  Eric 
Benzelius,  and  published  by  Lye,  4to.  Oxford,  1750,  with  a  Latin  translation,, 
and  notes  below  the  Gothic  :  a  short  Gothic  Grammar,  written  by  Lye,  is  pre- 
fixed. This  handsome  4to.  of  the  Clarendon  Press  was  printed  with  the  type 
which  Junius  had  presented  to  the  University  of  Oxford  after  it  had  been 
used  at  Dordrecht  in  the  Edition  of  1665. 

IV.  A  learned  Swede,  Ihre,  a  native  of  Uppsala,  and  afterwards  professor, 
favoured  the  literati  in  1753  with  his  remarks  upon  the  editions  of  Junius, 
Stiernhielm,  and  Lye.  He  had  constant  access  to  the  Codex,  and  his  ci-iti- 
cisms  and  remai-ks  upon  the  editors'  deviations  from  it  are  very  valuable. 
All  Professor  Ihre's  treatises  on  the  Gothic  version,  and  other  tracts  connected 
Avith  the  subject,  were  published  under  the  following  title  :  J.  ab  Ihre  scripta 
versionem  Ulphilanam  et  linguam  Moeso-Gothicam  illustrantia,  edita  ab  Anton. 
Erid.  Biisching,  Berolini,  4to.  1773. 

V.  The  Codex  was  again  prepared  and  printed  in  Eoman  characters  with- 
out accents,  after  the  corrected  text  of  Ihre,  with  a  literal  interlinear  Latin 
translation,  and  a  more  free  Latin  version  in  the  margin,  with  a  Grammar  and 
Glossary  by  F.  K.  Fulda.  The  Glossary  revised  and  the  text  corrected  by 
W.  F.  H.  Reinwald,  published  by  J.  C.  Zahn,  Weissenfels  and  Leipsic,  4to.  1805. 

VI.  A  commentary  on  parts  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  with  -the  following 
title;. —  Skeireins  Aiwaggelyons  thairh  lohannen.^ — -Auslegung  des  Evangelii 
Johannis  in  gothischer  Sprache  von  H.  F.  Massmann,  Doctor  der  Philosophic, 
Professor  der  alteren  deutschen  Sprache  etc.  4to.  Miinchen,  1834. — It  contains 
an  account  of  the  manuscript,  p.  ix-xvii  : — the  Commentary  in  Gothic,  printed 
in  facsimile  types,  p.  3-34  : — -the  same  Gothic  text,  in  Ptoman  and  Italic  type 
accented,  in  one  column,  and  a  literal  Latin  version  in  the  other,  with  notes 
at  the  foot,  p.  37-52  : — an  account  of  the  MS.  and  a  short  notice  of  Ulphilas 
and  the  Goths,  p.  53-118  : — a  complete  Glossaiy  of  the  Gothic  words  with 
explanations  in  Latin,  and  the  Gi'eek  equivalents,  p.  121-182  : — a  facsimile  of 
Skeireins,  and  other  MSS.  p.  183. 

VII.  Ulfilas : — Veteris  et  Novi  Testameuti  versionis  Gothicse  fragments, 
quse  supersunt,  ad  fidem  codd.  castigata,  Latinitate  donata,  adnotatione  critica 


ANGLO-SAXO  N— E  T II E  L  13  E 11 T.  ix 

instructa,  cum  Glossario  ct  Gramniatica  lingua)  Gotluca\  conjunctis  ciiris 
ediderunt  H.  C.  de  Gabelcntz  ct  Dr.  J.  La'bc.  Lipsiit,  apud  F.  A.  Brockbaus, 
1836  et  1846. — This  is  a  very  valuable  work  in  3  vols.  4to.  Vol.  I.  contains 
Prolegomena,  p.  ix-xxxvii  :  the  Gothic  text  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  as 
far  as  they  have  been  discovered,  with  fragments  of  the  Old  Testament,  printed 
in  Eoman  type,  without  accents  ;  below  is  a  Latin  translation,  and  under  this 
are  very  useful  notes  in  Latin,  in  2  cola,  small  type,  p.  1-359. — Vol.  IL  con- 
tains Vorwort,  p.  vi-xi  :  Skeii*.  p.  xii-xvi :  CJalcnd.  Goth.  p.  xvii,  xviii  :  Gloss. 
p.  X-214:  Griechisch-gothisches  AVorterbuch,  p.  215-241  :  Gram,  der  Goth, 
p.  1-298. 

VIII.  Ulphilas  von  Gaugengigl  :  Vol.  L  Spi-achlehi'C  und  Wiirterbuch  : 
Vol.  II.  Gothic  New  Testament,  2  vols,  in  i,  royal  8vo.,  with  a  plate  of  Gothic 
Alphabets.     Passaic,  1849. 

IX.  Uppstrom's  Codex  Argcntcus,  4to.  1854- 1857:  v.  Notes,  p.  570,  Matt, 
i.  21  ;  xi.  10. 

X.  Massmann's  Ulfilas",  Stuttgart,  1857,  ^  "^ol-  Svo.  The  Gothic  text  is 
printed  entirely  in  Roman  letters,  of  a  good  legible  size,  and  fills  the  left  hand 
pages.  Parts  of  the  Scptuagint  and  of  the  original  Greek  text  and  the  Vulgate 
Latin  Version,  both  in  smaller  type  than  the  Gothic,  fill  the  right  hand  pages. 
They  are  in  two  columns,,  and  the  verses,  both  of  the  Greek  and  Latin,  are 
parallel  with  the  Gothic.  The  Gothic  text  is  accented  according  to  the  system 
introduced  by  the  celebrated  Professor,  Dr.  James  Grimm.  ISLiny  very  valuable 
notes,  a  Glossary,  and  a  brief  Gothic  Grammar  are  appended  to  the  Text. 
It  is  a  most  useful  and  comprehensive  book,  containing,  in  one  moderate 
8vo.  volume,  the  whole  of  the  Gothic  translation  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments hitherto  discovered,  and  all  that  is  known  on  the  subject. 

XI.  Ulfila  oder  die  uns  crhaltenen  Denkmalcr  der  Gothischen  Sprache. 
Text,  Grammatik  und  Wurterbuch.  Bearbeitet  und  hcrausgegebcn  von  Friedrich 
Ludwig  Stamm,  Pastor  zu  St.  Ludgeri,  in  Helmstedt.  Paderborn,  1858. — A 
plain,  good  sized,  readable  text,  in  Roman  type,  without  accents.     The  ])  is  used. 

ANGLO-SAXON. — Before  Greg-cry  the  Groat  planted  Christianity 
in  England  by  his  missionaries,  the  encrg'etic  and  warlike  Ang-lo-Saxons 
had  scarcely  any  facilities  for  intellectual  improvement.  A  gradual 
preparation  for  the  public  reception  of  the  Christian  faith  had  been 
made  by  the  marriage  of  Ethelbert,  king-  of  Kent,  with  Bertha,  a 
Frankish  princess.  Bertha  and  her  attendants  continued  their  Christian 
worship  in  England,  under  the  direction  of  the  Bishop  who  accompanied 
her  from  France.  The  exemplary  conduct  of  the  Queen  impressed  the 
mind  of  Ethelbert  and  his  court  with  a  favourable  opinion  of  Chris- 

•  The  exact  title  of  this  scholarlike  and  most  ha;idy  book  is  given  in  the  Gothic  notes 
on  Matt.  i.  21,  p.  570. 


X  PREFACE. 

tianity.  The  way  being  opened  by  Bertha,  Ethelbert  in  a.d.  597  gave 
a  friendly  reception  to  Augustine,  the  leader  of  the  Christian  messengers 
of  peace,  and  assigned  them  a  residence  in  Canterbury,  As  Christian 
doctrines  and  discipline  expand  the  mind,  and  produce  a  love  of 
learning  and  intellectual  pursuits,  these  results  were  seen  by  the 
establishment  of  the  first  school  in  Kent  by  Ethelbert,  and  by  his 
written  Laws,  as  well  as  by  the  thirst  for  knowledge  raised  among 
his  subjects.  Those,  who  applied  themselves  to  literature,  manifested 
the  strength  of  their  intellectual  powers,  by  a  success  which  could 
not  have  been  expected,  and  can  scarcely  be  surpassed.  That  within 
a  hundred  years  after  the  dawn  of  Christianity  and  literature  upon 
the  Anglo-Saxons,  two  such  men  as  Bede  and  Bonifacius  should  have 
arisen,  the  one  from  the  most  northerly  and  the  other  from  the  southei'ly 
part  of  England, — from  Durham  and  Devonshire, — is  an  adequate  proof 
that  the  previous  absence  of  literary  knowledge  did  not  arise  from  the 
want  of  intellect,  but  of  opportunity  for  its  cultivation.  Bede  had 
a  European  reputation  as  a  Scholar,  and  Bonifacius  as  a  Christian 
Missionar3^  Bonifacius,  a  native  Saxon,  and  like  all  the  Angles 
and  Saxons  of  Germanic  origin,  speaking  a  Germanic  dialect,  was  a 
most  successful  herald  of  peace  to  his  kindred  race  on  the  Continent. 
His  talents,  and  his  heart  glowing  with  benevolence  and  Christian 
zeal,  made  him  the  missionary  Bishop  over  the  numerous  tribes  to 
whom  he  had  preached  with  such  success,  that  he  is  said  to  have 
been   the    means-  of  converting'   to   the    Christian   faith   more   than  a 

hundred  thousand  Germans. Bede  was  born   in  672,  and   died   in 

735.  His  works  were  spread  over  Europe,  and  so  highly  esteemed, 
that  his  Ecclesiastical  History,  written  in  Latin,  was  printed  about 
the  year  1474,  among  the  early  works  that  issued  from  the  German 
press.  It  was  translated  into  Anglo-Saxon  by  King  Alfred,  and  is  still 
a  well-known  and  popular  book,  though  tinged  with  the  credulity  of 
the  age  in  which  it  was  written.  Bede  was  a  diligent  student  and 
translator  of  the  Scriptures,  as  will  soon  appear;  but,  we  must  first 
observe,  that  among  the  many  books  sent  by  Gregory  the  Great  to 
Augustine,  two  copies  of  the  Gospels  in  Latin,  of  the  same  size,  and 
written  in  the  same  Koman  uncials,  are  now  extant.  After  being  safely 
kept  in  the  Bibliotheca  Gregoriana  in  St.  Augustine^s  Abbey,  Canter- 
bury, Archbishop  Parker,  at  the  dissolution  of  religious  houses,  took 
charge  of  these  precious  MSS. ;  one  of  these  he  presented,  with  his 
other  MSS.  and  books,  to  tiic  Liln-ary  of  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Cambridge,  where  it  still  remains  in  perfect  safety.     The  other  copy 


ANGLO-SAXON   VERSION. 


XI 


we  know  from  the  following  entry  in  the  margin  fol.  3 a,  "Robertas 
Cottoii  Cumngtononsis  1602/'  was  among  the  manuscript  treasures  of 
Su-  Robert  Cotton.  It  is  now  in  the  safe  custody  of  the  Bodleian, 
Oxford.  This  Oxford  Codex  appears,  from  its  history,  as  well  as  from 
lis  mternal  evidence,  to  have  been  the  original  from  which  numerous 
.  ines  were  made  and  spread  over  England  as  far  north  as  the  residence 
ot  Rede  in  the  Monastery  of  Wearmouth,  Durham.  The  internal  evi- 
dence  is  this,  that  all  the  Anglo-Saxon  MSS.  have  the  large  interpola- 
tion given  in  the  note  upon  Matt.  xx.  28,  with  others  which  will 
sliortly  be  mentioned.  This  MS.  of  the  Gospels,  sent  by  Gre-ory  the 
Great,  is  not  the  Vulgate,  but  the  old  Latin  Version,  the  Vetu,?  Italica 
m  constant  use  till  the  time  of  Jerome,  who  guided  by  it,  finished  his 
Vulgate  translation  of  the  Gospels  in  a.d.  384.  As  the  Anglo-Saxon 
Version  was  made  from  the  A^etus  Italica,  it  may  be  useful  in  ascertain- 
mg  the  readings  of  this  oldest  Latin  Version.  We  may  cite  one  or  two 
rxaraples  more  in  proof  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  was  from  the  Vetus 
Italica,  and  not  from  the  Vulgate  of  Jerome. 


I  In  St.  Matt,  xxvii.  32,  tlic  Vulgate  has  Inveneruut  homiaem  Cyrcn.Tum 
and  omits  vcnientem  obviam  illis.  The  An-lo-Saxon  is  word  for  Avord  fi-oiu 
the  Vetus  Italica,  as  will  be  seen  below.  I,i  tliis  instance  the  Anglo-Saxon 
was  evidently  translated  from  the  Vetus  Italica. 

Inveneruut  homincm  Cyreuseum,  venientem  obviam  illis.    Vet.  Ital. 

Dd  gemetton  hig  aSnue  Cyreniscne  man,  cumende  licom  togenes.  Ang.-Sax. 

!       A  clause  is  also  omitted  in  the  Vulgate  of  St.  Matt.  xxiv.  41,  when  it  is 
both  in  the  Vetus  Italica  and  Anglo-Saxon. 

Duo  in  lecto,  unus  assumotur,  ct  unus  relinquetur.    Vet.  Ital. 

Twegen  bcoj,  on  bcddc,  an  by]>  gcnumen,  and  6der  l.y},  ls5Fod.  Ang.-Sax. 

Sometimes  a  word  is  different  in  the  Wilgate  and  in  the  Italic  Version,  and 
the  Anglo-Saxon  then  follows  the  Italic,  as  in  St.  Luke  xv.  8. 
Et  evertit  domum.    Vet.  Ital. 
And  awent  hyre  bus.  Anrj.-Sax. 
Et  everrit  domum.    Valg. 

The  Vetus  Italica  sometimes  omits  a  M-liole  verse,  and  tlie  same  omission 
IS  observed  m  the  Codex  Augustinius  and  in  the  Anglo-Saxon,  when  it  is  con- 
tamed  in  the  Vulgate,  as  in  St.  Matt,  xxiii.  14.  This  affords  further  evidence, 
that  the  Anglo-Saxon  was  translated  from  the  Vetus  Itab'ca,  and  also  that  the 
Bodleian  Codex  Augustinius  is  the  Italic,  and  not  the  Vulgate  Version.  See  the 
note  upon  Matt,  x.xiii.  14,  p.  577. 


xii  PREFACE. 

It  is  then  an  interesting-  fact^  that  we  still  possess,  in  the  Bodleian, 
one  of  the  copies  which  Gregory  the  Great  sent  to  England, — that 
it  is  not  a  copy  of  the  Vulgate,  but  of  the  Vetus  Italica,  and  that  it 
may  he  the  very  copy  from  which  the  Anglo-Saxon  Version  was  made. 

We  are  not  certain  as  to  the  names  of  those  patriotic  Anglo-Saxons, 
who  devoted  their  time,  talents,  and  learning  to  the  translating  of  the 
Scriptures  into  Anglo-Saxon,  that  they  might  be  read  by  the  people, 
and  in  their  churches;  but  we  have  an  indisputable  evidence  in  the 
Rubrics,  printed  in  our  notes  from  the  MS.  that  they  were  constantly 
read  in  Anglo-Saxon  churches,  as  the  rubrical  directions  declare  what 
part  of  the  Scriptures  Avas  appointed  for  successive  seasons.  We  have 
no  more  knowledge  of  the  exact  date  when  the  Gospels  were  first  trans- 
lated into  Anglo-Saxon,  than  we  have  of  the  translators.  We  are, 
however,  assured  by  Cuthbert'^,  a  pupil  of  the  learned  Venerable  Bede, 
the  glory  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church,  that  he  was  finishing  his  trans- 
lation of  St.  Jolin^s  Gospel  immediately  before  his  death  on  the  27th 
of  May,  735.  As  St.  John  is  the  last  of  the  Gos2:»els,  the  three  pre- 
ceding had  most  likely  been  previously  translated.  Cuthbert  describes 
the  last  day  of  Bedels  life  with  Christian  simplicity  and  feeling.  '  When 
the  morning  dawned  he  told  us  to  write  diligently  what  we  had  begun. 
This  being  done,  one  of  us  said, — There  is  yet,  beloved  Master,  one 
chapter  wanting ;  will  it  be  unpleasant  to  be  asked  any  more  questions  ? 
He  answered,  Not  at  all.  Take  your  pen  and  write  with  speed. — He 
did  so.  At  the  ninth  hour  he  said  to  me,  I  have  some  valuables  in 
my  little  chest;  fetch  them  that  I  may  distribute  my  small  presents. 
He  addressed  each  and  exhorted  to  prayer.  We  wept.  In  the  evening 
when  his  pupil  said.  Dear  Master,  one  sentence  is  still  wanting.  Write 
it  quickly,  exclaimed  Bede.  When  it  was  finished,  he  said.  Support 
me  while  I  go  to  the  holy  place,  where  I  can  pray  to  my  Father. 
When  he  was  placed  there  he  repeated  the  Gloria  Patri,  and  expired 
in  the  effort.'' 

We  have  no  satisfactory  evidence  to  prove  that  this  was  the  first 
translation  of  the  Gospels,  nor  that  Bede's  version  has  come  down  to 
us.  The  Scriptures,  in  their  own  tongue,  were  revered  by  the  Anglo- 
Saxons,  for  Alfred  the  Great  placed  the  Commandments  at  the  head 
of  his  Laws,  and  incorporated  many  passages  from  the  Gospels.  Sub- 
sequent translators  would  naturally  avail  themselves  of  the  versions 
made  by  their  predecessors,  and  write  them  in  the  orthography,  the 
language,  and  the  style  of  the  time  in  which  they  lived.     From  these 

*  Smith's  Bede,  p.  703. 


ANGLO-SAXON   MSS.  B.C.  xiii 

distiiiq-uislnng'  features,  the  age  of  a  MS.  may  be  ascertained  witli 
tolerable  accuracy.  Sometimes  persons  and  places  are  named,  which 
aid  in  fixing  the  dat<?. 

Anglo-Saxon  MSS.  of  the  Gospels. Our  Anglo-Saxon  text*  is  based 

upon  the  MS.  No.  CXL.  in  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  denoted  by  B; 
and  the  MS.  li.  2. 11.  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge,  designated  by  C  ; 
ct.llatcd  with  Cot.  or  the  Cotton  Otho  C.  I.  the  MS.  in  the  British  Museum, 
and  with  the  Hatton  MS.  No.  38  in  the  Bodleian,  Oxford,  i-eferred  to  in  the 
notes,  by  the  signatui-e  H,  compared  Avith  Rl.  or  the  MS.  of  nearly  the  same 
form  and  date  I.  A.  XIV.  in  the  Royal  Library,  British  Museum : — collated 
also  with  the  Oxford  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  No.  441,  to  which  a  reference  is 
made  in  the  notes  by  0. — Also  Rush,  or  the  Rushworth  Gloss,  in  the  Bodleian, 
No.  3946  ;  and  the  Lindisfarne  in  the  British  Museum,  Nero  D.  IV. 

The  value  of  these  MSS.  and  the  text  formed  upon  their  authority  will  be 
best  ascertained  from  a  shoi't  account  of  each,  chiefly  in  the  alphabetical  order 
of  the  letters  by  which  they  are  designated. 

I.  B.  is  described  in  Wanley's  Catal.  p.  116,  and  by  Nasmith,  p.  213;  it 
is  said  to  be  copied  from  an  older  MS.  before  the  Conquest.  I  think  between 
A.D.  990  and  1030.  Many  vowels  ai-e  accented.  At  the  end  of  St.  Matthew's 
Gospel  is  the  following  note,  written  in  the  same  form  of  letter  as  the  MS. 
but  of  a  somewhat  later  date  : — Ego  iElfricus  scripsi  hunc  librum  in  Monasterio 
Badonio,  et  dedi  Brihtwoldo  Prepositot. — Dr.  Marshall,  speaking  of  this  MS. 
in  1664,  says, — Hunc  Codicem  et  Oxoniensem,  rarius  rcperi  ab  invicem  dis- 
sentientes  ;  sujierioremque  cos  vetustatem  spirare  existimo.  (p.  490.) 

II.  C.  denotes  the  MS.  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels,  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  marked  li.  2.  11.  This  MS.  in  small  folio,  wi'itten  in  a  good 
clear  hand  about  the  time  of  the  :{:  Norman  Conquest,  if  not  earlier,  is  very 
valuable  for  its  accuracy  in  grammatical  forms,  and  orthography  as  adopted  in 
the  best  West-Saxon  ;  and  because  it  is  the  only  cojiy  which  has  the  Rubrics 
complete,  and  Avritten  in  the  same  hand  and  just  after  the  other  parts  of  the 
MS.  Many  vowels  are  accented.  In  1704,  when  Wanley  wrote  his  Catalogus 
Historico-Criticus  Manuscriptorum  Septentrionalium,  the  leaf,  containing  the 
following  note,  stood  among  the  waste  leaves  at  the  beginning  of  this  MS.  :  it  is 
now  (1865)  placed  at  the  end§: — Hunc  tcxtum  Euangeliorum  dedit  Leofricus 

*  See  Anglo-Saxon  Notes,  p.  574,  col.  1.     The  Anglo-Saxon  text. 

+  See  Anglo-S.axon  Notes  upon  Matt,  xxviii.  20w.  J  Wanley's  Catal.  p.  152. 

§  I  miglit  merely  state  the  fact,  but  I  may  add,  that  Mr.  Br.idshaw  of  King's  College, 
who  has  the  care  of  the  MSS.  and  examines  them  most  minutely,  is  satisfied,  from  the  size 
and  the  cutting  of  the  parchment,  with  other  concurring  circumstances,  that,  when  the  MS. 
was  originally  written,  this  was  the  last  leaf ;  he  has,  therefore,  restored  it  to  what,  he  is 
assured,  was  its  first  position. 


xiv  PREFACE. 

episcopus  ecclesise  Sancti  Petri  Apostoli  in  Exonia  ad  utilitatem  succcssorum 
suorum.   Then  immediately  follows  in  the  same  Anglo-Saxon  hand  as  the  Codex, 
but  of  a  little  later  date, — Das  boc  Leofric  biscop  gef  Sancto  Petro  and  ealluni 
■  his  feftergengum  into  Exanccstrc  Gode  mid  to  denienne. 

At  the  foot  of  a  waste  leaf,  placed  before  the  MS.  is  this  note : — Huuc  Codi- 
cem  Evangelioi'um  Gregorius  Dodde,  Decauus  Ecclesise  Exoniensis,  cum  assensu 
fratrum  suorum  Canonicorum  dono  dedit  Matthseo  Cantuariensi  Archicpiscopo, 
qui  ilium  in  banc  novam  formam  rcdigi  et  oruari  curavit.  1566. 

On  the  upper  margin  of  page  i  of  this  MS.  is  written  in  the  bold,  clear 
hand  of  Archbishop  Parker, — "  MatthtBus  Cantuar:  1574."  At  the  foot  of  this 
page  in  the  same  clear  hand,  "  Continet  pag.  401,"  i.  e.  The  entire  MS.  contains 
401  pp.  The  Gospels  occupy  p.  1-343. — Pseudo-Evangelinin  NicUodemi,  p. 
344-383,  published  by  Thwaites  at  the  end  of  his  Heptateuchus  in  8vo.  1698. — 
Nathanis  Judcei  Legatio  Fahulosa  ad  Tiheriurti  CcBsarem,  p.  383-40 t.  All  the 
401  pages  of  the  MS.  are  written  in  the  same  bold  and  distinct  Anglo-Saxon 
hand.  The  Rubrics  are  in  faded,  dark  red  letters  of  the  same  form  as  the  MS., 
but  written  after  the  text  was  finished,  as  they  often  extend  far  into  the  margin, 
the  latter  words  being  placed  at  the  end  of  one  or  more  consecutive  lines  of 
the  MS.  :  for  example  in  Matt,  xi.,  MS.  p.  37,  line  14-17.  The  letters  of  the 
Rubrics  Avere  most  likely  formed,  when  the  Capital  letters  were  coloured.  The 
Gospels  are  divided  into  paragraphs,  denoted  by  large  jilain  Capital  lettei'S  of 
different  colours,  some  of  which,  especially  the  green  and  light  blue,  are  as 
bright  as  if  recently  coloured.  There  is  generally,  but  not  always,  a  Rubric 
at  the  head  of  each  paragraph.  Three  or  four  paragraphs  are  often  included  in 
a  Chapter ;  and  the  chapters  of  our  modern  versions  sometimes  begin  in  the 
middle  or  other  parts  of  the  paragraphs  of  this  MS.,  in  which  there  was  not 
originally  the  least  indication  of  such  a  division. 

III.  This  is  what  remains  of  the  once  fine  MS.  written  on  vellum  before 
the  Norman  Conquest,  and  denoted  by  Cot.  because  it  is  in  the  Cotton  Library, 
Britisb  Museum,  Otho  C.  I.  A  minute  description  is  given  of  it  by  Wanley 
in  A.  D.  1704*,  when  it  was  in  a  perfect  state  from  Matt,  xxvii.  6.  It  was  so 
much  injured  by  the  fire,  which  destroyed  many  of  Sir  Robert  Cotton's  MSS. 
on  the  23rd  of  Oct.  1731,  that,  what  was  defective  only  as  far  as  Matt,  xxvii.  6 
before  that  calamity,  afterwards  looked  like  a  char-red  mass.  Planta,  in  his 
Catalogue  of  the  Cotton  MSS.,  describes  it  as  "  once  consisting  of  290  leaves, 
but  now  (1802)  so  much  burnt  and  contracted  as  to  render  the  binding  of  it 
impracticable."  It  was  fortunately  kept  in  a  case ;  and  what  was  found  im- 
practicable by  Mr.  Planta,  has  been  effected  under  the  careful  su2:)erintendence 
of  Sir  Frederic  Madden,  by  whose  judicious  ai-rangements  many  MSS.  have 
been  restored,  and  made  accessible  to  the  public.  The  smallest  part  of  this 
burnt  mass  has  been  carefully  mounted  on  thick  folio  paper,  which  is  cut  away 

*  Catal.  p.  21  r,  212. 


ANGLO-SAXON   MSS.  II.O.  Kl.  xv 

iu  the  niicUllc  to  fit  the  injured  vellum,  and  made  fast  by  transparent  paper, 
gummed  to  the  edges  of  the  paper  and  the  vellum  ;  the  jNIS.  ean,  therefore,  be 
easily  read  on  both  sides.  It  is  now  bound  iu  two  large  folio  vols.  Sir  Frederic 
Madden  tells  us — that  twenty-five  folios  are  lost  since  Wanley  described  it. 
The  first  small  fragment  of  this  MS.  now  remaining  is  from  folio  26,  which  Sir 
F.  Madden  has  marked  as  part  of  St.  Mark  vii.  22.  Such  a  note  deserves  the 
best  thanks  of  all  who  consult  the  MS.  as  it  saves  much  of  their  time.  The 
fragments  increase  a  little  in  size  from  folio  26  to  38.  St.  Luke  is  nearly  com- 
plete, and  occupies  fol.  39-93.  St.  John  fills  fol.  95-135,  and  is  nearly  perfect, 
especially  in  the  latter  part.  There  arc  not  any  rubrical  directions,  and  only 
a  few  badly  formed  capital  letters  of  a  dingy  red  colour  in  this  MS.  The 
accents  are  neither  numerous  nor  carefully  a])plied. 

IV.  H.  The  Hatton  MS.  No.  38  in  the  Bodleian  ^^  Oxford,  is  the  size  of 
a  large  8vo.  and  written  on  vellum,  in  a  very  uniform  and  beautiful,  but  late 
hand,  about  the  time  of  Henry  II.  The  letters  are  so  uniform,  upright,  and 
near  together,  as  to  appear  like  printing  in  facsimile  types.  It  formerly  be- 
longed to  the  Rev.  John  Parker,  son  of  Matthew  Parker,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, who  wrote  his  name  in  red  chalk,  "  lohes  parker,"  on  the  verso  and  top  of 
the  first  fly-leaf.  "Wanley  tells  us  that  the  missing  leaf  Lk.  xvi.  was  neatly 
written  and  inserted  by  Mi'.  Parker.  The  four  Gospels  are  arranged  not  in  the 
usual  order,  but  St.  Matt,  is  placed  after  St.  Luke  ;  thus,  Mark,  Luke,  Matthew, 
and  John.  The  only  Rubric  in  Anglo-Saxon  is  this  at  the  beginning  of  St. 
John, — Her  ongin)>  dset  god  spell  de  Johannes  se  godspellere  gewrat  on  Path- 
mos  dam  ciglande. — The  accents  are  few,  and  capriciously  applied. 

V.  This  MS.  denoted  by  Rl.  is  in  the  Royal  Library,  British  Museum,  I.  A. 
XIV.  It  is  very  similar  to  the  Hatton  in  the  8vo.  size,  but  a  little  smaller. 
The  writing  is  somewhat  earlier  iu  date,  and  less  regular  than  the  Hatton. 
The  Rubrics  are  very  few,  and  of  a  brighter  red  than  the  Hatton.  There  are 
scarcely  any  accents;  yet  Ysaac  is  found  in  fol.  33,  5.  The  four  Gospels  are 
placed  in  this  order, — Mark,  ^latthew,  Luke,  and  John. — St.  Mark  begins, 
Initium  Scl  Euangelii  secundum  Marcura.  Her  ys  Godspelles  angin,  Haleudes 
Cristes  Godes  sune,  swa  awriten  is  on  ]?as  Avitegan  bee  Isaiam.  —  Her  ongind 
^latheus  boc  Jjas  halga  Godspclleres. — Begins,  SoSlice  wel  is  to  understanden  ■f 
ajfter  ]\Iatheus  gerecednysse  her  his  oncneornysse  boc  Htelendes  Cristes  Dauides 
suna. — St.  Luke,  Nu  we  willa5  her  cow  areccen  Lucas  boc  tSa?s  halgan  God- 
spclleres.— JJegins,  ForSam  6e  wytodlice  manega  Jjohtc  l^are  J^inge  wace  ge 
endebyrden  tie  on  us  gefylde  sint,  swa  us  betahten  ])a  j^e  hit  of  frimSe  gesawon, 
and  t5are  sprtece  \>e  nas  wieron. — Then  follows  the  Rubric  to  St.  John  precisely 
as  in  the  Hatton  MS. — This  Royal  MS.  belonged  to  St.  Augustine's  Abbey  t, 
Canterbury.  It  was  also  in  possession  of  Thomas  Cranmer,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  whose  name  is  written  on  the  upper  margin  of  the  first  leaf. 

*  Wanley's  Catal.  p.  76.  t  Ibid.  p.  181. 


xvi  PREFACE. 

VI.  0.  The  Oxford  MS.  in  the  Bodleian,  No.  441,  is  closely  allied  to  the 
best  MSS.  B,  C,  and  Cot.  ;  namely  to  I,  II,  and  III.— This  Oxford  MS.  of  the 
four  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  is  in  small  folio,  written  before  the  Norman  Con- 
quest*, in  a  fine  bold  Anglo-Saxon  character,  and  has  some  vowels  accented. 
The  Bubrics  are  written  in  a  small  and  recent  hand,  between  the  paragraphs  ;. 
or,  for  want  of  room,  in  the  margin.  The  first  six  leaves  of  St.  Mark,  fol. 
57-62,  fol.  90,  fol.  131,  and  fol.  150,  also  the  last  three  leaves  of  St.  John, 
fol.  192-194,  are  written  in  a  small  and  recent  hand  upon  new  parchment, 
with  few  accents.  —  The  first  edition  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  by  John 
Foxe,  in  1 571,  was  printed  from  this  Oxford  MS.  No.  441.  It  was  also  the 
basis  of  the  edition  by  Junius  and  Marshall  in  1665. 

VII.  The  Latin  of  the  Lindisfarne  Gospels,  or  the  Durham  Book,  is  said  to 
have  been  written  about  a.d.  687  by  Eadfrith,  a  monk,  and  the  interlinear  and 
verbal  Anglo-Saxon  Gloss,  by  Aldred  a  Priest,  between  946  and  968.  Both 
Eadfrith  and  Aldred  became  Bishops  of  Durham.     It  is  one  of  our  finest  MSS. 

VIII.  The  Latin  of  the  Bushworth  Gospels  appears  to  be  written  about  the 
end  of  the  7th  century;  and  the  interlinear  and  verbal  Anglo-Saxon  Gloss  of 
the  loth.  The  first  three  Gospels  have  been  published  by  the  Surtees  Society. 
St.  Matthew,  edited  by  the  Kev.  Joseph  Stevenson,  MA.,  8vo.  1854.  St.  Mark 
in  1861,  and  St.  Luke  in  1863,  both  edited  by  Geo,  Waring,  Esq.,  MA. 

Printed  editions. — I.  The  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  were  first  printed,  at 
the  suggestion  and  expense  of  Matthew  Parker,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
under  the  care  of  John  Foxe,  the  Martyrologist,  with  this  title  : — "The  Gospels 
of  the  fower  Euangelistes  translated  in  the  olde  Saxons  tyme  out  of  Latin  into 
the  vulgare  toung  of  the  Saxons,  newly  collected  out  of  Auncient  Monumentes 
of  the  sayd  Saxons,  and  now  published  for  testimonie  of  the  same  at  London. 
Printed  by  John  Daye  dwelling  ovier  Aldersgate.  157 1.  Cum  Friuilegio  Regice 
Maiestatis  per  Becennium."  The  text  is  in  the  clear  and  readable  Anglo-Saxon 
type,  used  by  Daye  in  JElfric's  "  Sermon  on  Easter  day,"  1567 +,  the  first  book 
printed  in  Anglo-Saxon.  The  Anglo-Saxon  occupies  two-thirds  the  width  of 
the  page,  and  the  remaining  third  is  filled  Avith  the  English  Version  of  the 
Bishops'  Bible  in  small  old  English.  Foxe  wrote  the  long  dedication  to  Queen 
Elizabeth.  The  chief  object  for  the  publication  of  these  Gospels  is  thus  stated 
in  the  Preface  : — "  We  haue  published  especially  to  this  end,  that  the  said  boke 
imprinted  thus  in  the  Saxons  letters,  may  remaine  in  the  Church  as  a  profitable 
example,  and  president  of  olde  antiquitie,  to  the  more  confirmation  of  your 
gratious  procedinges  now  in  the  Church  agreable  to  the  same.  Wherin  as  we  haue 
to  see  how  much  we  ai'e  beholden  to  the  i-euerend  and  learned  father  in  God, 
Mattheio  Archbishop  of  Cant,  a  cheefe  and  a  famous  trauailler  in  thys  Church 
of  England,  by  whose  industrious  diligence  and  learned  labours,  this  booke, 

*  Wanley,  p.  64. 

+  See  Origin  of  Eng.  and  Ger.  Language?,  iii.  9,  page  18,  note  *. 


WYCLIFFE.  xvii 

with  otlicis  moe,  Iiatli  bene  collcctod  and  searclied  out  of  the  Saxo7is  IMonu- 
metcs  :  so  likewise  haiie  we  to  vndcrstaiid  and  conccaue,  l)y  the  edition  hereof, 
how  the  religion  presently  taught  and  professed  in  the  Church  at  thys  jn-escnt, 
is  no  new  reformation  of  thinges  lately  begonne,  which  were  not  before,  l)ut 
rather  a  reduction  of  the  Church  to  the  Pristine  state  of  olde  conforniitie, 
which  once  it  had."  (p.  9.) 

II.  A  much  improved  edition  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels*  was  puljlished, 
with  the  Gothic  by  Junius  and  Marshall,  in  1665,  with  the  following  a!iiplc 
title, — Quatuor  D.  N.  Jesu  Christi  Euangeliorum  Versiones  perantiquaj  du:e, 
Gothica  scil.  et  Anglo-Saxonica :  quarum  illam  ex  celeberrimo  Codice  Argenteo 
nunc  primum  depromsit  Franciscus  Junius,  Francisci  filius.  Hanc  autem  ex  Codi- 
cibus  ]\ISS.  eoUatis  eracndatius  reeudi  curavit  Thomas  Mareschallus,  Anglus  : 
cujus  etiam  Observationes  in  utramque  Versionem  subneetuntur. — Accessit  et 
Glossarium  Gothicum  :  cui  prtemittitur  Alphabetum  Gothieum,  Runicum,  etc. 
opera  ejusdem  Francisci  Junii. — Dordreehti.  Typis  et  sumptibus  Junianis. — 
Excudebant  Henricus  et  Joannes  Esspei,  Urbis  Typographi  Ordinarii.  cioioclxv. 

III.  A  very  neat  and  handy  edition  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  appeared 
in  i2mo,  London  1842,  with  this  title — Da  Halgan  Godspel  on  Englisc. — The 
Anglo-Saxon  Version  of  the  holy  Gospels,  edited  from  the  original  manuscripts, 
by  Benjamin  Thorpe,  F.S.A.     London,  Rivington  :  Oxford,  Parker  :    1842. 

One  peculiar  feature  of  the  Ang-lo-Saxon  version  may  be  noticed, 
before  we  speak  of  the  next  translation.  Those  terms,  which  are  adopted 
in  other  versions  from  the  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin,  are  generally 
translated  by  indigenous  Ang-lo-Saxon  compounds,  so  descriptive  as  to 
be  intelligible  to  every  reader.  A  very  few  examples  will  be  sufficient 
to  show  this  principle,  and  the  compositive  power  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
language.  For  Centurion  they  used  hundred-man,  similar  to  the  Lat. 
Centurio  : — Disciple,  leorniug-eniht,  a  learning  youth : — Dropsy,  a  man 
with  the  dropsy  was  called  waeter-seoc-man : — Parable,  bigspel,  a  near 
example  : — Repentance,  dajd-bot,  an  amends-deed : — Resurrection,  £crist, 
a  rising  again : — Sabbath,  reste-dseg,  a  day  of  rest : — Scribe,  boc-ere, 
boc-wer,  a  hook  man  :  —  Synagogue,  gesamnung,  a  congregation :  — 
Treasury,  gold-hord,  gold-hoard. 

WYCLIFFE. — Till  the  discovery  of  printing  in  the  15th  century, 
the  Holy  Scriptures  and  other  writings  could  only  be  published,  or 
made  generally  known,  by  Lectures  and  by  the  slow  process  of  manu- 
scripts. Between  forty  and  fifty  years,  Wycliffe  was  more  or  less 
closely  connected  with  the  University  of  Oxford.  As  Tutor,  Head  of 
*  See  Description  of  this  vol.  in  Gothic,  p.  vii.  No.  I. 


xviii  PREFACE. 

a  College^  and  Professor  of  Divinity^  lie  liad  great  facilities  for  making 
the  Gospel  generally  known.  In  addition  to  the  members  of  noble 
families^  and  men  educated  for  lay  professions^  those  especially  preparing 
for  the  Church  attended  his  Lectures,  and  were  educated  under  his 
superintendence  ;  taking  with  them  into  every  parish  throughout  the 
whole  countr}^,,  the  learning  and  impressions  they  had  received  in  the 
Univer.sity,  giving  lectures  upon  his  principles,  and  often  becoming  his 
willing  agents  in  transcribing  his  works.  The  important  part,  taken 
by  Wycliffe  in  prej)aring  for  the  Reformation  by  the  translation  of 
the  Scriptures,  will  be  best  seen  by  a  short  notice  of  the  chief  incidents 
of  his  life. 

Jolm  Wycliffe  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  1324  at  a  small  village  of 
that  name,  near  Richmond,  in  Yorkshire ;  and,  at  the  age  of  sixteen^ 
to  have  become  one  of  the  first  members  of  Queen^s  College,  founded 
in  1340.  He  was  a  fellow  of  Merton  College  in  1356.  With  much 
natural  talent,  unwearied  assiduity,  and  a  facility  in  acquiring  know- 
ledge, this  diligent  and  unobtrusive  student  gained  in  the  University 
great  reputation  for  his  learning,  and  faithful  friends  by  his  decision 
of  character,  combined  with  kindness  of  heart  and  unassuming  manners. 
He  was  deservedly  popular,  and  was  much  attached  to  Oxford  for  the 
literary  facilities  and  the  uninterrupted  quietude  which  he  could  not  find 
anywhere  so  perfect  as  in  the  University.  During  more  than  twenty 
years  he  gratified  his  insatiable  desire  for  knowledge  on  all  subjects, 
never  neglecting  to  devote  a  specified  time  for  reading  the  Bible,  making 
all  other  knowledge  subservient  to  the  great  object  he  ever  kept  in  view, 
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.  He  read  the  Latin  Fathers 
with  great  care,  and  studied  Aristotle,  the  profound  reasoner  of  the 
Greeks.  As  the  Greek  language  and  literature  were  little  known  and 
almost  forgotten  in  England  before  the  taking  of  Constantinople  by 
the  Turks  in  a.  d.  1453^  when  the  Greeks  fled  for  refuge  to  other 
countries,  where  they  introduced  and  interpreted  the  ancient  Greek 
authors,  Wycliffe  had  not  the  means  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  Greek. 
He  could,  therefore,  study  Aristotle  only  in  the  Latin  translations  and 
commentaries.  Even  with  such  inadequate  assistance  he  became  a  most 
subtle  reasoner,  and  an  unrivalled  disputant,  able  to  encounter  the 
intricacies  of  scholastic  divinity.  His  great  opponent,  the  Chronicler 
Knighton,  admits  that,  while  Wycliffe  was  generally  esteemed  a  most 
eminent  theologian,  he  had  no  equal  in  the  employment  of  the  scholastic 
art  of  disputation. 

About  the  year  1360,   circumstances   occurred  which   called  forth 


WYCLIFFE   OPPOSES   THE   FRIARS.  xix 

AVy differs  extraordinary  talents.  Oxford  was  so  celebrated  as  a  scat 
of  learning-  in  the  reig-n  of  Henry  III.  that  an  immense  number  of 
students  came  to  tlie  University  from  all  parts  of  England  and  i'rom 
the  Continent.  Anthony  Wood,  in  his-  Annals*,  tells  us  they  amounted 
to  thirty  thousand.  When  all  allowance  is  made  for  this  almost  in- 
credible estimate  of  the  students  by  one  of  Oxford's  most  partial 
friends,  it  at  least  indicates  the  popularity  of  the  University.  By 
the  undue  influence  of  the  mendicant  Friars,  the  younger  students  were 
tempted  to  leave  the  Colleges  for  the  Convent,  till  they  are  said 
to  have  been  reduced  to  six  thousand.  The  Church  of  Rome,  to  re- 
vive the  monastic  institutions,  established  the  four  orders  of  Mendicants, 
the  Augustines,  Carmelites,  Dominicans  and  Franciscans.  The  first 
establishment  of  the  Dominicans  was  at  Oxford  in  I22i.  With  other 
privileges,  the  Popes  had  allowed  the  Friars  the  liberty  of  superintending- 
edueation.  They  had  their  own  exempt  jurisdiction;  and,  in  their  un- 
remitted endeavours  to  gain  converts  by  trespassing  on  the  statutes 
of  the  University,  they  were  involved  in  continual  disputes  with  the 
Chancellor  and  Scholars.  The  University  and  the  Church  suffered  so 
much  by  this  interference,  that  a  Convocation  was  assemljled,  and  a  de- 
cree passed,  that  no  youth,  under  the  age  of  eighteen,  should  be  received 
by  the  Friars  into  their  orders.  The  contest  became  so  warm  and 
exasperating,  that  Wycliffe  entered  into  the  defence  of  his  beloved 
University  with  such  zeal,  energy  and  success,  as  to'  confound  the 
Friars.  They  could  not  resist  his  plain  and  honest  reasoning.  He 
overwhelmed  them  by  his  arguments  and  learning,  and  brought  them 
into  popular  disgrace  by  his  pamphlets  on  the  ''  able  beggary "  ab- 
surdly advocated  by  the  Friars. 

The  whole  University  was  gratified  by  this  display  of  Wycliffe's 
energy,  talents  and  learning ;  and,  in  testimony  of  respect  and  gratitude, 
elected  him  Warden  or  Master  of  Balliol  College  or  Hall,  as  it  was  then 
called.  In  the  early  part  of  1361,  he  was  presented  by  his  College  to 
the  valuable  Rectory  of  Fillinghani  in  Lincolnshire,  which  he  afterwards 
exchanged  for  Ludgershall  in  Buckinghamshire,  that  he  might  be  within 
a  few  miles  of  his  numerous  friends  in  the  University.  In  the  year  1365 
Simon  de  Islip,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  appointed  him  Warden  of 
Canterbury  Hall,  now  occupied  by  the  Canterbury  Quadrangle  of  Christ 
Church.  In  1367  he  defended  Edward  III.  in  refusing  to  pay  Pope 
Urban  the  tribute  which  had  been  claimed  ever  since  it  was  exacted 
from  the  weak  King  John.     Wycliffe  wrote  with  such  ability,  and  used 

•  Vol.  i.  p.  2o6;  Baber,  p.  ir. 

C2 


XX 


PREFACE. 


such  convincing  arguments,  as  to  prove,  beyond  any  future  doubt,  the 
illegalit}^  of  the  claim.  The  See  of  Rome  was  silent  but  indignant, 
lookino"  upon  Wycliffe  with  a  jealous  eye,  as  the  cause  of  the  defeat. 
In  Eno-land  this  defence  increased  the  fame  of  its  author,  and  procured 
for  him  the  favourable  regard  of  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  and  both  Houses 
of  Parliament.  Edward  III.  had  previously  made  him  one  of  his 
Chaplains. 

In  1373  Wycliffe  was  gratified  by  obtaining  the  chief  desire  of  his 
heart,  the  election  to  the  Professorship  of  Divinity.  His  whole  life  had 
been  spent  in  preparing  himself  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  duties 
devolving  on  the  Divinity  Professor.  Being  elevated  to  a  Professorship, 
which  enabled  him  to  diffuse  with  authority  that  light  which  had 
already  beamed  on  his  own  mind,  he  used  great  judgment  in  his  lectures 
and  in  the  theological  discussions  over  which  he  presided.  His  experi- 
ence taught  him  that  deep-rooted  principles  and  old  customs  must  be 
treated  with  a  gentle  hand.  His  heart  was  filled  with  piety  towards 
God  and  love  to  man,  which  were  always  manifested  by  his  unaffected 
simplicity  of  manner,  in  language  as  plain  and  expressive  as  it  was 
elegant.  His  lectures  always  attracted  a  large  audience,  as  he  was  ever 
more  desirous  of  correcting  error  by  the  statement  of  truth,  than  by 
direct  and  personal  attacks.  When  he  had  felt  his  way,  and  had 
obtained  numerous  supporters  in  the  University,  the  majority  of  whom 
read  and  studied  the  Scriptures  not  only  critically  but  practically; 
with  such  friends,  he  threw  off  all  reserve  and  spoke  of  vital  religion, 
the  religion  of  the  heart  with  its  practical  results,  and  the  best  means  of 
promoting  them  amongst  the  people.  His  lectures  and  sermons  were 
full  of  the  Scriptures,  forming  short  treatises  on  Divinity,  worthy  of  the 
Oxford  Professor.  He  entertained  a  deep  conviction,  that  the  only  way 
of  promoting  vital  and  practical  religion  in  the  mass  of  the  population, 
was  by  giving  them  the  Word  of  God  in  their  own  tongue.  He  had, 
therefore,  for  some  time  been  engaged  in  translating  the  Scriptures  into 
English,  from  the  Latin  Vulgate,  the  authorised  version  of  the  Church 
of  that  day.  Many  of  his  most  able  and  faithful  friends  assisted  him  in 
this  holy  work.  While  he  was  increasing  in  Christian  knowledge,  and 
imparting  it  to  the  common  people,  as  well  as  to  those  numerous 
students  of  the  University  who  attended  his  Lectures  for  the  acquisition 
of  that  scriptural  knowledge,  which  would  enable  them  to  discharge 
faithfully  the  duties  of  parish  Priests  throughout  the  whole  land, — his 
reputation,  his  piety  and  worldly  prosperity  went  hand  in  hand.  His 
past  services  to  the  crown  were  rewarded  in  1374,  by  his  being  presented 


AVVCLIFFE^S    DEATH.  xxi 

to  the  valuable  Reetoiy  of  Lutterworth.  As  ecclesiastics  were  generally 
the  best  educated  men  of  that  time,  and  therefore  well  prepared  to  assist  in 
state  att'airs,  Wycliire  was  employed  by  the  Government  as  a  Diplomatist 
in  several  embassies.  The  See  of  Rome  could  not  forget  the  rebuke  and 
victory  of  Wyeliffe.  Tlioug-h  silent,  Rome  was  ever  watchful  for  an 
opportunity  of  crushing  the  successful  opponent.  Wyeliffe  and  his 
friends  went  on,  with  great  zeal  and  energy,  in  their  work  of  translating 
and  disseminating  the  Scriptures.  As  his  knowledge  of  revelation  in- 
creased, and  his  view  of  divine  truth  was  cleared,  he  manifested  greater 
decision  and  fully  declared  his  religious  opinions.  When  his  friends,  who 
had  supported  him  from  motives  of  state  policy,  saw  that  his  govern- 
ing principle  was  scriptural  truth,  they  forsook  him.  The  See  of  Rome 
seized  the  opportunity,  and  annoyed  and  persecuted  him ;  but  opposition 
could  not  retard  his  work. 

This  brief  notice  must  not  be  lengthened  by  entering  into  details :  it 
is  only  necessary  to  state,  that  Courtne}',  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
under  the  influence  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  with  the  aid  of  the  Aristoc- 
racy and  the  sanction  of  the  timid  Richard  II.,  brought  a  bill  into  the 
House  of  Lords  to  arrest  Wyeliffe  and  his  followers,  "  and  hold  them  in 
"  strong  prison  till  they  justify  themselves  according  to  the  law  and 
"  reason  of  Holy  Church*.''^  As  soon  as  the  Bill  had  passed  the  Lords, 
Courtney  endeavoured  to  carry  it  into  effect.  The  House  of  Commons 
remonstrated  upon  its  illegalit}',  not  having  passed  their  house.  The 
Chancellor  of  the  University  excused  himself  by  declaring-,  that  his  own 
life  and  the  peace  of  the  University  would  be  endangered,  if  W3'clifre 
were  taken.  To  allay  the  fury  of  the  storm,  AVycliffe  thought  it  prudent, 
in  Nov.  1382,  to  retire  to  the  country.  But  persecution  was  so  severe 
and  unrelenting,  that  he  was  compelled  to  descend  from  what  had  been 
his  throne — his  professorial  chair,  and  to  leave  the  University  for  ever. 
He  sought  retirement  at  Lutterworth,  Avhere,  despite  all  opposition  and 
persecution,  he  fearlessly  wrote  in  defence  of  his  doctrines,  and  proceeded 
in  his  work  of  completing  and  revising  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures, 
till  his  death,  on  the  last  day  of  Dec.  1384. 

The  bitter  feeling  and  hostility  of  the  See  of  Rome  did  not  end  with 
Wycliffe's  death,  but  by  a  decree  of  the  Council  of  Constance  his  remains 
were  disinterred  in  1428,  then  burnt  and  the  ashes  cast  into  the  Swift, 
a  streamlet  which  runs  by  Lutterworthf.     But  Wyeliffe  lives,  and  ever 

*  Gibson's  Codex  Jur.  Eccles.  Anglican,  p.  399. 

+  See  Life  of  Wyeliffe  by  Foxe,  1610 :  Lewis,  1720 :  Baber,  1810  :  Le  Bas,  1823  :  Tytler, 
1826:  Vaughan,  1845. 


xxii  PREFACE. 

will  live  in  the  hearts  and  affections  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race^  as  the  first 
translator  of  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures  into  English. 

As  Oxford  was  the  chief  scene  of  Wycliffe's  literary  enjoyment  and 
fame,  the  home  of  his  heart,  a  retreat  which  he  always  sought  with 
pleasure  and  left  with  regret,  it  is  gratifying  to  know  that  Oxford  has 
raised  an  imperishable  monument  to  Wycliffe's  memory  by  publishing, 
at  its  own  expense,  the  splendid  edition  in  4  vols,  4to.  of 

"  The  Holy  Bible,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  with  the  Apoc- 
ryphal Books,  in  the  earliest  English  Versions  made  from  the  Latin  Vulgate 
by  John  "Wycliffe  and  his  Followers  ;  edited  by  the  Rev.  Josiah  Forshall,  F.E.S. 
etc.,  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  and  Sir  Frederic  Madden,  K.H.  F.E.S.  etc., 
Keeper  of  the  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  Oxford,  at  the  University  Press 
1850." 

This  is  one  of  the  best,  most  laborious,  and  accurate  editions  of  any 
early  English  author  I  have  ever  seen.  The  editors  have  examined 
and  described  170  MSS.,  and  selected  and  most  carefully  printed  two  of 
the  best  in  parallel  columns,  the  first  written  before  1390,  and  the 
second  before  1420.  The  Prologues  and  every  available  and  desirable 
information  have  been  given.  A  very  excellent  and  ample  Glossary  is 
appended  to  the  4th  vol.  Altogether,  this  edition  is  the  work  of  sound 
and  ripe  scholars, — an  honour  to  the  University  of  Oxford  and  their 
press,  as  well  as  to  the  literary  veterans,  the  editors.  All  must  acknow- 
ledge with  them,  that  '^they  have  spared  neither  time  nor  pains  to 
render  their  work  complete j'''  especially  when  it  is  known,  that  "A 
considerable  portion  of  their  time,  during  nearly  twenty-two  years,  has 
been  spent  in  accomplishing  their  task.''^ — Vref.  p,  xxxviii. 

Our  text  of  Wycliffe's  Gospels  is  founded  upon  the  first  version  given  in 
this  Oxford  edition  of  1850,  collated  with  the  original  MS.  in  the  Bodleian, 
No.  369  of  the  Douce  Collection.  This  MS.  is  written  on  vellum,  in  large  fol. 
2  cols.  ff.  486  [429  bis],  consisting  of  two  distinct  MSS.,  both  imperfect.  The 
first  is  written  with  marginal  corrections  throughout,  in  three  different  hands, 
all  before  1390*.  The  second  part  of  the  volume,  from  fol.  251  to  the  end, 
containing  the  Text  of  our  Gospels,  is  written  about  the  same  time  as  the 
former,  that  is  before  1390,  say  the  preceding  year  1389,  the  date  I  have 
adopted.  A  facsimile  of  this  MS.,  Matt.  vi.  14,  15,  is  given  in  the  plate  facing 
the  Title.  Sir  F.  Madden  says,  in  Pref  p.  xxi.,  that  "the  version  described  ,  . . . 
is  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  the  work  of  Wycliffe  ;  that  it  is  the  earliest  transla- 
tion of  the  whole  Bible  in  the  English  language,  admits  of  no  reasonable  doubt." 
*  Sir  F.  Madden's  Pref.  p.  1.  No.  87, 


TYNDALE.  xxiii 

Editions  ofWycliffe. — The  numbers  I.  If.  and  III.  were  from  the  text 
before  1420,  adopted  as  the  later  text  iu  the  Oxford  edition  of  1850. 

I.  The  New  Testament  of  Wycliffc  was  first  printed  in  folio,  London  1731, 
by  the  Rev.  John  Lewis,  Minister  of  Margate,  Kent,  with  a  short  Glossary  or 
Explanation  of  the  old  and  obsolete  words  in  Dr.  Wycliffe's  Translation.  Tlic 
text  was  taken  from  two  MSS.,  one  of  which  was  his  own  [now,  1850,  Sir  F. 
Madden  states,  in  the  Bodleian,  Gough,  Eccl.  Top.  5]  and  the  other  the  property 
of  Sir  Edward  Deering,  Bart.,  now,  1850,  of  the  Very  Piev.  Wm.  Conybeai*e, 
dean  of  Llandaff. 

II.  The  Ptev.  Henry  Baber,  M.  A.,  republished  in  4to.,  London  1810,  a 
reprint  of  the  preceding  with  the  following  additions,  which  are  very  valuable, 
and  deserve  the  attention  of  every  scholar.  "  A  short  memoir  of  the  Life, 
Opinions  and  Writings  of  Dr.  Wycliffe  :  an  historical  account  of  the  Saxon 
and  English  vei'sions  of  the  Scriptures  which  have  been  made  previous  to  the 
fifteenth  Century,  The  Glossary  of  Lewis  at  the  end  of  the  vol.  is  corrected 
and  considerably  enlarged."  (p.  v.) 

III.  The  New  Testament  in  the  same  version  as  that  published  by  the 
Rev.  John  Lewis  was  again  published  in  184  t,  from  a  MS.  then  belonging  to 
H.  R.  H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  [now,  1850,  in  the  collection  of  the  earl  of 
Ashburnham,]  by  Messrs.  Bagster,  iu  the  English  Hexapla,  4to.  Lond.  1 84  r . 

IV.  When  the  4to.  edition  of  1850  was  commenced,  Sir  F.  Madden  says, — 
Pi'ef.  p.  i.  note  », — "No  part  of  the  earlier  of  the  two  versions  before  1390  had 
ever  been  printed,  with  the  exception  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  given  by  Dr. 
Adam  Clarke  in  his  commentary  on  the  Bible,  [8  vols.  4to.  Lond.  1810-25,] 
from  a  MS.  in  his  own  library,"  [now  Brit.  Mus.  Eg.  618,  619]. 

V.  In  1848,  the  New  Testament  in  the  earlier  version,  was  printed  by 
Mr.  Lea  Wilson,  from  a  MS.  in  his  own  possession,  [now,  1850,  in  the  hands 
of  the  earl  of  Ashburnham,]  under  the  title  The  New  Testament  in  English, 
translated  by  John  WycUffe,  circa  MCCCLXXX.  etc.  4to.  Lond. 

TYNDALE. — The  mind  cannot  be  fettered  by  man,  however  power- 
ful. We  yearn  for  freedom  of  heart  and  soul.  All  the  gifts  of  God  are 
as  free  as  the  light  of  the  sun.  So  is  the  light  of  his  divine  revela- 
tion free  to  all.  By  the  light  of  the  divine  word  man  sees  and  knows 
the  truth,  and  the  truth  makes  him  free*.     Free  from  the  thraldom  of 

evil and  to  do  good.     His  freedom  is  not  for  selfishness,  dissension  and 

strife,  but  for  order,  harmony  and  truth.  At  particular  times,  we  see  a 
man  raised  up,  whose  love  for  truth  is  so  great,  that  it  frees  him  from 
all  fear  of  evil  and  even  from  the  fear  of  death,  when  put  in  competition 

»  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  [^  oA^Otia  iXtuBepuxTfi  vficis]  the  truth  shall  make  you 
free."    St.  John  viii.  32. 


xxiv  PREFACE. 

with  truth.     Such  was  William  Tyndale,  as  will  be  seen  by  a  few  par- 
ticulars of  his  life.     William  Tyndale^  the  second  of  three  sons  of  John 
Tyndale  of  Hunt^s  Court,  in  the  parish  of  North  Nibley,  in  Gloucester- 
shire,  is  said  to  have  been  born  there  about  the  year  1484.    He  descended 
from  Hugh  Baron  de  Tyndale.     At  an  early  age  he  was  sent  to  Oxford. 
John  Foxe  tells  us,  Wm.  Tyndale  "  was  brought  up  from  a  child  in  the 
University  of  Oxford,  where  he  by  long  continuance  grew  up  and  in- 
creased, as  well  in  the  knowledge  of  tongues  and  other  liberal  arts ;  as 
sj)ecially  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  whereunto  his  mind  was 
singularly  addicted ;  insomuch  that  he  read  privily  to  certain  students 
and  fellows  of  Magdalen  College  some  parcel  of  divinity.     His  manners 
and   conversation    were    such    that   all,   who    knew   him,    reputed   and 
esteemed  him  to  be  a  man  of  most  virtuous  disposition  and  of  life  un- 
spotted.    Thus  he  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  increasing  more  and 
more  in  learning,  and  proceeding  in  degrees  of  the  schools,  sj)ying  his 
time,  removed  from  thence  to  the  University  of  Cambridge.''^     He  pro- 
bably went  to  Cambridge  with  the  view  of  profiting  by  the  instruction 
of  Erasmus,  who  lectured  on  the  Greek  language  in  that  University, 
from  1509  till  the  beginning  of  1514.     At  Cambridge  he  formed  an 
acquaintance  with  a  young  and  diligent  student,  John  Frith,  who  after- 
wards assisted  him  in  his  translation  of  the  New  Testament.     It  must 
have  been  about  151 8,  in  his  thirty-fourth  year,  when,  as  Foxe  tells  us, 
Tyndale  "  had  made  his  abode  a  certain  space  now  further  ripened  in 
the  knowledge  of  God^s  word,  leaving  that  University  also,  he  resorted 
to  one  Maister  Welch,  a  knight  of  Gloucestershire,  and  was  there  school- 
maister  to  his  children,  and  in  good  favour  with  his  maister."     This  was 
Sir  John  Welch,  of  Little  Sodbury,  at  whose  house  Tyndale  held  many 
dispvites  on  religious  subjects  with  the  clerical  dignitaries  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, who  frequented  Sir  John^s  table.     This  brought  him  into  so 
much  danger,  that  he  deemed  it  prudent  to  leave  the  country  and  go  to 
London. 

It  is  difficult  to  fix  the  time  of  his  ordination ;  we  only  know  that, 
after  preaching  at  St.  Dunstan^s  in  the  West  the  same  earnest  and 
practical  sermons  delivered  in  the  country,  he  attempted  to  obtain 
the  patronage  of  Tonstall,  Bishop  of  London,  by  sending  his  translation 
of  the  Attic  Greek  Orator,  Isocrates.  He  was  unsuccessful,  as  the 
Bishop''s  palace  was  full;  but  an  eminent  merchant,  Humfrey  Monmouth, 
a  favourer  of  Luther,  admitted  him  into  his  house ;  and  when  Tyndale 
"^  understode  at  the  laste,  not  only  that  there  was  no  rowme  in  my  lorde 
of  london^s  palace  to  translate  the  new  testament,  but  also  that  there 


TYN DALE'S   NEAV   TEST.  1536.  xxv 

was  no  place  to  do  it  in  all  cuglonde/'  [Prol.  to  Pcntateucli,  1530,]  he 
determined  to  go  to  German}-.  His  friend  Monmouth  settled  upon 
him  an  annuity  of  ten  pounds,  about  J^'150  of  our  money,  and  paid  his 
passage  that  he  might  live  abroad  and  finish  his  translation  of  the  New 
Testament  from  Greek  into  English.  lie  is  said  to  have  gone  to  Witten- 
berg to  confer  with  Luther,  who  j)ublished  in  1522  his  lii-st  edition  of 
his  New  Testament  in  German.  Tyndale  and  his  friend  John  Frith 
were  driven  from  place  to  place,  till  at  last  they  settled  in  the  free 
impei-ial  city  of  Worms  on  the  Rhine,  where  Tj-ndale's  first  edition  of 
the  New  Testament  was  printed  at  the  end  of  1525  or  in  the  early  part 
of  1526,  in  very  small  octavo. 

The  beautiful  facsimile  edition  of  Mr.  Francis  Fry,  F.S.A.,  has  been  noticed 
and  tlie  full  title  given  in  the  notes  on  Tyiulalc's  translation*.  He  has  taken 
so  much  pains  to  acquire  accurate  informatiou,  as  to  the  printer,  the  place  and 
the  date  of  this  first  edition  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament,  that  I  gladly  refer 
to  his  satisfactory  introduction,  illustrated  by  facsimiles.  I  have  only  room 
for  a  very  brief  summary.  Peter  Schoffer  on  Ijecoming  a  Lutheran,  found  it 
necessary  to  leave  Maycncc,  and  to  settle  in  the  free  city  of  Worms  in  1^12. 
Fourteen  works  printed  by  Schoffer  from  1518  to  1529,  seven  of  which  have  the 
imprint  Worms,  have  been  carefully  compared  with  the  capital  letters,  the  three 
sizes  of  type,  the  woodcut  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  numerals  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  Tyndale,  and  they  perfectly  accord.  Not  only  the  type,  but  the  length 
of  the  lines  and  their  number  in  each  page,  are  exactly  the  same  in  the  two 
German  editions  of  the  Prophets  as  in  Tyndale's  Testament.  The  water-marks 
in  the  paper  are  also  the  same.  If  then  the  same  type,  the  length  and  the 
number  of  lines  in  a  page,  the  same  woodcut  and  water-mark  are  found  in  the 
other  works  of  Schoffer,  printed  at  Worms,  as  in  Tyndale's  New  Testament  of 
1526,  can  there  be  any  reasonable  doubt  that  it  was  printed  at  Worms  by 
Peter  Schoffer,  corroborated  as  this  inference  is  by  the  Lutheran  profession  of 
Schoffer,  and  the  residence  of  Tyndale  at  Worms  1  Thei-e  is  not  any  date  in 
the  Testament ;  but,  as  Cochljeus  caused  Tyndale  to  fiee  to  Worms  in  the 
middle  of  1525,  and  the  Testament  was  printed  there  iunnediately  after,  we 
may  conclude  it  was  published  by  the  end  of  that  year,  or  the  beginning  of  the 
next,  as  it  was  sold  in  Oxfoi-d  "before  the  7th  of  Feb.  i526t." 

There  is  an  imperfect  copy  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  of  1526  in  the 
Library  of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  The  only  copy  known  to  exist,  perfect  from 
the  beginning  of  St.  Matt,  to  the  end  of  Revelation,  is  in  the  Baptist's  College, 
Bristol.  Of  this  Bristol  copy,  IMr.  Fry  has  taken  a  very  correct  facsimile, 
which  was  made  on  tracing  paper,   transferred  to   stone,   and   printed.     The 

*  Notes,  p.  584.  t  Anderson's  Annals  of  the  English  Bible,  vol.  i.  p.  93. 


xxvi  PREFACE. 

whole  lithographic  impression  consists  of  one  hundred  and  seventy-seven  copies, 
of  which  twenty-six  are  in  4to. 

Our  gratitude  is  due  to  the  free  city  of  Worms,  for  the  protection 
of  Tyndale,  while  printing'  the  first  edition  of  his  New  Testament.  In 
England^s  days  of  darkness  and  persecution,  on  the  false  plea  of  religion, 
which,  when  pure,  and  under  the  mild  and  sympathizing  influence  of 
the  Gospel,  abhors  tyranny,  we  are  deeply  indebted  to  Hamburg  and 
other  free  cities  of  Germany ;  and,  in  after  times  of  still  greater  gloom, 
to  Holland  and  Switzerland  for  their  friendly  reception  and  protection 
of  our  refugee  countrymen,  when  their  lives  were  imperilled  at  home,  for 
conscientiously  adhering  to  those  truths  which  they  had  learned  from 
the  Scriptures.  In  these  free  cities  and  states,  our  countrymen  were 
received  as  brethren,  with  honour, — their  talents  and  learning  acknow- 
ledged, and  their  works  printed  and  published.  Though  Tyndale  had 
the  reputation  of  being  well  versed  in  modern  as  well  as  ancient  lan- 
guages, we  should  not  have  known  the  extent  of  his  lingual  acquire- 
ments, nor  whether  the  first  impression  of  his  New  Testament  was 
large  or  small,  if  the  following  facts  in  the  year  1536  had  not  been  re- 
corded, by  the  friendly  hand  of  a  foreigner,  in  the  diary  of  Spalatinus, 
secretary  of  Frederic,  the  elector  of  Saxony,  and  supporter  of  Luther. 
Von  Busche,  Professor  of  Hebrew  in  the  University  of  Marburg,  a  per- 
sonal friend  of  Tyndale,  "  told  us  that  six  thousand  copies  of  the  New 
Testament  in  the  English  language  had  been  printed  at  Worms;  and 
that  this  translation  had  been  made  by  an  Englishman,  sojourning  there 
with  two  other  natives  of  England,  who  was  so  skilled  in  seven  lan- 
guages, Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  Spanish,  English,  and  German, 
that  whichever  he  might  be  speaking,  you  would  think  it  to  be  his 
native  tongue"^." 

The  quarto  translation  with  notes,  partly  printed  at  Cologne,  was 
finished  at  Worms  in  1526,  as  well  as  the  very  small  octavo  already- 
described.  The  Dutch  booksellers  found  such  ready  sale  for  Tyndale's 
translation,  that  they  issued  several  editions,  without  any  correction  or 
supervision  of  the  translator,  who  is  supposed  to  have  gone  to  Hamburg 
after  1526  to  obtain  the  best  Hebrew  criticism,  from  the  learned  Jews  in 
that  city,  and  to  correct  what  he  had  translated  of  the  Old  Testament 
by  the  original  Hebrew.  There  he  met  with  Miles  Coverdale,  who 
assisted  him  in  translating  the  five  books  of  Moses  into  English^  printed 

*  Schelhoruii  Amcenitates  Literarise,  torn.  iv.  p.  431.     Excerpta  qusedam  e  diario  Geo. 
Spalatini. 


TYNDALE'S   MARTYRDOM.  xxvii 

by  the  Hamburg  press  in  1530.  Tyndalc's  Eng-lisli  version  of  Jonah 
issued  from  the  same  press  in  1531.  We  next  hear  of  Tyndale  at  Ant- 
werp, where  he  found  a  faithful  friend  in  Thomas  Poyntz,  an  EngUsh 
merchant,  who  cordially  received  him  into  his  house.  While  residing 
in  this  respected  family,  besides  preaching  to  the  English  residents,  he 
most  carefully  revised  his  translation  of  the  New  Testament,  and  in 
)  334,  after  the  lapse  of  eight  years,  published  it  with  this  title  : — 

The  Newe  Testament,  dylygently  corrected  and  compared  with  tlic  Greke 
by  "Willyani  Tindale  :  and  fynesshed  in  the  yere  of  oui-e  Lovde  God  anno  M.D. 
and  XXXIIII.  in  the  nioueth  of  Nouember. — Then  follows.  "  W.  T.  vnto  the 
Reader.  Here  thou  liast  (moost  deare  I'eader)  the  New  Testament,  or  covenaunt 
made  wyth  us  of  God  in  Christes  blonde.  Which  I  have  looked  over  agayne 
(now  at  the  last),  with  all  dylygence,  and  compared  it  vnto  the  Greke,  and  have 
weded  oute  of  it  many  fautes,  wliich  lackc  of  lielpe  at  the  begynniuge  and 
oversyght  dyd  sowe  tlierin." 

Tyndale's  translation  of  the  Scriptures  had  been  denounced  by  public 
authority  in  England;  and,  by  an  imperial  decree  promulgated  at  the 
diet  of  Augsburg  in  1530,  persons  accused  of  heresy  could  be  seized  and 
cast  into  prison.  Those  who  opposed  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in 
the  language  of  the  people  were  enraged  when  they  saw  the  increased 
supply  of  the  English  version;  and,  availing  themselves  of  the  imperial 
decree,  they  employed  secret  influence  and  agency  for  the  capture  of 
Tyndale.  Henr}^  Philips  was  sent  to  Antwerp,  who,  under  the  guise 
of  friendship,  inveigled  him  from  the  house  of  Poj^ntz  in  August  1535, 
and  then  delivered  him  into  the  hands  of  the  officers,  sent  to  apprehend 
him  as  a  denounced  heretic.  Tyndale  was  at  once  conveyed  to  the 
Castle  of  Yilvoord,  about  eighteen  miles  from  Antwerj).  Though  great 
efforts  were  made  for  his  liberation,  they  were  all  ineffectual ;  for,  after 
being  confined  in  prison  more  than  a  year,  he  was  brought  to  trial;  and 
"  at  last,^""  says  Foxe,  "  he  was  condemned  by  virtue  of  the  Emperor's 
deci-ee,  made  in  the  assembly  at  Augsburg ;  and  upon  the  same  brought 
forth  to  the  place  of  execution ;  was  there  tied  to  a  stake ;  and  then  first 
strangled  by  the  hangman,  and  afterward  with  fire  consumed,  in  the 
morning  [* of  October  6th],  at  the  town  of  Vilvoord,  in  the  year  1536, 
when  he  was  about  the  age  of  fifty-two.  Thus  much  of  William  T^-ndale, 
who,  for  his  notable  pains  and  travail,  may  be  worthily  called  an  apostle 
of  England." 

*  The  date  in  Foxe's  Calendar.     See  Walter's  Biographical  Notice,  p.  Ixxiv,  prefixed  to 
the  Works  of  Tyndale,  8vo.  1848. 


xxviii  PREFACE. 

Thoug-h  Henry  VIII  did  not  appear  to  have  any  connection  with 
carrying"  into  effect  tliis  arbitrary^  unjust  and  cruel  decree,  Tyndale 
earnestly  and  with  a  loud  voice  pra}'ed  at  the  stake — "  Lord !  open  the 
King  of  England's  eyes  \" — The  prayer  of  the  dying  martyr  was  heard; 
for,  before  the  close  of  1536,  the  first  volume  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in 
English  ever  printed  in  this  country,  the  folio  edition  of  the  '^New 
Testamentj  issued  from  the  press  of  the  king's  own  printer/ with  the  name 
of  William  Tyndale  on  the  title.  Nay  more,  when  what  is  generally 
called  Mattheio's  Blhle  was  published  in  1537,  the  king  gave  his  royal 
^'  Licence  that  the  same  may  be  sold,  and  read  of  every  person,  Avithout 
^'  danger  of  any  act,  proclamation,  or  ordinance  heretofore  granted  to 
"  the  contrary/'  This  Bible  received  its  designation  from  the  name  of 
Thomas  Matthew  being  given  on  the  title-page.  It  was  chiefly  a  repub- 
lication of  Tyndale's  version ;  but  those  parts  of  the  Old  Testament, 
which  he  did  not  live  to  translate,  were  taken  from  Coverdale's  Bible  of 
1535.  The  New  Testament  of  Tjaidale  had  been  in  circulation  for  eleven 
years ;  and  it  was  the  best  translation  and  popular,  because  the  language 
was  familiar  to  the  .people.  Some  of  the  Prologues  and  notes  of  T^'udale 
had  been  introduced  into  Matthew's  Bible,  and  given  offence  and  raised 
opposition.  To  remove  these  objections  Archbishop  Cranmer,  with  the 
king's  sanction,  proposed  the  publication  of  the  whole  Bible  without 
note  or  comment.  He  had  the  translation  of  Tyndale  copied,  and  sent 
in  portions  to  the  Bishops  for  their  correction,  and  then  to  be  returned 
to  him  for  his  final  revision.  This  version  was  published  in  1539,  and 
is  known  as  Cranmer' s,  or  the  Great  Bille,  the  first  that  was  authorized 
"  to  be  sett  up  in  summe  convenyent  j^lace  within  the  churche,  whereat 
the  parishners  may  rede  yt."  The  Great  Bible  was  the  authorized 
version  in  the  reign  of  Henry  and  Edward;  and,  after  the  death  of 
Mary,  it  was  authorized  by  Elizabeth,  and  continued  in  general  use  till 
superseded  by  the  revised  edition  of  1568  under  the  superintendence  of 
Archbishop  Parker,  assisted  by  the  most  learned  Bishops,  hence  called 
the  BlsJwjjs'  Bible.  The  first  rule,  recommended  by  King  James  I.  in 
the  preparation  of  our  present  authorized  version  of  1611,  was  this, — 
"  The  ordinary  Bible  read  in  the  Church,  commonly  called  the  Bishops' 
"  Bible,  to  be  followed,  and  as  little  altered  as  the  original  will  permit." 
From  this  very  brief  detail,  it  appears  that  our  present  English  Version 
was  based  upon  the  Bishops'  Bible  of  1568,  and  that  upon  Cranmer's  of 
1539,  which  was  a  new  edition  of  Matthew's  Bible  of  1537,  partly  from 
Coverdale  of  1535^  ^^^t  chiefly  from  Tjndale ;  in  other  words,  that  our 
*  A  copy  is  in  the  Bodleian. 


ESTIMATION   OF   TYNDALE'S   VERSION,     xxix 

present  authorized  translation  is  mainly  that  of  T3n(lale,  made  from 
the  orig-inal  Hebrew  and  Greek.  It  has  stood  the  test  of  the  severest 
criticism,  from  his  last  revision  to  the  present  time,  without  material 
alteration;  because  Tyndale,  haviufj^  a  critical  knowledj^e  of  Hebrew  and 
•Greek  and  deep  Christian  experience,  caug-ht  the  very  spirit  of  the 
original,  and  gave  the  impression  of  it  in  plain,  idiomatic  English.  His 
style  is  easy,  correct  and  vigorous.  His  translation  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  a  fine  specimen  of  our  language,  in  what  may  be  called  the  first 
stage  of  maturity.  It  is  the  foundation  of  our  siandanl  translation,  which 
is  also  the  standard  of  our  language.  He  avoids  Latin  derivatives,  and 
generally  uses  indig*enous  words,  the  strong  and  expressive  Saxon  terms, 
known  by  all  the  people.  In  this  respect  our  version  happily  follows 
him.  Tyndale  ti'anslates  Tr]v  ayaTrrjv  tov  0eoi;,  Lk.  xi.  42,  the  love  of 
God,  which  our  established  version  has  adopted ;  but  WyclifTe  has  the 
charite  of  God,  from  the  Vulgate  chariiafem  Del.  Our  translators  seldom 
depart  from  Tyndale,  but  when  they  do,  in  a  particular  word,  the  spirit 
of  the  passage  is  often  lost;  for  instance,  in  i  Cor.  xiii.  13,  Tyndale  has, 
— Noice  abideth  fai/th,  hope  and  lore,  even  these  ihre  ;  hut  the  chefe  of  these 
is  love  \r]  dyoTTj]].  Love  is  divine  affection  in  the  soul,  for  God  is  love 
[ort  6  0eos  ayavri  eoriy].  Faith  in  the  Saviour  is  the  foundation  of  good 
works,  hope  raises  the  snpter structure,  and  love  completes  and  crowns  it 
in  eternity.  Faith  works  by  love,  and  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law 
\TiKr]p(i>lia  vofxov  v;  aydin]].  The  perfection  of  a  good  work  is,  that  it 
springs  from  love.  Every  Christian  knows  this  to  be  his  ruling  prin- 
ciple. We  have  an  illustration  of  it  in  filial  love.  How  different  is  the 
feeling  and  conduct  of  an  affectionate  child  from  that  of  a  servant !  The 
child,  influenced  by  love,  is  unwearied  in  attention,  and  the  only  hope  is 
an  increase  oi  mutual  affection;  while  the  servant^s  constraining  principle 
is  naturally  the  hope  of  material  wages.  Thus,  while  Christian  love  is 
the  constraining  principle  of  action  here,  and  the  fulfilling  of  the  law, 
when  our  present yaiM  is  lost  in  sight,  and  hope  in  enjoyment,  this  aya-nr] 
will  continue,  and  increase  throughovit  eternity. — Now,  if  this  be  the 
literal  and  true  meaning  of  St.  PauFs  Greek,  let  love  be  substituted  for 
charity,  wherever  it  occurs  in  i  Cor.  xiii.,  as  it  is  in  Tyndale  1526,  fol- 
lowed by  Coverdale  1535,  Matthew  1537,  Archbishop  Cranmer  1539, 
and  Parker  1568, — and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  love  is  more  in 
accordance  with  the  scoi^e  of  the  chapter  than  charity,  and  that  Tyndale's 
last  clause, — the  chefe  of  these  is  love,  is  far  better  than  the  Vulgate  major 
horum  est  charitas,  or  than  Wycliffe^s, — the  moost  of  thes  is  charite,  or 
even  than  our  version, — the  greatest  of  these  is  charity. 


XXX  PREFACE. 

Before  I  close  my  Preface^  I  must  have  the  pleasure  of  alluding" 
to  the  friendly  assistance  I  have  received  in  the  preparation  and  printing" 
of  these  Gospels.  First,  and  most  of  all,  I  am  deeply  indebted  to 
George  Waring,  Esq.,  M.A.,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  Mag- 
dalen Hall,  Oxford,  whose  contributions  to  Anglo-Saxon  philology  as 
editor,  for  the  Surtees  Society,  of  the  Lindisfarne  and  Rushworth  Glosses, 
are  already  before  the  public.  Many  years  ago  the  text  of  the  Gothic 
and  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  had  been  very  carefully  transcribed,  and  the 
Anfflo-Saxon  collated  with  the  oldest  and  best  MSS.  The  final  revision 
had  been  long  deferred  in  consequence  of  other  pressing  engagements 
and  failing  sight,  till  all  impediments  were  removed  in  the  early  part 
of  1864  by  my  friend,  who  made  an  arrangement  with  the  Publisher  to 
take  the  responsibility  of  preparing  my  transcript  for  the  press,  and 

seeing  it  accurately  printed : of  harmonizing  the  division  of  verses, 

and  the  punctuation  of  the  Gothic,  Anglo-Saxon,  and  the  translation 
of  Tyndale  with  Wycliffe  and  our  authorized  version  :  and  of  regulating, 
as  far  as  possible,  the  accents,  which  indicate  the  long  sound  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  vowels  over  which  they  are  placed.  The  accent  on 
diphthongs  is  here  omitted,  except  when  found  in  "the  MSS.,  as  it  was 
not  employed  by  Dr.  Grimm  and  others  to  denote  the  length  of  the 
vowel,  but  merely  to  indicate  the  etymological  origin  of  the  accented 
vowel.  Every  accent  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  text,  therefore,  denotes  the 
long  sound  of  the  vowel  over  which  it  is  placed,  and  the  diphthongs 
eo,  ea,  etc.  are  accented  exactly  as  in  B.  or  in  C. 

As  the  simplicity  of  Anglo-Saxon  accentuation  has  frequently  been  over- 
looked, or  involved  in  a  complicated  system,  it  will  tend  to  remove  false  im- 
pressions, and  to  make  the  matter  clear,  by  recollecting  that  the  Anglo-Saxons 
only  used  one  accent,  Avhich  always  indicated  the  long  sound  of  the  vowel  over 
which  it  was  placed.  Our  complicated  system  of  English  voavcLs  arose  from 
the  Norman  scribes,  who  first  confused  the  Anglo-Saxon  accents,  and  then 
attempted  to  supply  their  place  by  a  multiplicity  of  vowels,  which  Ave  have 
adopted,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  following  examples  : — Owen  a  cween,  fet  feet, 
ges  geese,  etc.  : — Die  a  dike,  lie  like,  lim  litne,  win  wine,  etc.  : — Boc  a  hook,  f5r 
fore,  hefore,  god  good,  gos  a  goose,  etc.  : — Du  thoti,  hii  how,  bus  a  house,  mus 
a  mouse,  etc.  : — Bryd  a  bride,  fyr  fre,  mys  mice.  In  all  these  instances  the 
Anglo-Saxon  is  quite  plain  and  consistent,  expressing  the  same  sound  by  the 
same  accented  vowel,  while  the  English  employs  different  vowels  for  the  same 
purpose,  as  in  cween,  geese  ; — good,  goose,  fore ; — thoM,  hoio,  house,  and  mouse. 
The  greatest  complication  of  vowels  is  seen  in  our  expression  of  the  long  open 
sound  of  0,  heard  in  no  and  bone.     We  use  oe,  oa,  and  o  with  a  silent  final  e. 


ANG.-SAX.   ACCENTS:   AND   p,  D.  xxxi 

vhile  the  Anglo-Saxons,  in  all  cases,  merely  accented  the  a,  as, — Da  a  doc,  fa 
a  foe,  ta  a  toe,  etc. — Bat  a  boat,  ac  an  oak,  fam  foam,  etc. — Ban  a  bone,  staa 
a  stone,  etc.  This  superabundant  employment  of  English  vowels  is  troublesome 
to  natives,  and  most  perplexing  to  foreigners.  On  the  contrary,  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  system  of  accenting  the  long  vowels  is  plain  and  definite.  Mr.  AVaring 
has  been  guided  by  these  general  principles  in  accenting  the  Anglo-Saxon,  but 
Gothic  words  have  not  been  accented,  because  not  a  single  accent  has  been 
found  in  Cod.  Arg.  Every  possible  care  has,  however,  been  taken  to  secure 
the  greatest  verbal  accuracy  in  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-Saxon  texts,  as  well  as 
in  the  other  two. 

I  believe  jNIr.  "NYaring'  has  exerted  himself  to  the  uttermost  to  fulfil 
his  eng-ag-ementj  and  I  have  devoted  a  far  longer  time  to  the  work 
than  I  anticipated  would  be  at  my  disposal.  Neither  labour  nor  expense 
has  been  spared^  when  either  could  be  profitably  employed  to  benefit 
the  work.  I  have,  therefore,  not  only  willingly  assisted  in  preparing 
the  MS,  for  the  press,  collated  the  B  text  with  the  C,  but  I  have 
carefully  read  over  every  proof  twice  and  the  revise  once,  after  being 
read  in  the  same  manner  by  Mr.  Waring,  and  by  a  friend ;  every  sheet 
has,  therefore,  been  carefully  read  over  at  least  nine  times. 

Mr.  Waring  suggested  and  superintended  the  placing  of  )>  and  d,  or  the 
hard  and  soft  sound  of  our  modern  th,  as  they  are  used  in  all  parts  of  England 
at  the  present  day.  Though  in  our  numerous  provincial  Dialects  almost 
every  letter  has  a  diversity  of  sounds,  I  believe  there  is  greater  uniformity 
in  the  hard  and  soft  sound  of  our  th, — the  Anglo-Saxou  ]>  and  d, — than  in 
any  other  letters.  As  the  true  archaism  of  our  good  old  English  and  its 
nervous  energy  are  retained  in  the  provincial  Dialects  of  our  Island*,  I  have 
no  doubt  the  original  and  genuine  hard  and  soft  sounds  of  the  Ano-lo-Saxon 
J)  and  d  have  been  transmitted  to  us  by  the  secluded  peasantry  of  our  rural 
districts,  and  confirmed  by  those  educated  in  our  Universities  and  towns.. 
The  only  way  then  of  i-ecovering  the  right  sound  of  ]>  and  d,  and  of  correctly 
applying  these  characters  in  writing  and  printing  Anglo-Saxon,  is  to  adopt 
the  true  English  sound  of  these  letters.  If  the  two  distinct  sounds  of  our 
modern  th  have  been  faithfully  conveyed  to  us,  we  only  ascend  to  Anglo-Saxon 
times  and  re-adopt  their  rational  system  by  using  their  two  distinct  characters 
for  these  two  distinct  sounds.  The  Norman  scribes  could  not  distinguish 
between  the  hard  and  soft  sound  of  ]>  and  d  ;  they  therefore,  in  ^vritino-  Aii^lo- 
Saxon,  confounded  them,  using  the  one  or  the  other  without  any  apparent 
distinction.     Some  scribes  only  employed  S  or  d,  which  is  the  same  letter 

*  See  Origin  of  the  English  and  Germanic  Languages,  part  iii.  §  19,  p.  •26. 


xxxii  PREFACE. 

in  a  modified  form,  as  in  the  Ilushworth  Gloss,  Avliicli  discards  the  use  of  \> 
altogethei-  in  St.  Mark,  Luke,  and  John.  Hence  the  th  for  both  sounds  in 
modern  English,  to  the  confusion  of  foreigners.  Our  pi-esent  printed  Anglo- 
Saxon  text,  indicating  the  true,  the  distinct  hard  and  soft  sound  of  th  by  ]>  and 
d,  will  be  a  great  assistance  to  foreigners,  in  showing  the  correct  pronunciation 
of  th,  in  English  words  cognate  with  the  Anglo-Saxon. 

The  hard,  sharp,  or  acute  sound  of  the  English  th  in  thm  and  sooth,  is 
represented  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  p  and  ]> ;  the  soft,  flat,  or  grave  sound  of  TH 
in  THine  and  sooTHe  is  represented  by  D,  d  or  8. 

For  ascertaining  the  hai'd  and  soft  sound  of  th,  equally  applicable  to  English 
and  Anglo-Saxon,  are  given  the  following  general 

EULES. 

I.  The  hard,  sharp  or  acute  p  or  \>,  is  used  in  the  heginning  of  all  words, 
not  pronominal,  as  )?incan  to  <Aink,  j^in  thm. 

a.  And  at  the  end  of  radical  and  inflectional  terminations,  as  bsej)  a  ba<^, 
cla])  c\oth,  s6]j  sooth,  })incj>  thinketh.     Except  wicl  wIth,  etc. 

b.  And  sometimes  when  th  is  preceded  or  followed  by  a  consonant,  as 
cmb})encan  to  thmh.  about ;  ej^nes  easiness  ;  jjritig  thirty. 

II.  The  soft,  flat  or  grave  D,  d  or  'h  is  used  in  the  beginning  of  all 
pronouns  and  of  all  words  derived  from  pronouns,  as  ctset  THat ;  de  THe ; 
■dseslic  like  Tuis,  danonne  inence,  daerdser  THere. 

a.  Also  often  between  two  vowels,  as  badu  baTHs,  badlan  to  baTHe,  cladum 
with  cloTHes. 

These  Rules  are  in  jierfect  accordance  with  those  given  in  our  best  works 
on  orthoepy. 

Ill  the  printing  department,  we  have  had  the  most  willing-  assistance 
and  co-operation  from  all  engaged  in  the  work  at  the  University  Press, 
to  whom  our  thanks  are  due. 

To  the  Master  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  Dr.  Pulling, 
to  the  Rev.  Henry  Oetavius  Coxe,  M.  A.,  Librarian,  and  to  the  Assistant- 
Librarians  of  the  Bodleian,  Oxford,  I  am  greatly  indebted,  for  the  most 
ready  and  friendly  assistance,  in  the  consultation  and  use  of  MSS.  under 
their  care.  Though  I  had  carefully  collated  the  whole  of  the  Bene't,  or 
Corpus  MS.  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels,  with  my  own  coj)y,  in  1832, 
and  examined  it  again  in  1841,  I  have  frequently  had  to  consult  it 
since  1850.  While  the  stringent  regulations,  made  by  Archbishop 
Parker,  for  the  preservation  of  the  MSS.  and  printed  books  left  to 
'Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  have  been  observed,  the  Master, 
Dr.  Pullingj  and  the  Fellows  of  the  College,  have  had  the  happy  art 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT   OF  ASSISTANCE.       xxxiii 

of  giving"  every  facility,  in  so  friendly  a  manner  as  to  avoid  the  least 
appearance  of  conferring-  a  favour.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Dr.  Guest, 
jNIaster  of  Caius  College,  who  has  most  kindly  removed  doubts  by 
consulting  the  MS.  My  best  and  most  willing  acknowledgments  are 
due  to  the  Rev.  J.  E.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Librarian  of  the  University 
of  Cambridge,  and  to  Henry  Bradshaw,  Esq.,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  King'tj 
College,  for  their  ready  assistance  in  procuring  a  Grace  of  the  Senate 
to  take  out  of  the  Library  one  of  their  treasures,  the  MS.  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  Gospels.  I  have,  therefore,  had  the  great  advantage  cf 
the  unrestrained  possession  and  use  of  this  MS.  for  reference,  during 
the  time  the  Anglo-Saxon  text  has  been  passing  through  the  Oxford. 
University  Press. 


r.  B. 


Oxford ;  June  2'jihf  1865. 


THE   CHIEF    CONTRACTIONS. 


«.  aft<>r  a  number,  denotes  the  i;:lit 
hnnd  pn^e,  recto  i  and  b,  the  left  bftnd 
pa^e,  verto, 

a  indicates  the  first  word  in  a  verso, 
1=2,  (•=3,  .f=4  etc.  to  2=26:  06  denoto 
words  1  and  2,  rd=3  and  4:  a-d  denote 
the  words  from  1  to  4,  both  inclusive :  dd 
Indicnto  n  donljle  alphaljet,  i.  e.  Vi  letters 
of  one  olphalx't,  and  d=:4  of  the  next 
or  2'  +  4=30,  the  nnmber  of  the  word 
In  the  vers-'.  Thus,  in  Notes,  p.  571, 
col.  ?.  l.V=chap.  V.  Terse  15;  n=5,  the 
fifth  word  in  verse  15. 

Are-  or  Arg.  v.  Cod.  Arg. 

A.S.  Anglo-Saxon. 

IS  The  Bene't  or  Oorp.  Christl  K8.  T. 
Fr« f.  p. xliLtl. 

b.T.a. 

(,  T.  a. 


C  The  Csmbridge  MS.  v.  Prcf.  p.  xlil. 

5U. 
Cast.  Mni.  Count  Castigliono  and  An- 

gelo  Mai,  T.  Aotes,  p.  571 :  v.  3  and 

vii.  28e. 
Cod.  Ars.  Codex  Argentcus,  T.  Tref. 

p.  iv-ix. 
Cod.  Aus.  Codex  Aujnstinius  Bodl.  D. 

2.  11. 
Col.  Column. 

Corp.  Coriius  Christi  CoU.  Camb.  v.  B. 
Cot.  Cotton,  T.  Tref.  p.  ilv.  }  iil, 
D.  2. 11,  v.  Cod.  Aug. 
etc.  or  etc.  et  csotcra. 
Fol.  or  fol.  folio  or  leaf. 
3=5r,  gh  and  y, 
Qab.  Lijb.  (iabolontz  and  LObe,  T,  Prof. 

p.  viii.  i  Til. 
Ork.  Greek. 


H.  or  Hat.  The  llntton  MS.T.  Pref.  p.  tr. 

i.  e.  id  eit, 

Jn.  St.  John's  Gospel. 

lik.  St.  Luko. 

Moss.  JIassman,  v.  Pref.  p.  li.  }  i. 

Jilt.  St.  Mnrl£. 

Mt.  St.  Matthew. 

0.  Tho  Oxford  JIS.  v.  Pref.  p.  xvi.  '.  vL 

Kl.  Eoyal  MS.  v.  Prcf.  p.  xv.  ',  v. 

Rush,  or  Eushw.  Kushworth,  v.  Pref. 


p.  XVI. 


:  W. 


Skeir.  Skeiroins,  v.  Pref.  p.  ^ 

Upps.  UppstrOm's  Cod.  Arg.  4to.  Upp- 
sala 1.17»-18.'j7,  t.  Notes,  p.  570. 

Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  T.  Notes,  p.  570. 

v.  vido,  see. 

Vt  t.  Ital.  'Ilio  Old  Italic  Version,  T. 
Pref.  p.  xi. 

w.  wanted  or  omitted  In  MS8, 


xxxiv  THE  GOTHIC  FACSIMILE  A.* 

•M^-  n  N  T  e  9  A^^  Ai  AJ^^sT^i  +  ^1 A^^  Am 

MD.      UNTE        YABAI        AFLETIp        MANNAM 
xliv.      Enim  si  remittitis  hominibus 

MI  s  s /id^  ed^it^  Si 'z,e/L]zAe^i^gA^ 

MISSADEDINS  IZE,      AFLETIp       YAH 

transgressiones  eorum,  remittit  et 

i^xyiSATTAixvAKSAnj^AKhiMiHA^ 

IZWIS    ATTA    IZWAR    SA  UFAR  HIMINAM. 
vobis        pater        vester         6      super  coelis. 

'i^  qA^^Ai^i  AJ^^sti^^mAwn  AmmiS 

ip     YABAI    NI     AFLETIp      MANNAM    MIS- 
Autem     si        non       remittitis  hominibus      trans- 

SA^sOiiNSi'ze.Ni^A^A'T^TA'Ti'^ 

SADEDINS  iZE,    NI    pAU      ATTA     I  Z- 

gressiones  eormn,        neque  pater        ves- 

VAKAJ^AGTiti^MissA^sOLiNSixyA 

WAR     AFLETIp       MISSADEDINS     IZWA- 
ter  remittit  transgressiones  vest- 

.M6-  KXS: A^^^AJ^^i^^ej^ASTAi^NiyAiK- 

ME.     ROS.     AppAN      BIpE     FASTAIp,    NI  WAIR- 
xlv.         tras.  Autem         quum         jejiinatis,       non      fia- 

3Iatt.  vi.  14-16,  V.  Aljjhahet, p.  xxxvi. 
ANGLO-SAXOX,  THE  BEKE'T  OE   CORP.  MS.   B.f 

nun^e'  ac  alyy  uv  oj:  yye^lc  ro|?lice';  picot)licc'  ^y^ 

cos^nuiige,     ac     alys    us     of     yfele     so]?lice.       Witodlice    gyf 
iemip-tation,    hut  hose    us  from  evil.      Amen.  Verily,        if 

■^<t  y.o^(l■^y^^a^  mannu  Hyjia  yy una  \on  yoyi  '^'yy^ 
ge       forgyfad       mannum     hyra       synna    )?onne     forgyfp 
ye        forgive  men         their       sins,       then    forgiveth 

efopeji    yef  }v€oytn\ica  yct'^cyi  e'er  e'cpjie'    ^ylrav; 

eower       se       Leofenlica         feeder      cow     eowre       gyltas. 
your        \  heavenly        father     you,     your         guilt. 

Gyr  ^e'  yo^  lice'  ne  yoyi'^yya^  mannil.  ne'  doyen  ycz 

Gyf     ge     sodlice     ne      forgyfad      mannum,   ne    eower    fse- 
If      ye     soothly  forgive  not       men,    neither  your  fa- 

t)e|i  ne  yoyi-^yy'^  efor  doyyid  yynna-, 
der     ne      forpyfd     eow    eowre     synna. 
trier  jorgivetli   you,    your       sins.  \pref  p  xiii 


THE  ANGLO-SAXON  FACSIMILE  C.  ||  xxxv 

on  coyznun^e:-  ac  alyy  uy  oy  y|:de'.  |-o^lice'-    yiuot)lice' 

m      costnunge,      ac     alys    us    of     yfele.      sodlice.         Witodlice 
5^f   5^  ^o)i5i|:ab''  mannu   KCojia  yynna-    |?onne'    ^o|i 
?it'     ge       forgiilid       mannmn      heora        synna,        Jjonne      f'or- 
5ij:e^   c'o^eji    ye!    hcoycnlica   yctX)cy,    dov   e'op]tC    51I- 
,^ilect        eower      se        heofenlica         fseder       eow     eowre      gil- 
:ay'  ^ly  ^e!  yo^Slice!  ne:  ^o|i5i|:a(5'  mannu-   nd  c'o^cp 
^s.        gif     ge      sodlice      ne       forgifad       maiinum,     ne     eower 
:cet)eji  ne'  |:oji  5y|:^  e'oj-  e'c^pe'  yynna-    Dyy  5e'  bypab" 
seder       ne      forgyfd      eow    eowTe      syniia.         Dys      gebyrad  "''"•• 

3Iatt,  vi.  13-15,  V.  Pre/,  p.  xiii,  §  ii. 
WYCLIFFE.   D. 

yuel  amen .  ]?at  is  so  be  it  /  forsoJ?e 
5if  5ee  shulen  for3eue  to  men  her 
synnys  :  &  3oure  heuenly  fadir.  shal 
for3eue  to  50U  3oure  trespassis  /  so 
J^ely  3if  300  sliulen  for3eue  not  to 
men :  neif>  3oure  fadir  shal  for3eue 
to  30U  3om'e  synnes.    But  when  306 

Matt.  \i.  13-16.  Pref.  p.  xx". 

TYNDALE.  E. 
tem_pfa-cion  .  Ibut  deljvre  vs  ffrom  yvell  /  Amen.  For  ad 
yfF  yeshall  forgeve  other  men  there  treaspases  / 
youre  father  I  heve  shal  also  forgeve  you .  but  ad 
ye  wyll  not  forgeve  men  there  trespases  /  nomo^ 
re  shall  youre  father  forgeve  youre  treaspases. 

Moreovre  when  ye  faste  /  be  not  sad  as  the  y# 
poeryts  are.  For  they  disfigure  there  faces  /  that 
hit  myg-ht  apere  vnto  men  that  they  foste.  Vere? 
]y  y  say  vnto  you  /  they  have  there  rewarde.  But 
thou  /  who  thou  fastest  /  anoynte  thyneheed  /  ad 

McUt.  vi.  13-17. 

*  V.  Facsimile  facing  the  Title:  and  Preface,  p.  vi.  vii.  t  v.  Notes,  p.  574.  col.  i ;  and 

«f»pe,  p.  xiii.  +  Verbally,  ihe  heavenly  Father  of  you.  \\  The  Cambridge  MS. :  v.  Preface, 

xiii.  §  ii.     The  verbal  English  of  C  is  given  in  the  preceding  example,  marked  B.  **  The  Rubric: 

the  entire   Rubric,  in  Notes,  p.  575,  col.  I.  Matt.  vi.  i6a)     The  literal  English  of  this  Rubric  is,  Tbts 
hngeth  to  the  head  of  the  fast  on  Wednesday. 


XXX  vi 


GOTHIC 


A 

6 

h 

K 
A 

M 
H 

9^ 
n 

n 

[H] 

)^ 

S 
T 

Y^ 
)^ 

X' 


A 
B 
G 
D 
E 
Q 
Z 
H 

IP 
I 
K 
L 


Y 

U 
P 

R 

S 

T 

W 

F 


a 
b 

g 
d 
e 

q 

z 

h 

i 

k 
1 


M      m 

N      n 


y 
11 

p 

r 

s 
t 
w 

f 


CH   ch 
WH  wh 
O       o 


10'^ 
20 

30 

40 

50 
60 
70 
80 
90 

100 

200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 


i\'wto  on  the  Gulhic  Ali,habct. 

*  The  Gothic  alphabet  is  evidently 
formed  from  the  Cjreek.  It  was  first 
used  by  Ulphilas  about  a.  d.  360.  See 
Facsimile,  and  Preface,  p.  Hi. 

"  Most  of  the  Gothic  letters  have  the 
same  sound  as  their  English  representa- 
tives ;  but,  as  in  Greek  so  in  Gothic, 
g  has  always  a  hard  sound,  as  in  give ; 
and  g  before  another  g,  or  before  1<,  has 
the  sound  of  n  :  thus,  Lk.  i.  11,  aggilus, 
an  angel,  is  pronounced  angilus,  as  the 
Grk.  0776X0$  :  Lk.  v.  21,  j'agkyan,  to 
thinh,  is  pronounced  thankyan. 

^  Is  represented  by  our  q  sounded  as 
kw,  thus  qens  a  wife,  Lk.  i.  18,  is  pro- 
nounced hveens. 

*  Our  indefinite  th  would  have  been 
used,  but  the  A.  S.  J)  was  necessary  to 
distinguish  ip  from  th  as  separate  letters 
in  such  words  as  athaitands,  Lk.  vii.  19. 

^  As  ya  yea,  yuk  a  yoke. 

®  As  oy  between  two  consonants. 

''  The  hard  ch  as  the  Grk.  x- 

8  As  in  wheila  while,  whan  when ;  hw 
could  not  be  used,  as  hw  occur  as  separate 
letters  in  hwssopo,  pronounced  hoyssopo, 
Skeir.  p.  179. 


ANGLO-SAXON. 

Form  Sound 


1/1=11: 


R/i=2i:  Hr= 

a88:  J: Ax  =537- 


Koles  on  the  Anglo-Saxon  Alphabet. 

Enq-.    Ang.-Sax. 
Vowels.   Vowels. 

o  as  0  in  cock. 

a  as  o  in  coke. 

o  as  00  in  cook. 

fu  as  ii  in  f;dl. 

U-!  ^  ■     r    1 

[u  as  oil  in  loul. 


a  as  a  m  man. 

a;''  as  ai  in  main 
fe  as  e  in  met. 
I  X  as  ea  in  meat 
[e  as  ee  in  meet. 
Ji  as  i  in  wm. 
\i  as  i  i 


gy 


fy  as_>'  in  lyfaj>. 
\y  asy  in  lyf  life. 


D,  d,  ^  have  the  sound  of  th  in  thine 
and  soothe.  See  p.  xxxii. 

■^  p,  ]?  have  the  sound  of  th  in  thin 
and  sooth.  See  p.  xxxii. 

Note — The  accent,  in  Anglo-Saxon, 
indicates  the  long  vowels  [see  notes  b_g 
and  p.  xxx]  and  must  not  be  confounded 
with  syllabic  emphasis,  or  the  stress  of  the 
voice,  which  falls  upon  the  chief  syllable 
in  a  word.  This  emphasis,  in  Gothic  and 
Anglo-Saxon,  is  always  upon  the  first 
radical  syllable  of  a  word,  and  never 
upon  prefixes,  such  as  a,  be,  ge,  etc. 


3'A 

B 

EC 

ee 

FF 

EG 

Hb 

I 

K 

L 


a 
b 
c 

ee' 

\ 

5 
H 

I 
I 


COM  m 
NH    n 

0 


P 

Q 
R 
5X 

HZ 

IX 

VY 

;c 

y 


c 

V 

r 

z 
II 

rr 

X 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 

I 

K 

L 

M 

N 

O 

P 

Q 

R 

S 

T 

U 


W  w 
X    X 

Y    y^ 
Z     z 
Ai  ai 

y  y  that:  *!  and. 


•^  ^  ^>0   U  <3^.^ 


^  <^  xj 

^C  o  t:  ^  ^   J3^^  o 
o  u  tj  t:  «^«^'*  ?:  S  ^ 


< 

a 

2:   ;r  oci*-  J-.  *^5^;2 

S  S-^it^**— **  O  fc*  o  o 


000 


_;  «*  l1  ^ 


5^t 


^B^^bS'^g 


ti 


^    ;i   iV    o    ^  ^5^  "* 

r  k^-t£.  ^  ^  St 


ARGENTEUS  A 


'l^C^B)llNI^]:N6TI^MfkHNjlMHIS 


ANGLO-SAXON    B. 


w 


(ryjc^  -pod  Lice- ncp]ig>'-pa^  irjannti-ne-  WPertpe- 


J»i«  W  a-W 


AMoLiJ    SAXtJU    C 


51P  .{cc  rBiifcn  fSutue  t*>  tucu  Rci» 
rv-nnvS  '.  -?^  ?oinM  fcucuR-  ^hiv.  (^af 

It<;^;:;ip^<te  ftTut^i  fbi^ciic  nol"  to 
mat.-  iicty  ^Owrt'  FaturJ^drf^^jcitc 
1r  -^cm  ^'^nrc   rynncdf|Ful-1|!f)cii^^(i 


clon.butbcl■yDie^)sffromv»dl''2(m<•n.#ola^ 
I'ffycfballfojgcweotljcrmcntbErctreafprtfea/ 
yourefatlieril)i«>cfhalalfofoiaeoe)>ou.butati 
pc  tnyll  11  et  f otgcw  men  tbcrcfrcfpafcs  'nomo^ 
refbalIvimrcfatl;crfojact!cvcuwtreaft>afea, 
itTolcooiCtDlJcnyefafle  bciiotfoti as  Ortcy, 
pccrj'rfaTc.#ojtlKvt'ifftjjurctben:fa«B.  that 
hit  mygt)' iipere  tjmomtntbaf  thcvfdfle  ,t)cre' 
Ijivfaytintovou  tbcvbaDCtbcrcrciDarOcBut 
thou   w()c tijou  fajtefl/  ano'j>ntetJi)>iwljee?>/d6 


THE 


FOUR    GOSPELS. 


GOTHIC:       ANGLO-SAXON;     Yy^YCLIFFE:        TYNDALE: 


AlWAGGELYO 
})airh 

MAKKU,  LCKAN, 

yah 
iOKANNEN : 


Translated  from 

THE    GREEK, 

by 

ULrniLAS. 

15ishop  of 

TUE  ilOESO-GOTHS, 

between 

A-  D.  34S  and  388, 

about 

A.D.  3!;o. 


DA   FEOWER 

CRISTES  EEC, 

on 

Engliscum 

ffereorde : 


Translated  from  the 
VETUS     ITALICA, 

and  printed  chiefly 

from  a  MS. 

written  between 

A.D.  090  £jid  A.  I).  1050; 

probably  about 
A.  I).  905. 


THE 

GOSPEL 

of 

MATHEU, 
MARK,    LLKE, 

and 

JOO.V 

in  Englische  : 

Translated  from  the 
LATIN    VULGATE, 

by 

JOHN  WYCLIFFE. 

and  printed 

from 

a  manuscript, 

written 

about 

A.  D.  1389. 


THE 

GOSPELL 
of 

8.  MATHEW, 
S.  MARKE,    8.  LUKE, 

and 
S.  IHOK  : 


Translated  IVom 

THE    GREEK, 

by 

WILLIAM  TYXDALE. 

and  printed 

from 

the  first  edition, 

published 


A.  D.  1S26. 


AIWAGGELYO  + 

))AIRH 

MAPPAIU 


HER  OXGIXNEp 

DMT  G6DSPELL+ 

^FTER 

MATHEUS   GERECEDNYSSE. 


Is  wanting  till  Chapter  F,  1 5  :  except 
a  few  verses  and  fragments  of  verses,  the 
sources  of  which  are  indicated  in  the 
notes  ^. 


^Befers  to  the  Chapter  and  Verse  of  the  Notes 
at  the  end  of  the  Volume,  helonging  to  that 
Version,  and  the  Word  of  the  Verse  after  which 
the  t  stands. 


Chap.  I.  i  Her  is  on  cneorisse  boc 
Hselendes  Cristes,  Dauides  suna,  Abra- 
bames  suna. 

2  S5})lice  Abrabam  gestrynde  Isaac. 
Isaac  gestrynde  lacob.  lacob  gestrynde 
ludani  and  bis  gebrodra. 

3  ludas  gestrynde  Pbai^es  and  Zaram, 
of  dam  wife  de  wses  genemned  Tbamar. 
Pbares  gestrynde  Esrom.  Esrom  ge- 
strynde Aram. 

4  Aram  gestiynde  Aminadab. '  Ami- 
nadab  gestrynde  Naason.  jN'aason  ge- 
stiynde Salmon. 

5  Salmon  gestrynde  Booz,  of  dam  wife 
Raab.  Booz  gestrynde  Obetb,  of  dam 
wife  Rutb.     Obetb  gestrynde  lesse. 

6  lease  gestrynde  done  cyning  Dauid. 
Dauid  cyning  gestrynde  Salomon,  of  dam 
wife  de  waes  Urias  wif. 

7  Salomon  gestrynde  Roboam.  Roboas 
gestiynde  Abiam.     Abia  gestrynde  Asa. 

8  Asa  gestrynde  losapbatb.  Tosapbatb 
gestiynde  loram.   loras  gestrynde  Oziam. 

9  Ozias  gestrynde  loatbam.  loatbam 
gestiynde  Acbaz.  Acbaz  gestrynde  Eze- 
cbiam. 

I  o  Ezecbias  gestrynde  Mannasen.  Man- 
nases  gestiynde  Amon.  Amon  ge- 
strynde losiam. 

I I  losias  gestrynde  lecboniam  and  bis 
gebrodru,  on  Babilonis  geleorednysse. 

1 2  And  sefter  Babilonys  geleorednysse, 
lecbonias  gestiynde  Salatbiel.  Salatbiel 
gestrynde  Zorobabel. 


HEEEE  BIGTNXETH 

THE    GOSPEL 

OF 

M  A  T  H  E  U. 


THE 

GOSPELL 

OF 

S.    MATHEW. 


Chap.  I.  i  The  boke  of  generacioun 
of  Jliesu  Ci-ist,  the  soue  of  Dauyd,  the 
sone  of  Abraham. 

2  xVbraham  gendride'''  Ysaac.  Ysaac 
forsothc  bigate  Jacob.  Jacob  forsothe 
bigate  Judas  and  his  bretheren. 

3  Judas  forsotlie  bigate  Phares  and 
Zaram,  of  Thamar.  Phares  forsothe 
bigate  Esrom.  Esrom  forsothe  bigate 
Aram. 

4  Aram  forsothe  bigate  Amynadab. 
Amynadab  forsothe  bigate  N'ason.  Xa- 
son  forsothe  bigate  Sahnon. 

I  5  Salmon  forsothe  bigate  Booz,  of  Raab. 
Booz  forsothe  bigate  Obeth,  of  Ruth. 
j  Obeth  forsothe  bigate  Gesse. 
I  6  Jesse  forsothe  bigate  Dauith  the  kyng. 
'Dauith  forsothe  kyng  bigate  Salomon, 
,  of  that  loomman  that  was  Uries  wjif. 

7  Salomon  forsothe  bigate  Ro'boam. 
Eoboam  forsothe  bigat  Abias.  Abias 
forsothe  bigate  Asa. 

8  Asa  forsothe  bigate  Josophat.  Jo- 
sophat  forsothe  bigate  Joram.  Joram 
forsothe  bigate  Osias. 

9  Osias  forsothe  bigate  Joathan.  Jo- 
athan  forsothe  bigate  Achaz.  Achaz 
forsothe  bigate  Ezechie. 

10  Ezechie  forsothe  bigate  Manasses. 
Manasses  forsothe  bigate  Amon.  Amon 
forsothe  bigate  Josias. 

1 1  Josias  forsothe  bigate  Jechonyas  and 
his  bretheren,  in  to  transmigracyoun  of 
Babiloyne. 

12  And  after  the  transmygracyoun  of 
Babilo}Tie,  Jechonias  bigate  Salatiel.  Sa- 
hatiel  forsothe  bigate  Zorobabel. 


Chap.  I,  i  Tys  is  the  boke  off  the 
generacion  off  Jhesus  Christ,  the  sonne 
of  David,  the  sonne  also  of  Abraham. 

2  Abraham  begat  Isaac.  Isaac  begat 
Jacob.  Jacob  begat  Judas  and  hys 
brethren. 

3  Judas  begat  Phares  and  Zaram,  off 
Thamar.  Phares  begat  Esrom.  Esrom 
begat  Aram. 

4  Aram  begat  Aminadab.   Aminadab 

begat  Naassou.     Naasson  begat  Salmon. 

5  Salmon  begat  Boos,  of  Rahab.  Boos 
begat  Obed,  of  Ruth.   Obed  begat  Jesse. 

6  Jesse  begat  David  the  kynge.  David 
the  kynge  begat  Solomon,  of  her  that 
was  the  wyfe  of  Ury. 

7  Solomon  begat  Roboam.  Roboam 
begat  Abia.     Abia  begat  Asa. 

8  Asa  begat  Josaphat.  Josaphat  begat 
Joram.     Joram  begat  Osias. 

9  Osias  begat  Joatham.  Joatham  begat 
Acbas.     Achas  begat  Ezechias. 

10  Ezechias  begat  Manasses.  ^fanasses 
begat  Amon.     Amon  begat  Josias. 

1 1  Josias  begat  Jechonias  and  hys 
brethren,  aboute  the  tyme  of  the  cap- 
tivete  of  Babilon. 

12  After  they  wer  ledd  captive  to 
Babilon,  Jechonias  begat  Salathiel.  Sa- 
lathiel  begat  Zorobabel . 

B  2 


GOTHIC,  360. 


namo  is  Jfsu 


gabairijj  sunu,  yali  Laitais 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

13  Zorobabel  gestrynde  Abiud.  Ablud 
gestiynde  Eliachim.  Eliachim  gestrynde 
Azor. 

1 4  Azor  gestrynde  Sadoc.  Sadoc  ge- 
strynde Achim.  Achim  gestrynde  Eliud. 

15  Eliud  gestrynde  Eleazar.  Eleazar 
gestrynde  Mathan.  Mathan  gestrynde 
lacob. 

16  lacob  gesti-ynde  loseph,  Marian 
wer,  of  dsere  w£fis  acenned  se  Hselend, 
de  is  genemned  Crist. 

17  Eornostlice    ealle    cneoressa    fram 
Abrabame  ocl  Dauid   synd   feowertyne    , 
cneoressa,  and  fram  Dauide  od  Babilo-   ] 
nis  geleorednysse  feowertyne  cneoressa, 
and   fram    Babilonis    geleorednesse   od 
Crist  feowertyne  cneoressa  ^ 

18  S5)jlice  dus  wses  Cristes  encores. 
Da  dajs  Hselendes  modor,  Maria,  wais 
losepe  beweddod,  ser  bi  to  somne  be- 
comun,  beo  wses  gemet  on  innode  boeb- 
bende  of  dam  Halegan  Gaste. 

19  S6))lice  losep,  byre  wer,  da  be 
wses  ribtwis,  and  nolde  hi  gewidmsersian, 
be  wolde  bi  dihlice  fori  ^  tan. 

20  Him  da  soj^lice  das  j^ing  pencen- 
dum,  Dribtnes  engel  on  swefnum  setj' wde, 
and  him  to  cwsejj,  losep,  Dauides  sunu, 
nelle  du  ondrsedan  Marian,  dine  gemeec- 
cean,  to  onfonne  ;  dset  on  byre  acenned 
ys  byt  ys  of  dam  Halgan  Gaste. 

21  Witodlice  beo  cenjj  sunu,  and  dii 
nemst  bys  naman  Hselend  :  He  s5t)lice 
hys  folc  hal  gedejj  fram  byra  synnum. 

22  S5|)lice  eal  dys  wses  geworden,  d.-fit 
gefylled  wsere,  daet  fram  Drihtne  ge- 
cweden  waes  j^urb  done  witegan. 

23  S5)5lice  !  seo  fgemne  ha?fj)  on  innode, 
and  beo  cen|)  sunu,  and  hi  nemna]?  his 
naman  Emanuhel,  dset  ys  gerebt  on  ure 
gejjcode,  God  mid  us. 

24  Da  aras  losep  of  swefene,  and  dyde 
swa  Dribtnes  engel  him  behead,  and 
be  onfeng  bys  gemseccean  ; 

25  And  he  ne  grette  hi,  [od  doet]t  beo 
cende  byre  frum-cennedau  sunu,  and 
nemde  bys  naman  Hselend.^ 


I.  13-25.]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

13  Zorobabel  forsothe  bepite  Abyul. 
Abyut  forsotbe  bygate  EHaeliiin.  Elia- 
chym  forsotbe  bigate  Asor. 

14  Asor  forsotbe  l)igate  Sadoc.  Sadoo 
forsotbe  bygate  Acbym.  Acbym  forsothe 
bygate  Elyut. 

15  Elyut  forsotbe  bygate  Eleasar.  Elca- 
sar  forsotbe  bigate  Mathan.  Matbaii 
forsotbe  bigate  Jacob. 

16  Jacob  forsotbe  bigate  Joseph,  the 
busboml  of  jNIarie,  of  wliiclie  Marie  Jesus 
is  born,  that  is  clcpid  Crist. 

1 7  And  so  alle  generaciouns  from  Abia- 
liain  til  to  Dauith  ben  fourtene  gene- 
raciouns, and  fro  Dauith  vnto  trans- 
mygraciouu  of  Eabiloyne  hen  fourtene 
generaciouns,  and  from  the  transmygra- 
cioun  of  Ijabiloyne  vnto  Crist  hen  four- 
tene generaciouns. 

1 8  Forsoth  the  generacioun  of  Crist  was 
thus.  Wbane  Marie,  his  modir,  was 
spousid  to  Joseph,  bifore  that  thei  shul- 
den  come  to  gidre,  she  is  foundun  hau- 
ynge  in  the  wombe  of  the  Holy  Gost. 

19  Joseph  forsothe,  bir  husbond,  when 
he  was  iust  man,^  and  wolde  not  pup- 
liche'*'  hir,  wolde  priuyly  forsake  hire. 

20  Sotbely  hym  thenkynge  these 
thingus,  lo  !  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ape- 
ride  in  sleepe'''  to  hym,  sayinge,  Joseph, 
the  sone  of  Dauyd,  nyl  thou  drede  to 
take  Marie,  thi  wyf  ;  forsothe  that  thing 
that  is  born  in  hire  is  of  the  Holy  Goost. 

21  Sothely  she  shal  here  a  sone,  ar-d 
thou  shalt  clepe  bis  name  Jesus  ;  for  he 
shal  make  his  peple  saif  fro  her  synnes 

22  Forsoiheal  this  thing  was  don,  t'lat 
it  shulde  be  fulHllid,  that  thing  that  was 
seid  by  a  prophete,  seiynge, 

23  Loo  !  a  virgyne  shal  haue  in  wombe, 
and  she  shal  here  a  sone,  and  his  name 
slial  be  clepid  Emanuel,  that  is  inter- 
pretid,^  God  with  us. 

24  Sothely  Joseph  rysynge  vp  fro  sleep, 
did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  comaundid«> 
hym,  and  toke  his  wijf  ; 

25  And  he  knewe  hir  nat,  til  she  had 
boren  hir  first  bygotcn  sone,  and  clcpiac 
his  name  Jhesus. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  5 

13  Zorobabel  begat  Abiud.  Abiud  be- 
gat Eliacbim.     Eliachim  begat  Azor. 

14  Azor  begat  Sadoc.  Sadoc  begat 
Achin.     Achiu  begat  Eliud. 

15  Eliud  begat  Eleasar.  Eleasar  be- 
gat Matthan.     Matthan  begat  Jacob. 

1 6  Jacob  begat  Joseph,  the  husbande 
off  Mary,  of  whome  was  boren  that  Jhe- 
sus, which  is  called  Christ. 

17  All  the  generacions  from  Abraham 
to  David  are  fowretene  generacions, 
and  from  David  vnto  the  captivete  of 
Babilon  are  fowrtene  generacions,  and 
from  the  captivete  of  Babilon  vnto 
Christ  are  also  fowrtene  generacions. 

1 8  The  byrthe  off  Christe  was  on  thys 
wyse.  When  hys  mother,  Mary,  was 
maryed  vnto  Joseph,  before  they  cam  to 
dwell  togedder,  she  was  founde  with 
chylde  by  the  Holy  Goost. 

19  Then  her  husbande,  Joseph,  beinge 
a  parfect  man,  and  loth  to  defame  her, 
was  mynded  to  put  her  awaye  secretly. 

20  Whill  he  thus  thought,  behold  !  the 
angell  of  the  Lord  apered  vnto  him 
in  slepe,  sainge,  Joseph,  the  sonne  of 
David,  feare  not  to  take  vnto  the  Mary, 
thy  w}'fe  ;  for  that  which  is  conceaved 
in  her  is  of  the  Holy  Goost. 

21  She  shall  brynge  forthe  a  sonne, 
and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  ;  for 
he  shall  save  his  people  from  theire 
synnes. 

22  All  thys  was  done  to  fulfill  that 
which  was  spoken  of  the  lorde  be  the 
prophet,  saynge, 

23  Bebolde !  a  mayde  shalbe  with 
chylde,  and  shall  brynge  forthe  a  sonne, 
and  they  shall  call  his  name  Emanuel, 
which  is  as  moche  to  saye  be  interpreta- 
cion,  as  God  with  vs. 

24  Joseph  as  sone  as  he  awoke  out 
of  slepe,  did  as  the  angell  off  the  Lorde 
bade  him,  and  toke  hys  wyfe  vnto  hym  ; 

25  And  knewe  her  not,  tyll  she  had 
brought  forth  her  fyrst  sonne,  and  called 
hys  name  Jesus. 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  II.  i  Eornustlice  da  se  Hcelend 
acenned  \v£es  on  ludeiscre  Bethleem,  on 
dees  cyninges  dagum  Herodes,  da  comon 
da  tungol-witegan  fram  east-dsele  to 
Hierusalem, 

2  And  cwsedon,  Hwser  ys  se,  ludea 
cyuing  de  acenned  ys  1  s5|)lice  we  ge- 
sawon  hys  steorran  on  east-dsele,  and  we 
comon  us  him  to  ge-eadmedenne. 

3  Da  Herodes  dset  gehyrde  da  wear]) 
he  gedrefed,  and  eal  Hierosolim-waru 
mid  him. 

4  And  da  gegaderode  Herodes  ealle 
ealdras  daera  sacerda,  and  folces  writeras, 
and  axode,  hwser  Crist  acenned  wsere. 

5  Da  SEedon  hi  him,  On  ludeiscere 
Bethlem  ;  witodlice  dus  ys  awi'iten  jjurh 
done  witegan, 

6  And  du,  Bethleem,  ludea  land,  witod- 
lice ne  eart  du  Isest  on  luda  ealdrum ; 
of  de  forjj-gsejj  se  here-toga,  se  de  recj) 
min  folc  Israhel. 

7  Herodes  da  clypode  on  sunder- 
sprsece  da  tungel-witegan,  and  befran  hi 
georne  hwsenne  se  steorra  him  a:teowde. 

8  And  he  asende  hi  to  Bethlem,  and 
dus  cwEe{),  Fara]?,  and  axiaj)  geornlice  be 
dam  cilde,  and  donne  ge  hyt  gemeta)?, 
cyda|)  eft  me,  diet  ic  cume  and  me  to 
him  gebidde. 

9  Da  hi  dset  gebod  gehyrdon,  da  fer- 
don  hi.  And  s5|)lice  !  se  steorra,  de  hi 
on  east-dsele  gesawon,  him  bef5ran  ferde, 
od  he  stod  ofer,  dser  dset  cild  wses. 

10  Sojjlice  da,  da  tungel-witegan  done 
steoi'ran  gesawon,  [hig]  "•"  fsegenodon 
swyde  myclum  gefean. 

1 1  And  ganggende  into  dam  huse,  hi 
gemetton  dset  cild  mid  Marian,  hys  me- 
der  ;  and  hi  a);enedon  hi,  and  hi  to  hirn 
gebsedon.  And  hi  untyndon  hyra  gold- 
hordas,  and  him  lac  brohton,  dcet  wses 
gold,  and  recels,  and  myrre. 

1 2  And  hi  afengon  andsware  on  swef- 
num,  dset  hi  eft  to  Herode  ne  hAvyrfdon, 
ac  hi  on  oderne  weg  on  hyra  rice  ferdon.''' 

J  3  Da  hi  da  ferdon,  da  sety  wde  Drihtnes 


U.  1-13.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Chap.  II.  i  Thcrforc  when  Jhcsus 
was  born  in  Bothlem  of  Juda,  in  the  days 
of  kjng  Herode,  loo  !  kyngis^  camen  fro 
the  eest  to  Jerusalem, 

2  Sayingc,  Wher  is  he,  that  is  bonin 
kyng  of  Jcwis  1  forsothc  wc  han  seyn  his 
steiTC  in  the  este,  and  we  comcu  for  to 
wirshipe  hym. 

3  Sotlicly  kyng  Herode  herynge  is 
trublid,  and  al  Jerusalem  with  him. 

4  And  he,  gedryngc  to  gidre  allc  the 
princis  of  prestis,  and  scribis  of  the  peple, 
enquiride  of  hem,  wher  Crist  shulde  be 
borun. 

5  And  thei  seidcn  to  hym,  In  Bethlem 
of  Juda  j  for  so  it  is  writcu  bi  a  pro- 
phete, 

6  And  tliou,  Bethlem,  the  lond  of  Juda, 
thou  art  nat  the  leste  in  the  princis 
of  Juda  ;  for  of  thee  a  duk  shal  gon  out, 
that  shal  gouerne  my  peple  of  Yrael. 

7  Than  Herode,  prinyli  the  kyngis 
clepid  to  hym,  bisily  lernyde  of  hem  the 
tyme  of  the  sterrc  that  apperide  to  hem. 

8  And  he,  sendj'nge  hem  in  to  Beth- 
lem, saide.  Go  ^ee,  and  axe  5ce  bisily  of 
the  chyld,  and  whan  5ee  han  founden, 
telle  a^ein  to  me,  that  and  Y  cummynge 
wirshipe  hym. 

9  The  whiche,  Avhen  thei  hadden  herde 
the  kyng,  Aventen  awey.  And  loo  !  the 
sterre,  the  Avhiche  thei  sayen  in  este, 
wente  bifore  hem,  til  that  it  cummynge 
stood  aboue,  wher  the  child  Avas. 

10  Forsothe  thei,  seeynge  the  sterre, 
ioyedcn  with  a  ful  grete  ioye. 

11  And  thei,  entrynge  the  hous,  foun- 
den the  child  with  Marie,  liis  modir  ;  and 
thei  fallynge  doun  worshipiden  hym. 
And  her  ticsours  oi)nyd,  thei  offreden  to 
hym  3ifti.s,  gold,  encensc,  and  meiTC, 

12  And  answer  taken  in  sleep,  that 
thei  shulden  not  turne  a5ein  to  Herode, 
thei  ben  turned  by  an  other  wey  in  to 
her  euntree. 

13  And  when  thei  hadden  gon  awey, 


TYNDALE,  1526.  7 

Chap.  II.  i  When  Jesus  was  borne 
in  Bethleem  a  toune  of  Jury,  in  the 
tyme  of  king  Herode,  beholde  !  there 
cam  wyse  men  from  the  est  to  Jerusalem, 

2  Saynge,  \\niere  is  he,  that  is  borne 
kyngc  of  the  Jues  ?  we  have  scnc  his 
starre  in  the  est,  and  are  come  to  wor- 
ship hym. 

3  Herode  the  kynge  after  he  hadd 
herde  thys  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusa- 
lem with  hym. 

4  And  he  sent  for  all  the  chefe  prestes, 
and  scribes  off  the  people,  and  demaunded 
off  them,  where  Christ  shulde  be  borne. 

5  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  In  Bethleem 
a  toune  of  Jury  ;  for  thus  it  is  written 
be  the  prophet, 

6  And  thou,  Bethleem,  in  the  londe 
of  Jury,  shalt  not  be  the  leest  as  per- 
teyninge  to  the  princes  of  Juda  ;  for  out 
of  the  shal  come  a  captaine,  whycli 
shall  govern  my  people  Israhel. 

7  Then  Herod  prevely  called  the  wyse 
men,  and  dyligently  enquyred  of  them 
the  tyme  of  the  starre  that  appercd. 

8  And  sent  them  to  Bethleem,  saynge, 
When  ye  be  come  thyder,  searche  dyli- 
gentily  for  the  ehilde,  and  when  ye 
have  foundc  hym,  bringe  me  worde, 
that  Y  maye  come  and  worshippe  hym 
also. 

9  When  they  had  herde  the  kynge, 
they  departed.  And  lo !  the  starre, 
whych  they  sawe  in  the  este,  went  before 
them,  vntyll  it  cam  and  stod  over  the 
place,  where  the  chylde  was. 

10  When  they  sawe  the  starre,  they 
were  marveylously  gladd. 

11  And  entred  into  the  liousc,  and 
founde  the  ehilde  with  Mary,  hys  mother; 
and  kneled  doune  and  worshipped  hym. 
And  opened  there  trcaseures,  and  offred 
unto  him  gyftes,  gold,  franckynsence, 
and  myr. 

12  And  after  they  were  Avarncd  in 
ther  slepe,  that  they  shulde  not  go  ageyne 
to  Herod,  they  rctourned  into  ther  awne 
countre  anotlier  way. 

13  After  that  they  were  departed, lo! 


GOTHIC,  36c. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

cngel  losepe  on  swefnum,  and  dus  cwsej*, 
Ans,  and  nim  dset  cild  and  his  m5dor, 
and  fleoh  on  Egypta-land,  and  beo  dser, 
od  daet  ic  de  secge ;  toweard  ys,  dset 
Herodes  sec])  dset  cild,  to  forspillenne. 

14  He  aras  da,  and  nam  dset  cild  and 
his  modor  on  niht,  and  ferde  on  Egyp- 
tum, 

1 5  And  wses  dser  od  Herodes  for);-siJj ; 
dset  wsere  gefylled,  dset  de  frara  Drihtne 
gecweden  wses  |)urh  done  witegan,  Of 
Egyptum  ic  minne  sunu  geclypode. 

16  Da  wses  Hei'odes  swyde  gebolgen, 
fordam  de  he  bepseht  wses  frani  dam 
tungel-witegum  ;  and  he  asende  da  and 
ofsloh  ealle  da  cild,  de  on  Bethleem 
wseron,  and  on  eallum  hyre  gemserum, 
fram  twy-wintrum  cilde  and  binnan  dam, 
setter  dsere  tide  de  he  ge-axode  fram 
dam  tungel-witegum. 

17  Da  woes  gefylled,  dset  gecweden  wses 
])urh  Hieremiam,  done  witegan, 

18  Stefn  wses  on  hehnysse  gehyred, 
wcp  and  mycel  J^otovung,  Rachel  weop 
h3Te  beam,  and  heo  nolde  beon  gefref- 
red,  fordam  de  hi  nseron.''' 

19  S5|jlice  da  Herodes  wses  forj)faren, 
witodlice !  on  swefne  Drihtnes  engel 
setywde  losepe  on  Egyptum, 

20  And  dus  cwoe}),  A'ris,  and  nim  dset 
cild  and  his  modor,  and  far  on  Israhela 
land  ;  nu  synd  forjjfarene  de  dses  cildes 
sawle  sohton. 

2^.  He  aras  da,  and  onfeng  dset  cild 
and  his  modor,  and  com  on  Israhela  land. 

22  Da  he  gehyrde  dset  Archelaus  rixode 
on  iudea  j-eode,  for  dsene  Herodem,  he 
ondred  dyder  to  farende.  And,  on  swef- 
num gemynegod,  he  ferde  on  Galileisce 
dselas ; 

23  And  he  com  da  and  eardode  on 
dsere  ceastre,  de  is  genemned  Nazareth, 
dset  wfere  gefylled,  dset  gecweden  wses 
j^iirh  done  witegan,  Fordam  de  he  Na- 
zai-enisc  by[)  genemned. ■•■ 


II.  14-23-]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

loo  !  the  aungcl  of  the  Lord  apporidc  in 
sleep  to  Joseph,  sayynge,  Ryse  vp,  and 
take  the  chiKl  and  liis  modir,  and  Hoc  in 
to  Egipt,  and  be  thou  there,  til  that  I 
scye  to  thee  ;  sothely  it  is  to  eunic,  that 
Herode  seeke  the  child,  fox*  to  lose  hym. 

14  The  whiche  Joseph,  rysynge  vp, 
toke  the  chijld  and  his  modir  by  iiy3te, 
and  wente  into  Egipt, 

15  And  was  there  til  to  the  deth  of 
Erode;  that  it  shuld  be  fulfillid,  that 
thing  that  was  said  of  the  Lord  by  the 
])rophete,  sayinge,  Fro  Egypt  Y  liaue 
clepide  my  sone. 

16  Thanne  Erode  seeynge  that  he  was 
scorned^  of  the  kyngis,  was  gretely 
wroth  ;  and  he  sendynge  slew3  alle  the 
children,  that  weren  in  Bethlem,  and  in 
alle  the  eendis  of  it,  fro  two  ;eer  age  and 
with  ynne,  after  the  tyme  that  he  hadde 
sou5t  out  of  the  kyngis. 

17  Than  it  was  fulfillide,  that  thing 
that  was  said  by  Jeremye,  the  prophete, 
sayinge, 

1 8  A  voice  is  herd  an  hee5e,  weepynge 
and  niyche  weilynge,  Rachel  weef)ynge 
liir  sonys,  and  she  wolde  not  be  comfortid, 
for  thei  ben  not. 

19  Sothely  Erode  dead,  loo!  the  an- 
gel of  the  Lord  apeeride  in  sleep  to 
Joseph  in  Egipt, 

20  Sayinge,  Ryse  vp,  and  take  the 
childe  and  his  modir,  and  go  in  to  the 
lond  of  Yrael  ;  for  thei  that  sou3teu  the 
lijf  of  the  chyld  ben  dead. 

2  r  The  whiche  Joseph,  rysynge  vp, 
toke  the  child  and  his  mudir,  and  cam  in 
to  the  lond  of  Yrael. 

22  Forsothe  he  heerynge  that  Arche- 
laus  regnede  in  Jude  for  Eroude,  his 
fadir,  dred  for  to  go  thidir.  And  he, 
monestid  in  sleep,  wente  in  to  the  parties 
of  Galilee  ; 

23  And  he  cummynge  dwelte  in  a 
citee,  that  is  clepid  Nazavcth,  that  it 
shulde  be  fulfillid,  that  thing  that  is  said 
by  prophetis,  For  whi  he  shal  be  clepid 
of  Nazareth. 


TYJ^  DALE,  1526.  9 

the  angell  of  the  Lorde  apcred  to  Joseph 
in  his  slope,  saynge,  Aryse,  and  take  the 
childe  and  his  mother,  and  flye  in  to 
Egipte,  and  abyde  there,  tyll  Y  bringe 
the  worde ;  for  Herod  wyll  soke  the 
chylde,  to  destroye  hym. 

14  Then  he  arose,  and  toke  the  chylde 
and  his  mother  by  night,  and  departed 
in  to  Egipte, 

15  And  was  there  vnto  the  dccth  of 
Herod  ;  to  fulfill  that  which  was  spoken 
of  the  Lorde  by  the  prophet,  which  say- 
eth.  Out  of  Egipte  have  Y  called  my 
Sonne. 

16  Then  Herod  perceavynge  that  he 
was  moocked  off  the  wyse  men,  was  ex- 
ceedynge  wrotii ;  and  sent  forth  and  slue 
all  the  chyldren,  that  were  in  Bethleem, 
and  in  all  the  costes  there  of,  as  many  as 
were  two  yere  old  and  vnder,  accordynge 
to  the  tyme  which  he  had  diligently 
searched  oute  of  tlie  wyse  men. 

17  Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was 
spoken  be  the  prophet,  Jeremi,  saynge, 

18  On  the  hilles  was  a  voyce  hei'de, 
mournynge  wepynge  and  greate  lamen- 
tacion,  Rachel  wepynge  ffor  her  chyldren, 
and  wolde  nott  be  comforted,  because 
thoy  were  not. 

19  When  Herod  was  deed,  lo  I  an  angell 
off  the  Lorde  apered  vnto  Joseph  in 
Egipte, 

20  Saynge,  Arise,  and  take  the  chylde 
and  his  mother,  and  go  in  to  the  londe 
of  Israhel ;  for  they  are  deed  which  sought 
the  chyldes  deeth. 

2  r  Then  he  arose  \y,  and  toke  the 
chylde  and  his  mother,  and  cam  into  the 
londe  of  Israhel. 

22  But  when  he  horde  that  Archelaus 
did  raygne  in  Jury  in  the  roume  off  hys 
ftithor,  Herode,  he  was  afra}de  to  goo 
thcthcr.  Notwithstondynge,  after  he  was 
warned  in  his  slepe,  he  tourned  a  syde 
into  the  parties  off  Galile  ; 

23  And  went  and  dwelt  in  a  cite 
called  Nazareth,  to  ffulfiU  that  which  was 
spoken  be  the  prophetes,  He  shalbe  called 
of  Nazareth. 


10 


GOTHIC,  360. 


3  Stibna  wopyandins  in  au|?idai,  Man- 
weid  wig  Frauyins  ;  railitos  Avaurkei}> 
staigos  is.  t 


7  . . .  KunI  nadre,  Avlias  galaiknida  izwis 
{)liuhaii  faura  j^amma  anawair|)iii  hatiza  P 


8  Waurkyaijj  nu  akran  wairj^ata  idrei- 

9  Yah  ni  [jjuggkyai])]  qi})an  in  izwis, 
Attan  aigum  Abraham  ;  qij^a  auk  izwis, 
jjatei  mag  Gup  us  stainam  jjaim  urraisyan 
barna  Abrahama. ''' 

I  o  A]))jan  yu  so  aqizi  at  waurtim  bagme 
ligi|j  ;  all  nu  bagme  unbairandane  akran 
god,  usmaitada,  yah  infon  galagyada.''' 

I I  Ik  allis  izwis  daupya  in  Avatin,  [du 
idreigai]  ;  ijj  sa  afar  mis  gagganda  swin- 
poza  mis  ist,  jjizei  ik  ni  im  Avair{)S  [sko- 
hans  bairan]  ;  sah  [j'an]  izwis  daupeij) 
in  Ahmin  Weiliamma  [yah  funin]j 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  III.  i  On  dam  dagum  com 
lohannes  se  Fulluhtere,  and  bodude  on 
dam  westene  ludea?, 

2  And  cwpej),  Do|)  deed-bote,  soJ>lice 
geneala?ce)?  heofoua  rice. 

3  Dis  ys  se,  be  dam  de  gecweden  ys 
)?urh  Esaiam,  done  witcgan,  Clypiendes 
stefn  WJBS  on  westene,  Gegearwia]? 
Drihtnes  weg  ;  d5[)  his  sidas  rihte. 

4  Se  lohannes  witodlice  hrefde  reaf  of 
olfenda  hserum,  and  fellenne  gyrdel  embe 
hys  lendenu  ;  and  bys  mete  W£es  gserstap- 
an,  and  Avudu  hunig. 

5  Da  ferde  to  him  Hierosolim-waru, 
and  eal  ludea  jjeod,  and  eal  diiet  rice 
wid  geondam  lordanen ; 

6  And  hi  Avseron  gefullode  on  lor- 
dane  fram  him,  and  hi  andettan  hyra 
synna. 

7  S6{)lice  da  he  geseh  manega  diera 
Sunder-halgena,  and  diera  Riht-wisendra 
to  his  fuUuhte  cumende,  he  cwa^])  to  him. 
La  nosddrena  cyn,  hwa  geswiitelode  cow 
to  fleonne  fram  dam  toweardan  yrre  1 

8  Eornostlice  do)?  medemne  weastm 
daera  d3ed-b5te, 

9  And  ne  cwcdajj  betwux  cow,  We 
habbaj)  Abraham  us  to  faxler  ;  so[5lice  ic 
secge  eoAV,  dset  God  ys  swa  mihtig  dset  he 
mseg  of  dysum  stauum  aweccean  Abra- 
hames  beai'n. 

I  o  Eallunga  ys  seo  sex  to  dsera  treowa 
Avurtrumum  asett ;  eornustlice  eelc  treoAV 
de  g5dne  Avsestm  ne  bringj),  byj)  forcorf- 
en,  and  on  fyr  aworpen. 

II  Witodlice  ic  eow  fullige  on  Avse- 
tere,  to  d8ed-b5te  ;  se  de  tefter  me  to- 
AA'crd  ys  he  ys  strengra  donne  ic,  dses 
gescy  neom  ic  Avyrde  to  berenne  ;  he  eoAV 
fuUa])  on  Halgum  Gaste  and  on  fyre. 

12  Dees  fann  ys  on  his  handa,  and 
he  afeormajj  his  J^yrscel-fiore,  and  he  ge- 
gaderajj  his  hAVccte  on  his  bcrn  ;  da  ceafu 
he  forb8ern|)  on  unadwsescendlicum  fyre.''" 

13  Da  com  se  Htelend  fram  Galilea 
to  lordane  to  lohaune,  da3t  he  liine 
fullode. 

14  lohannes    da  sojjlice  forbead  him, 


III.  I- 1 4.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Chap.  III.  i  In  thilke  days  came 
Joon  Baptist,  prechynge  in  the  desert  of 
Judo, 

2  Sayinge,  Do  50  penaunce,  for  the 
kyngdoni  of  heucns  shal  nei5.^ 

3  Forsothe  this  is  he,  of  whom  it  is 
said  by  Ysaye,  the  prophcte,  A  voice  of  a 
cryingc  in  desert,  !Make  50  redy  the 
"wayos  of  the  Lord  ;  make  50  ri5tful  the 
pathes  of  hym. 

4  Forsothe  that  ilk  Joon  haddc  cloth 
of  the  heeris  of  cameylis,  and  a  girdil  of 
skyn  aboute  his  leendis ;  sothely  his 
mete  weren  locustis,  and  hony  of  the 
wode. 

5  Thanne  Jerusalem  wcnte  out  to  hym, 
and  al  Jude,  and  al  the  cuntre  aboute 
Jordan  ; 

6  And  tliei  weren  cristenyd  of  hym  in 
Jordan,  kuowlcchynge  there  synnes. 

7  Sothely  he  seeynge  many  of  Phari- 
sees and  of  Saduccse  commynge  to  his 
bajiteme,  saide  to  hem,  Generaciouns  of 
eddiis,  who  shewide  to 50U  for  to  lice  fro 
wrath  to  cumme  1 

8  Therfore  do  ^ee  worthi  fruytis  of 
penaunce, 

9  And  nyl  ^e  say  with  ynne  ;ou,  "We 
han  the  fadir  Abraham  ;  sothely  Y  saye 
to  50U,  for  whi  God  is  mi;ti  to  reyse  vp 
of  these  stonys  the  sonys  of  Abraham. 

TO  For  now  the  axe  is  putt  to  the  rote 
of  the  tree  ;  sothely  eueryti'ee  that  mak- 
ith  nat  good  fruyt,  shal  be  kitt  doun,  and 
shal  be  sent  in  to  fijr. 

1 1  Foi-sothe  Y  cristene  50U  in  water, 
in  to  penaunce  ;  forsothe  he  that  is  to 
cumme  after  me  is  strenger  than  Y,  whos 
shon  Y  am  not  worthi  to  here  ;  he  shal 
baptise^  50W  in  the  Holy  Goost  and  fijr. 

12  Whos  wynwing  cloth "■  in  his  bond, 
and  he  shal  fully  dense  his  corne  floore, 
and  shal  gedre  his  corne  into  his  berne ; 
but  chafhs  he  shal  brenne  with  fyr  un- 
quenchable.t 

13  Thanne  Jhesus  came  fro  Galilee  in 
to  Jordan  to  Joon,  for  to  be  cristned  of 
hym. 

1 4  Soothly  Joon  forbeed  hym,  sayinge, 


TYND  ALE,  1526.  11 

Chap.  III.  i  In  those  dayes  Jhon 
the  Baptiser  cam,  and  preached  in  the 
wililernes  otl' Jury, 

2  Sayiige,  liepent,  the  kyngdome  of 
heven  is  at  honde. 

3  This  is  he,  of  whom  it  is  spoken  be 
the  prophet,  Esay,  which  sayetli,  The 
voyce  off  a  cryer  in  wyldcrnes,  Prepare 
the  Lordes  way ;  and  make  hys  pathes 
strayght. 

4  This  Jhon  had  hys  garment  off  camels 
heer,  and  a  gerdell  off  a  skyune  aboute 
his  loynes  ;  hys  meate  was  locustes,  and 
wylde  hony.  , 

5  Then  Avent  oute  to  hym  Jerusalem, 
and  all  Jury,  and  all  the  region  rouude 
aboute  Jordan  ; 

6  And  were  baptised  of  hym  in  Jor- 
dan, knolcdging  their  synnes. 

7  When  he  saw^e  many  off  tlie  Phari- 
ses  and  off  the  Saduces  come  to  hys  bap- 
tism, he  sayde  vnto  them,  O  generaciou 
of  vipers,  Avho  hath  taught  you  to  fle 
from  the  vengcaunce  to  come  l 

8  Brynge  forth  therefore  the  frutes 
belongynge  to  repentaunce, 

9  And  se  that  ye  ons  thinke  not  to 
saye  in  yourselves,  We  have  Abraham  to 
ourc  father  ;  for  I  say  vnto  you,  that 
God  is  able  off  these  stones  to  rayse  vp 
chyldren  vnto  Abi'aham. 

10  Even  nowe  is  the  ax  put  vnto  the 
rote  of  the  trees  ;  soo  that  every  ti'ee 
which  bringeth  not  fforthe  goode  frute, 
shalbe  hewnc  doune,and  cast  into  the  fyre. 

11  I  baptise  you  in  water,  in  token 
of  repentaunce  ;  but  he  that  cometh 
after  me  is  myghtier  then  I,  whose 
shues  I  am  not  worthy  to  beare  ;  he  shal 
baptise  you  with  the  Holy  Gost  and  with 
fyre. 

12  Which  hath  also  his  fan  in  his 
bond,  and  will  pourge  his  floore,  and 
gadre  the  whcet  into  his  garner  ;  and 
will  burne  the  chaffe  with  everlastyngc 
fyre. 

13  Then  cam  Jesus  from  Gallic  into 
Jordan  to  Jhon,  ffor  to  be  baptised  off 
hym. 

14  But  Jhon  fforbadc  hym,  saynge,  I 


12 


GOTHIC,  36c. 


4     .     .      .     Ni  bi  lilaib  alnana  libaid 
manna,  ak  bi  all  waurde  ....''■ 


5  .  .  .  yah  gasatlda  ina  ana  gib- 
lin  allis,  yah  qa]j  du  imma/ 

6  Yabai  sunus  siyais  Gu];s,  wairp  \mk 
dak));  gamelid  ist  auk,  patei  aggilum 
seinaim  anabiudij)  bi  ]3uk,yali  ana  handum 
J)uk  ufhaband,  ei  whan  ni  gastagqyais  by 
staina  fotu  lieinana.''" 


J>emanaJ 


Ni  fraisais  Frauyan  Gu}) 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

and  cwpe}),  Ic  sceal  fram  de  beon  gefuUod^ 
and  cymst  cJu  to  me  1 

15  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  him 
and  cw8e|),  Lset  nu,  dus  unc  gedafenaj) 
ealle  riht-wisnesse  gefyllan.  Da  forlet 
he  bine. 

1 6  S6))lice  da  se  Heelend  gefullod  Avses, 
hrsedlice  he  astah  of  dam  \v0etere  ;  and 
him  wurdon  dser  rihte  heofenas  ontyn- 
ede,  and  he  geseah  Godes  Gast  nider- 
stigende  swa  swa  culfran,  and  wunigende 
ofer  hyne ; 

17  And  s6|)lice  !  da  com  stefn  of  heof- 
enum,  and  dus  cwse)?,  Her  is  min  se 
gecorena  sunu,  on  dam  me  gelicode.''' 


Io[panuh]  i'mma  lesus  qaj) . . ,  gamelid 


Chap.  IV.  i  Da  wses  se  Hselend  gelsed 
fram  Gaste  on  westen,  dset  he  wsere  fram 
deofle  costud. 

2  And  da  da  he  fseste  feowurtig  daga 
and  feowurtig  nihta,  da  ongan  hyne 
syddan  hingrian. 

3  And  da  genealsehte  se  costnigend,  ■•■ 
and  cwa3)j,  Gyf  dii  Godes  sunnu  sy,  cwe}> 
dset  das  stanas  to  hlafe  gewurdon. 

4  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend,  Hit  ys 
awriten,  Ne  leofa)>  se  man  be  hlafe  anum, 
ac  be  sclcon  worde  de  of  Godes  mupe  gsej). 

5  Da  gebrohte  se  deofol  bine  on  da 
halgan  ceastre,  and  asette  bine  ofer  da?s 
temples  heahnesse,  and  cwse})  to  him, 

6  Gyf  du  Godes  sunu  eart,  asend  de 
donne  nyder ;  s6|)lice  hit  ys  awriten,  Da^t 
he  his  englum  behead  be  de,  dajt  big  de 
on  hyra  handum  heron,  de-laes  de  din  fot 
set  stane  8etsi)orne. 

7  Da  cwse])  se  Hselend  eft  to  him,  Hit 
ys  awriten,  Ne  costna  du  Drihten  dinue 
God. 

8  Eft  se  deofol  hine  genam  and  Isedde 
bine  on  swide  heahne  munt,  and  ajteowde 
him  ealle  middan-eardes  ricu,  and  hyra 
wuldor ; 

9  And  cwseji  to  him,  Ealle  das  ic  sylle 
du,  gyf  du  feallende  to  me  ge-eadmetst. 

10  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend  to  him,  Gang 


111.  15.— IV.  10.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

I  owe  for  to  be  cristned  of  thee,  and 
thou  coinmcst  to  me  1 

15  Forsothe  Jhesus  answeringe  saicie 
to  hyni,  SuftVe  now,  for  so  it  bccuniiiicth 
vs  for  to  fulfill e  all  ri5t\visnesse.  Than 
Joo7i  lecte  hym.+ 

16  Forsothe  Jhesus  cristcned  stci3  vp 
aiioon  fro  the  water ;  and  loo  !  hcuens 
hen  opened  to  hyni,  and  he  say  the  Spirit 
of  God  cummynge  douu  as  a  culuer,  and 
cummynge  vpon  hym ; 

1  7  And  loo  !  a  voice  fro  heuenes,  say- 
iuge.  This  is  my  byloued  sone,  in  the 
whiche  Y  haue  plesid  to  me. 


Chap.  IV.  i  Thanne  Jhesus  was  led 
in  to  desert  of  a  spirit,  that  he  clvjlde  be 
temptid  of  the  deuel. 

2  And  whanne  he  hadde  fostid  fourty 
days  and  fourety  ni3tis,  afterward  he 
hungride. 

3  And  the  tempter  cummynge  nij, 
saide  to  hym,  5if  thou  be  Goddis  sone, 
say  that  these  stoons  be  maad  looues. 

4  The  whiche  answerpige  said  to  hym, 
It  is  \\Tyten,  A  man  lyueth  not  in  breed 
aloon,  hot  in  euery  word  that  cometh 
forth  fro  tlie  mouthe  of  God. 

5  Thanne  the  deuyl  toke  hym  in  to 
an  hooly  citee,  and  sette  hym  on  the 
pynacle  of  the  temple,  and  saide  to  hym, 

6  5if  thou  be  Goddis  sone,  sonde  thee 
doun  ;  sothely  it  is  ^\T}'ten,  For  to  his 
aungels  he  comaundide  of  thee,  and  thei 
shulden  take  the<»  in  hocindis,  lest  pera- 
uenture  thou  hurte  thi  tote  at  a  stoon. 

7  Eftsone  Jhesus  saith  to  hym,  It  is 
writen.  Thou  shalt  not  tempte  the  Lord 
thi  God. 

8  Eftsone  the  deuel  toke  h}nii  in  to  a 
ful  hee5  hill,  and  shewide  to  hym  alle  the 
rewmys  of  the  world,  and  the  glorie  of 
hem  ; 

9  And  saide  to  hym,  Alle  these  thingis 
Y  shal  ;eue  to  thee,  5if  thou  fallynge 
doun  shalt  worshipe  me. 

10  Than  Jhesus   saide   to   hym.    Go, 


TYNDALE,  1526.  ].> 

ought  to  be  baptysed  off"  the,  and  coin- 
mest  thou  too  me  1 

1 5  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  to  hym, 
Lett  hyt  be  so  nowe,  for  thus  hit  becom- 
meth  us  to  fulfyll  all  rightewesnes.  Then 
he  suffred  hym. 

16  And  Jesus  as  sone  as  he  was  baptised 
cam  strayght  out  of  the  water  ;  and  lo ! 
heven  was  open  vnto  hym,  and  he  sawe 
the  Spirite  of  God  dcscende  lyke  a  dove, 
and  lyght  vppon  hym  ; 

17  And  lo  1  there  cam  a  voice  from 
heven,  sayng,  Thys  ys  my  deare  sonne, 
in  whom  is  my  delyte. 


Chap.  IV,  i  Then  was  Jesus  ledd 
awaye  of  the  spirite  in  to  a  dt„a  t,  to  be 
tempted  of  the  devyll. 

2  And  when  he  had  fasted  fourtye 
dayes  and  fourtye  nyghtes,  att  the  last 
he  was  an  hungred. 

3  Then  came  vntyll  hym  the  tempter, 
and  sayde,  Yff  thou  be  the  sonne  of  God, 
commande  that  these  stones  be  made 
bred. 

4  He  answered  and  sayde,  Y''t  is  wryt- 
ten,  Man  shall  nott  live  only  by  breede, 
but  by  every  worde  that  proceadeth  out 
off"  the  mouth  off  God. 

5  Then  the  devyll  tooke  him  vpp  in 
to  the  holy  cite,  and  set  hym  on  a  pyna- 
cle of  the  temple,  and  sayd  vnto  hym, 

6  Yf  thou  be  the  sonne  of  God,  east 
thysylfe  doune ;  for  hit  ys  wrytten,  He 
shall  geve  his  angels  charge  over  the, 
and  with  there  haudes  the  shall  stey 
the  vpp,  that  thou  dashe  not  thy  fote 
agaynst  a  stone. 

7  Jesus  sayde  to  hym.  Hit  ys  wrytten 
also.  Thou  shalt  not  tempte  thy  Lorde 
God. 

8  The  de\7ll  toke  hym  up  agayne  and 
ledde  hym  in  to  an  excedynge  bye  moun- 
tayne,  and  shewed  hym  al  the  kyngdomes 
of  the  worlde,  and  the  beauty  of  them  ; 

9  And  sayde  vnto  hym.  All  these 
will  I  geve  the,  iff"  thou  wilt  fauU  doune 
and  worship  me. 

10  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  hym,  Avoyd 


14 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ist,  [Auk]  Frauyan  GuJj  jjeinana  inweit- 
ais,  yah  imma  ainamma  fuUafahyais.  + 


17  .  .  .  Idreigo}),  atnewhida  sik 
j.iudangardi  liimine. ''' 

18  . . .  Wliarbonds  ]>an  faui'  marein  Ga- 
leilaias,  gasawli  twans  broj^runs,  Seimona, 
[saei  lieitada]  Paitrus,  yah  Andraian, 
hrojjar  is,  Avairpandans  nati  in  marein ; 
wesun  auk  fiskyans. 

19  Yah  qa{j  im  [lesus],  Hiryats  afar 
mis,  yah  gatauya  igqis  nutans  maune.'"' 

20  [I\>  Jiai]  sunsaiw  afletandans  J^o 
natya,  laistidedun  afar  imma. 

21  Yah  inngaggans  framis  yainjjro, 
gasawh  [anj^arans  twans  broj^runs,]  la- 
kobu  jsana  Zaibaidaiaus,  yah  lohannen, 
brojjar  is,  in  skipa  [mijj  Zaibaidaiau, 
attin  seinamma,  mauwyandaus  natya 
[seina],  yah  haihait  ins. 

22  i^  {)ai  sunsaiw  afletandans  J)ata  skip 
yah  attan  seinana,  [laistidedun]  afar 
imma.^ 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

du  sceocca  onbsec  ;  s5)5Hce  hit  ys  awi'iten, 
To  Drihtne  dinum  Gode  du  de  ge-ead- 
mets)>,  and  him  anum  |?eowast. 

1 1  Da  forlet  se  deofol  bine  ;  and  englas 
genealcchton,  and  him  jjenodon.''' 

12  SojiHce  da  se  Hselend  gehyrde  dset 
lohannes  belsewed  wses,  da  ferde  he  to 
Galileam. 

13  And  forlsetenre  dsere  ceastre  Na- 
zareth, he  com,  and  eardode  on  Caphar- 
naum,  on  dam  sse-gemserum,  on  endum 
Zabulon  and  Neptahm, 

14  Dast  wsere  gefylled,  dset  de  gecwed- 
en  wtes  ))urh  Esaiam,  done  witegan, 

1 5  ■•■  [Zabulones  eorjju  and  Neptahmes 
eorj^e,  sees  Aveg  ofer  lordane,  dara  |)eoda 
GaUlea,] 

1 6  peoda-folc  de  on  j^ystrum  sset  geseah 
mycel  leoht,  and  sittendum  on  gearde 
deajjes  sceade,  is  leoht  up-asprungen. 

17  Syddan  ongan  se  Heelend  bodian, 
and  cwedan,  D6\>  deed-bote,  sojjlice  heof- 
ona  rice  genealsec}).''' 

18  Da  se  Hselend  eode  wid  da  Gali- 
leiscean  see,  he  geseh  twegen  gebrodru, 
Simonem,  se  Avaes  genemned  Petrus,  and 
Andream,  his  brodor,  sendeude  hyra  nett 
on  da  sse  ;  s6j)lice  hi  wseron  fiscei'as. 

19  And  he  ssede  him,  Cuma]j  tefter 
me,  and  ic  d5  dset  gyt  beojj  manna 
fisceras. 

20  And  hi  dfer  rihte  forleton  hyra  net, 
and  him  fyligdon. 

21  And  da  he  danon  eode,  he  geseh 
twegen  odre  gebrodru,  lacobum  Zebedei, 
and  loannem,  his  brodur,  on  scype  raid 
hyra  feeder,  Zebedeo,  remigende  hyra 
net,  aud  he  clypode  hi. 

22  Hi  da  sona  forleton  hyra  nett  and 
hyra  fieder,  and  him  fyligdon.''' 

23  And  da  beferde  se  Hselend  ealle 
Galileam,  Iserende  on  hyra  gesomnungum, 
and  he  wses  bodiende  godspel  dses  i-ices, 
and  hgelende  selce  adle,  and  cclceuntrum- 
nysse  on  dam  folce. 

24  And  da  fei'de  his  hlisa  into  ealle 
Syi'iam  ;  and  hi  brohton  him  ealle  yfel- 


p 


IV.  11-24.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Satlianas  ;  forsotlie  it  is  wrytin,  Thou 
sliult  worshipc  the  Lord  thi  C!od,  aud  to 
]iym  alone  thou  slialt  serue. 

1 1  Thau  the  deuel  kiftc  hym ;  and 
loo  !  aungelis  canieu  ni5c,  aud  scruedcn 
to  hym. 

1 2  Sothely  whanue  Jhcsus  hadde  hcrde 
that  Joou  was  taken,  he  wente  into 
Galilee. 

13  Aud  the  cite  of  Nazarct  laft,  he 
came,  and  dwelte  in  the  citoc  of  Capher- 
uaum,  beside  the  see,  in  the  eeudis  of 
Zabulon  aud  Xeptalyni, 

14  That  it  shulde  be  fulfillid,  that 
tiling  that  was  said  by  Ysay,  the  pro- 
phete, 

15  The  lond  of  Zabulon  and  the  loud 
of  Xeptalym,  the  wcye  of  the  see  ouer 
Jordan,  of  Galilee  of  hcthene  men, 

16  The  peple  tiiat  dwelte  in  derknes- 
sis  say  grete  li5t,  and  men  sittynge  in 
the  cuntree  of  shadew  of  deth,  li5t  is 
sprunge  to  hem. 

17  Fro  theunus  Jhesus  bygan  for  to 
j)reche,  and  say,  Do  50  penaunce,  forsotlie 
the  kyugdom  of  heueus  slial  cume  ni^o. 

18  Sothely  Jhesus,  walkynge  bisidis 
the  see  of  Galilee,  say  two  bretheren, 
Symon,  that  is  clepid  Petre,  and  Andrew, 
his  brother,  sendyuge  nett  in  to  the  sec  ; 
forsothe  thei  weren  lishei'is. 

19  And  he  saidc  to  hem.  Come  ;e 
after  me,  aud  I  shal  make  30U  to  be  maad 
fisheris  of  men. 

20  And  anon  her  nettis  forsakyn,  they 
sueden  hym. 

2 1  Aud  he  goynge  forth  fro  that  place, 
say  twcyu  other  bretheren,  Jamys  of 
Zebedee,  aud  Joon,  his  brother,  in  the 
ship  with  Zebedee,  her  fadir,  makynge 
a5ein^  her  nettis,  and  he  clepide  hem. 

22  Sothely  anoon  the  nettis  forsaken 
and  the  fadir,  thei  suedeu  hym. 

23  And  Jhesus  enuyraunyde  al  Ga- 
lilee, techynge  in  the  synagogis  of  hem. 
and  prechyuge  the  gospel  of  kyugdam, 
and  helynge  al  sorow,^  aud  al  sekenesse 
in  the  peple. 

24  Aud  his  opynyoun^  wente  in  to  al 
Syrie  ;  and  thei  ofiriden  to  hym  alle  men 


TYNDALE,  1526.  15 

Satan  ;  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt 
worshyp  thy  Lorde  God,  and  hym  only 
shalt  thou  serve. 

1 1  Then  the  dp^U  left  hym  ;  and  lo  ! 
the  angels  cam,  and  miuistred  vuto  hym. 

12  When  Jesus  had  hcrde  that  Jhou 
was  taken,  he  departed  in  to  Gallic. 

13  And  left  Nazareth,  aud  went,  and 
dwelte  in  Capernaum,  which  is  a  cite 
apon  the  see,  in  the  coostes  olF  Zabulon 
and  Ncptalim, 

1 4  To  ffulfiU  that  whiche  was  spoken  be 
Esay,  the  prophet,  saynge, 

15  Beholde  the  londe  of  Zabulon  and 
Neptalim,  the  waye  of  the  see  beyonde 
Jordan,  Gallic  off  the  Gentyls, 

16  The  people  whiche  sat  in  dercknes 
sawe  gi-eate  lyght,  and  to  them  which 
sate  in  the  region  and  shadowe  of  deeth, 
lyght  is  spronge. 

17  From  thatt  tyme  Jesus  began  to 
pi'cache,  aud  to  say,  Picjjcnt,  for  the 
kingdome  of  licveu  is  at  houde. 

18  As  Jesus  Avalkcd  by  the  see  ofl" 
Gallic,  he  sawe  two  brethren,  Simon, 
Avhich  was  called  Peter,  aud  Andrew,  his 
brother,  castynge  a  neet  into  the  see  ; 
for  they  were  fisshers. 

1 9  And  he  sayde  unto  them,  Folowe 
me,  and  I  will  make  you  fisshers  of  men. 

20  And  they  strayght  waye  Icfte  there 
nettes,  and  folowed  hym. 

21  And  he  went  fortlie  from  thence, 
aud  sawe  other  twoo  brethren,  James  the 
Sonne  of  Zebede,  aud  Jhon,  his  brother, 
in  the  shippe  with  Zebede,  their  father, 
mendynge  their  nettes,  and  called  them. 

22  And  they  with  out  taryinge  lefte 
the  sh}-p  and  their  fjithcr,  and  folowed 
hym. 

23  And  Jesus  went  aboute  all  Galile, 
teachyng  yn  their  sinagogcs,  and  preach- 
yuge  the  gospell  of  the  kyngdome,  and 
hcalinge  all  manner  of  sickues,  aud  all 
manner  dyseases  amonge  the  people. 

24  And  hys  ffame  spreed  abroode 
through  oute  all  Siria  ;  aud  they  brought 


16 


GOTHIC,  360. 


3   Audagai   fiai  unledans  iilrmin, 
^ize]  Tst  |)iudangartii  himine.'*' 


8  Audagai    j^ai   lirainyahairtai:s,  unte 
jjai  Gu})  gasaiwhand.^ 


13  [Yiis  siyu])]   salt   [airjjosj  ;   T'p   vs 
bai  salt  baud  wair))ij),  whe  gasupoda  1  ^. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

hsebbende  missenlicum  adlum,  and  or 
tiiitregum  gegripene,  and  da  de  deofel- 
seocnyssa  hset'don,  and  m5nod-seoce,  and 
laman  ;  and  he  da  gehaelde. 


25  And  him  fyligdon  mycele  menigu 
fram  Galilea,  and  fram  Decapoli,  and 
fram  Hierusalem,  and  fram  ludea,  and 
fram  begeondan  lordanen.'*' 


Chap.  V.  i  SoJ^lice  da  se  Hselend 
geseh  da  menigu,  he  astah  on  done  munt ; 
and  da  he  sset,  da  genealeehton  his  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas  to  him. 

2  And  he  ontynde  his  muj),  and  Iserde 
h',  and  cwsejj, 

3  Eadige  synd'''  da  gastlican  |)eai-fan, 
fordam  hyi-a  ys  heofena  rice. 

5  Eadige  synd  da  Hj^an,  fordam  de  hi 
eor|>an  agun. 

4  Eadige  synd  da  de  nu  wepaj),  fordam 
de  lii  beo|)  gefrefrede.''' 

6  Eadige  synd  da  de  for  rihtwisnesse 
hingria))  and  jjyrsta]?,  fordam  de  hi  beojj 
gefyllede. 

7  Eadige  synd  da  mild-heortan,  for- 
dam de  hi  mild-heortnysse  begytajj. 

8  Eadige  synd  da  cleen-heortan,  for- 
dam de  hi  God  geseojj. 

9  Eadige  synd  da  gesybsuman,  for- 
dam de  hi  beoj)  Godes  beam  genemnede. 

I  o  Eadige  synd  da  de  ehtnysse  ])o\m]> 
for  rihtwisnysse,  fordam  de  hyra  ys  heof- 
onan  rice. 

II  Eadige  synd  ge,  donne  hi  wyria|j 
eow,  and  ehta)>  eow,  and  secgeaj)  selc 
ytel  ongeu  eow  leogende,  for  me, 

12  Geblissia)?  and  gefsegnia)?,  fordam 
de  eower  med  ys  mycel  on  heofonum ; 
svva  lii  ehtun  da  witegan  de  befdran  eow 


13  Ge  synd  eorban  sealt ;  gyf  da^t 
sealt  awyrj^,  on  dam  de  hit  gesylt  hi\>1 
Hit   ne  mseg  syddan  to   nahte,   buton 


IV.  25.-V.  13]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

liauyuge  }  uele,  takyii  with  tlyucrs  sorowis 
ami  tourmeiitis,  aiul  hem  that  hacUleu 
douolis,  and  luiiatijk  men,  and  men  in 
palsie,  and  he  hclide  hem. 


25  And  there  sueden  liym  many  eum- 
panyes  of  Galilee,  and  of  Dceapoly,  and 
of  Jerusalem^  and  of  Judec,  and  of  be- 
5onde  Jordan. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


i; 


CiiAP.  V.  I  Jhesus  forsothe,  seynge 
cumpanyes,  Avente  vp  in  to  an  hill  ;  and 
"Nvhen  he  hadde  sete,  his  disciplis  eamen 
ni5e  to  hym. 

2  And  he,  openyngc  his  mouthe,  tau3te 
to  hem,  sayiuge, 

3  Blessid  be  the  pore  in  spirit,  for  the 
kingdam  in  henenes  is  heren. 

5  Blessid  he  mylde  men,  for  thei  shuln 
■\velde  the  eerthe. 

4  Blessid  be  thei  that  mournen,  for  thei 
shuln  he  comfortid.'*' 

6  Blessid  be  thei  that  hungren  and 
thristen  ri5twisnesse,  for  thei  shuln  ben 
fultillid. 

7  Blessid  be  mercyful  men,  for  thei 
shuln  gete  mercye. 

8  Blessid  be  thei  that  ben  of  clene 
hcrte,  for  thei  shuln  see  God. 

9  lilessid  be  pesible  men,  for  thei  shuln 
be  clepid  the  sonys  of  God. 

10  Blessid  be  thei  that  suffren  perse- 
cueioun  for  ri3t\visnesse,  for  the  kyngdam 
of  heuenes  is  herun. 

1 1  yec  shulen  be  blessid,  when  men 
shulen  eurse  50U,  and  .shulen  pursue  50U, 
and  shulen  say  al  yuel  a5eiiis  50U  lec3ing, 
for  me. 

12  loye  5ee  with  yn  forth,  and  glade 
^ee  with  out  forth,  for  30ure  meede  is 
jilcnteuouse  in  heuenes  ;  forsothe  so  thei 
han  pursued  and  prophetis  that  weren 
before  50U. 

13  3ce  ben  salt  of  the  erthe  ;  that  jif 
the  salt  shal  vanyshe  awey,  wlierynne 
shal  it  be  saltid?      To  no    thing  it  is 


vnto  hym  all  sieke  people,  that  were 
taken  with  divers  diseases  and  gri])inges, 
and  them  that  were  pos.sessed  with 
devils,  and  those  which  were  lunatyke, 
and  those  that  had  the  i)alsey,  and  he 
healed  them. 

25  And  there  folowed  li3'm  a  grcatc 
numbre  off  people  from  Galile,  and  froni 
the  ten  eites,  and  from  Jerusali'm,  and 
from  Jury,  and  from  the  regions  that  lye 
beyonde  Jordan. 


Chap.  Y.  i  When  he  sawe  the  peo- 
ple, he  went  vp  into  a  mountayne  ;  and 
when  he  was  set,  his  disciples  cam  vnto 
hym. 

2  And  he  opemicd  his  mought,  and 
taught  them,  saynge, 

3  Blessed  are  the  poore  in  sprete,  for 
theirs  is  the  kyngdome  off  heven. 

4  Blessed  are  they  that  morne,  for  they 
shalbe  comforted. 

5  Blessed  are  the  mcke,  for  they  shall 
iuheret  the  erth. 

6  Blessed  are  they  which  honger  and 
thurst  for  rightewesncs,  for  they  shalbe 
filled. 

7  Blessed  are  the  mcrcifull,  for  they 
shall  obteyne  mercy. 

8  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  herte,  for 
they  shall  se  God. 

9  Blessed  are  the  mayntc3'nei's  of  peace, 
for  they  shalbe  called  the  chyldren  of 
God. 

10  Blessed  are  they  which  suflVc  per- 
secucion  for  rightewesncs  sake,  for  theire 
ys  the  kyngdome  off  heven. 

1 1  Blessed  arc  ye,  when  men  shall  re- 
vylc  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall 
falsly  say  all  manner  of  yvell  saynges 
agaynst  you,  ffor  my  sake. 

1 2  licioyce,  and  be  glad,  for  greate  is 
youre  rewardc  in  heven ;  for  .so  persecuted 
they  the  prophets  which  were  before 
youre  dayes. 

13  Y'e  are  the  salt  of  the  erthe;  but 
and  if  the  salt  be  once  vnsavery,  what 
can  be  salted  ther  with  1     It  is  thence- 

G 


18 


GOTHIC,  360. 


1.1 


ak  ana  lukainastajj- 

in,  yah  liiihtei]^  ■*"  allaini  Jiaim  in  Jiamnia 
garda. 

16  Swa  liulityai  liuhajj  izwar  in  and- 
"wairjiya  manne,  ei  gasaiwhaina  izwara 
goda  waurstwa,  yah  hauhyaina  attan 
i'zAvarana  |)ana  in  himinam. 

17  Ni  hugyai})  ei  qemyau  gatairan 
wito]',  aijjj^au  praufetuns  ;  ni  qam  ga- 
tairan, ak  usfullyan. 

18  Amen  auk  qijia  izwis,  und  l^atei 
VT3lei]n]'  himins  yah  aiijia,  yota  ains,  ai))- 
|)au  ains  striks,  ni  usleij^ij?  af  witoda, 
iinte  alk^ta  Avairj^i);. 

19  lj>  saei  nu  gatairij)  aina  anabusne 
])izo  minnistono,  yali  laisyai  swa  mans, 
minuista  haitada  'in  }>iudangaixlyai  him- 
ine  ;  'i\>  sfei  tauyi]',  yah  laisyai  swa,  sah 
mikils  haitada  'in  liiudangardyai  himine. 


20  Qijja  auk  izwis,  ))atei  nibai  manag- 
izo  wair}iij)  izwaraizos  garaihteins  ])au 
})ize  bolvarye  yah  Fareisaie,  ni  J?au  qimij? 
in  |)iudangavdyai  himine. 

21  Hausidcdujj  jjatei  qi})an  ist  ])aim 
aivizam,  Ni  maur])iyais  ;  i|)  saei  maur|)r- 
ei|),  skuki  wair])i))  stauai. 

22  Aj)}ian  ik  qi)'a  izwis,  })atei  whazuh 
modags  brojn-  seinamma  sware,  skula 
wair[ii]7  stauai  ;  i[j  saei  qil^il^  bro])r  sein- 
amma, Eaka,  skula  Avairjnjj  gaqumjjai  ; 
a|i})an  saei  ([\\>i]>,  Dwala,  skula  wair];ij> 
in  gaiainnan  funins. 

23  Yabai  nu  bairais  aibr  jjein  du  hunsl- 
astada,  yah  j-ainar  gamuneis,  J'atei  hrolp- 
ar  ])eins  habai]?  wha  bi  ])uk, 

24  Aflet  yainai'  ])0  giba  J)eina  in  and- 
wairj)3fa  hunslastadis,  yah  gagg  faurjjis 
gasibyon  brojii'  jjeinamma,  yah  bijie  at- 
gaggands  atbair  J)0  giba  jieina. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

diet  hit  sy  ilt-aworpen,  and  sy  fram  mann- 
um  fortrcden. 

14  Ge  synd  middan-eardes  leoht ;  ne 
mseg  SCO  ceaster  beou  behyd  cte  byj) 
U2:)pan  miint  aset ; 

15  Ne  hi  ne  selajj  hyra  leoht-fet,  and 
hit  under  cyfe  setta|',  ac  ofer  candel-stajf, 
dxt  hit  onlihte  eallum  ttam  cte  on  dam 
hiise  synd. 

16  SwCi  onlihte  eower  leoht  beforan 
mannum,  da't  hi  geseon  eowre  godan 
weorc,  and  Avuldrian  eowei'ne  feder  de 
on  heofonum  ys.''' 

1 7  Nelle  ge  wenan  dsfit  ic  come  towurp- 
an  da  se,  odde  da  witegan ;  ne  com  ic 
na  towurpau,  ac  gefyllan. 

18  S5})es  on  eornost  ic  secge  eow, 
Berdam  de  gewite  heofon  and  eor|3e,  an  i, 
odde  an  prica,  ne  gewit  fram  dsere  Ee, 
serdam  ealle  J^ing  gewurdan. 

19  Eornostlice  se  de  towjTp}^  an  of 
dysum  Isestum  bebodum,  and  da  men. 
swa  Icerj),  se  byjj  Isest  genemned  on  heof- 
onan  rice ;  soj^lice  se  de  hit  de|;,  and 
Iserjj,  se  bi}^  mycel  genemned  on  heofonan 
rice.''' 

20  So})lice  ic  secge  eow,  bilton  eower 
rihtwisnys  mare  sy  donne  dtera  wrTtera 
and  Sundor-hillgena,  ne  gJl  ge  on  heof- 
onan rice. 

21  Ge  gehyrdon  d?et  gecweden  woes 
on  ealdum  tidum,  Ne  ofsleh  du ;  se  de 
ofslihji,  se  by]5  dome  scyldig. 

22  Ic  secge  eow,  sojjlice  dfet  selc  de 
yrsa]>  hys  breder,  by)>  dome  scyldig ; 
s5{)lice,  se  de  seg]>  hys  breder,  Du  aword- 
eua,  he  bi})  ge|)eahte  scj'ldig  ;  se  de  segjj, 
Du  stunta,  se  byjj  scyldig  helle  fyres. 


23  Eornostlice  gyf  du  bringst  dine  lac 
to  weofode,  and  du  dser  gel)encgst,  dset 
din  brodor  hsefj'  seuig  })ing  agen  de, 

24  Lset  dser  dine  lac  beforan  dam  al- 
tare,  and  gang  ser  and  gesybsuma  wid 
dinne  broder,  and  donne  cum  dii  syddan 
and  brinj;  dine  lac.''' 


V.  14-24-]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

worth  oiicr,  no  hot  that  it  be  sent  out, 
and  ilcfoulid  of  men. 

14  5e  ben  Ii5t  of  the  world  ;  a  citee 
putt  on  an  hill  may  nat  be  hid  ; 

i,^  Nether  men  tcndyn  a  lanterne,  and 
j)utten  it  vndir  a  bussliel,  but  on  a  can- 
dilstike.  that  it  jeue  li5t  to  alle  that  ben 
in  the  hous. 

16  So  shyyne  ;oure  lijt  before  men, 
that  thei  see  50urc  good  werkis,  and  glo- 
rifie  30ure  fadir  that  is  in  heueus. 

1/  Nyle  5e  gesse '''  that  Y  came  to 
vndo'''  the  lawe,  or  the  prophetis  ;  I  came 
not  to  vndo  the  lawe,  but  to  fultille. 

18  Forsothe  I  say  to  50U  trewthe,  til 
heuen  and  erthe  passe,  oon  i^,  ov  titil, 
shal  nat  passe  fro  the  lawe,  til  alle  thingis 
be  don. 

19  Therfore  he  that  vndoth^  oon  of 
these  leste  maundementis,  and  techith 
thus  men,  shal  be  clepid  the  leste  in  the 
rewme  of  heuenes ;  forsothe  this  that 
doth,  and  techith,  shal  be  clepid  grete  in 
the  kyngdame  of  heuenes. 

20  Forsothe  Y  say  to  30U,  no  but  5if 
5oure  ri5twisnesse  shal  be  more  plenteu- 
ouse  than  of  scribis  and  Pharisees,  jee 
shulen  not  entrcinto  kyngdam  of  heuenes. 

21  3^6  han  herde  that  it  is  said  to 
olde  men,  Thou  shal  nat  slea ;  forsothe 
he  that  sleeth,  shal  be  gylty  of  dome. 

22  But  I  say  to  50U,  that  euereche  that 
is  wrothe  to  his  brother,  shal  be  gylty 
of  dome  ;  forsothe,  he  that  shal  say  to  his 
brother,  Racha^,  shal  be  gylty  of  coun- 
seile  ;  sothly  he  that  shal  say,  FooF, 
shal  be  gylti  of  the  fijr  of  hclle. 

23  Therfore  5if  thou  offrist  thi  5ift  at 
the  auti.-r,  and  there  shalt  l)ythenke,  that 
thi  brother  hath  sum  what  ajeins  thee, 

24  Leeue  there  thi  5ift  before  the  au- 
tcr,  and  go  first  for  to  be  recounscilid''  to 
thi  brother,  and  thanne  thou  cummynge 
shalt  oftVe  thi  3ifte. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


19 


fortlie  goode  for  nothynge,  but  to  be  cast 
oute  at  the  dores,  and  that  men  trcade  it 
vnder  fete. 

1 4  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  worlde  ;  a 
cite  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid  ; 

15  Nether  do  men  lyght  a  candell,  and 
put  it  vnder  a  busshell,  but  on  a  candel- 
stick,  and  it  lighteth  all  them  which  are 
in  the  housse. 

1 6  Se  that  youre  light  so  shyne  before 
men,  that  they  maye  se  youre  good 
■workes,  and  glorify  youre  father  which 
is  in  heven. 

17  Ye  shall  not  thynke  that  I  am  come 
to  disauuU  the  lawe,  or  the  prophets  ;  no 
I  am  nott  come  to  disanull  them,  but  to 
fulfyll  them. 

18  For  truely  I  saye  vnto  you,  till 
heven  and  erth  perisshe,  one  iott,  or  one 
tvtle,  of  the  lawe  shall  not  scape,  tyll  all 
be  fulfilled. 

19  Whosoever  breaketh  one  of  these  lest 
comaundmentes,  and  shall  teache  men 
so,  he  shalbe  called  the  leest  in  the  kyng- 
domc  off"  heven  ;  but  whosoever  shall 
ol;serve,  and  teache  them,  that  persone, 
shalbe  called  greate  in  the  kyngdome  off 
heven. 

20  For  I  saye  vnto  you,  except  youre 
rightewesnes  excede  the  rightewcsnes  off 
the  scribes  and  Pharises,  ye  cannot  en- 
tre  into  the  kyngdome  off"  heven. 

21  Ye  have  herde  howe  it  was  sayd 
vnto  them  off"  the  olde  tyme,  Thou  shalt 
not  kyll ;  whosoever  shall  kyll,  shalbe  in 
daunger  of  iudgement. 

2  3  ]5ut  I  say  vnto  you,  whosoever  his 
angre  with  hys  brother,  shalbe  in  dauu- 
ger  off"  iudgement ;  whosoever  shall  saye 
vnto  his  brother,  Raclia,  shalbe  in 
daunger  off"  a  counsell  ;  but  whosoever 
shall  saye  vnto  his  brother,  Thou  fole, 
shalbe  in  daunger  off"  hell  fyre. 

23  Therfore  when  thou  off"erest  thy 
gyfte  att  the  altre,  and  there  remembrest, 
that  thy  brother  hath  eny  thynge  agaynst 
the, 

24  Leve  there  thyne  off*rynge  before 
the  altre,  and  go  thy  waye  first  and 
reconcile  thy  silfe  to  thy  brother,  and 
then  come  and  off"re  thy  gyffte. 

C  2 


20 


GOTHIC,  360. 


25  Siyais  wailahugyands  anclastauin 
J)einanima  sprauto,  uiid  |>atei  is  in  wiga 
mi}>  imma,  ibai  whan  atgibai  ];uk  sa  anda- 
staua  stauiu,  yali  sa  staua  }mk  atgibai 
andbalita,  yah  in  karkara  galagyaza. 

26  Amen  qijja  |)us,  Ni  usgaggis  yain- 
\ivo,  viute  usgibis  }iana  minnistan  kintu. 

27  Hausidedujj  Jjatei  qij^anist,  Ni  lior- 
inos. 

28  A|5))an  ik  qijja  izwis,  J)atei  whazuli 
saei  sai^Yhi)J  qinon  du  luston  izos,  yu  ga- 
horinoda  izai  in  liairtin  seinamma. 

29  1]>  yabai  augo  ];cin  Jjata  tailiswo 
marzyai  ))uk,  usstigg^  ita,  yah  wairp  af 
|)US  ;  batizo  ist  auk  })us,  ei  fraqistnai  ains 
li|)iwe  l^einaize,  yah  ni  allata  leik  J^ein 
gadriusai  in  gaiainnan. 

30  Yah  yabai  taihswo  ])eina  handus 
marzyai  )>uk,  afmait  ]>o,  yah  wairp  af 
})us  :  batizo  ist  auk  })us,  ei  fraqistnai 
ains  ]i))iwe  })einaize,  yah  ni  allata  leik 
J)ein  gadriusai  in  gaiainnan. 

31  Qij^anuh  |)an  ist,  patei  whazuh  saei 
afletai  qen,  gibai  izai  afstassais  bokos. 

32  I[)  ik  qij)a  izwis,  J)atei  whazuh  saei 
afletij^  qen  seina,  Vnuh  fairina  kalkinass- 
aus,  tauyi})  ]>o  horinon,  yah  sa  ize  afsat- 
ida  liugaijj,  horiuoj). 

33  Aftra  hausidedu|i,  Jjatei  qij>an  ist 
jjaim  airizam,  Ni  ufarswarais,  'ip  usgibais 
Frauyin  aij^ans  J)einans. 

34  A]j|5an  ik  qijja  izwis,  ni  swaran  allis  ; 
ni  bi  himlna,  unte  stols  ist  Gu]?s ; 

35  Nih  bi  air|)ai,  unte  fotubaurd  ist 
fotiwe  is ;  nih  bi  lairusaulwmai,  unte 
baurgs  ist  pis  mikilins  ]>iudanis  ; 

36  Nih  bi  haubida  J;einamma  swarais, 
unte  ni  niagt  ain  tagl  wheit,  ai])|)au  swai't 
gatauyau  ; 

37  Siyai{)-{:an  waurd  izwar,  Ya,  ya ; 
Ne,  ne  ;  i]j  |;ata  managizo  J)aim,  us  ]>am- 
ma  ubilin  ist. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

25  Beo  du  onbiigende  dinum  wider- 
winnan  hrade,  da  hwile  de  du  eart  on 
wege  mid  him,  de-lfes  de  din  wider- 
winna  de  sylle  dam  deman,  and  se  dema 
de  sylle  dam  jjene,  and  du  sy  on  cwertern 
send. 

26  S5j3es  ic  secge  de,  Ne  geest  du 
danone,  xr  du  agylde  done  ytemestan 
feor})lingc. 

27  Ge  gehyrdon  dset  on  ealdum  cwyd- 
um  gecweden  wses,  Ne  unriht-hseme  du. 

28  S5j)lice  ic  secge  eow,  daet  selc  dsera 
de  wif  gesyhjj  and  hyre  gewilna]>,  eallunga 
dset  se  gesyngajj  on  hys  heortan. 

29  Gyf  din  SAvydre  eage  de  seswicie, 
ahola  hit  ut,  and  awurp  hyt  fi-am  de  ; 
soj^lice  de  ys  betere,  djet  an  dinra  lima 
forwurde,  donne  eal  din  lichama  si  on 
helle  asend. 

30  And  gyf  din  swidre  hand  de  as"wice, 
aceorf  hi  of,  and  awurp  hi  fram  de  ; 
witodlice  de  ys  betere,  dset  an  dinra 
lima  forwurde,  donne  eal  din  lichama 
fare  to  helle.'^ 

31  S6]jlice  hit  ys  gecweden,  Swa  hwylc 
swa  his  wif  forlset,  he  sylle  hyre  hyra 
hiw-gedales  boc. 

32  Ic  secge  eoAV  to  sojnim,  dtet  felc  de 
his  Avif  forleet,  biiton  forlegenysse  )nngum, 
he  de)>  dset  heo  unriht-hcemt>,  and  se  un- 
riht-hsem|),  de  forlaetene  £efter  him  ge- 
nimj?. 

33  Eft  ge  gehyrdon,  dset  gecweden  wses 
on  ealdum  cwydum,  Ne  forswere  du,  so)?- 
lice  Drihtne  dii  agyltst  dine  ajjas. 

34  Ic  secge  eow  soj^lice,  dset  ge  eallunga 
ne  swerion  ;  ne  }>urh  heofon,  fordam  de 
heo  ys  Godes  J)rym-setl ; 

35  Ne  })urli  eorj>an,  fordam  de  heo  ys 
hys  fot-scamul ;  ne  jjurh  Hierusalem, 
fordam  de  heo  ys  mares  cynincges 
cester  ; 

36  Ne  du  ne  swere  |'urh  din  heafod, 
fordam  de  du  ne  miht  senne  locc  gedon 
hwitne,  odde  blacne  ; 

37  S5}>lice  si  eower  sprsec,  Hyt  ys,  hyt 
ys  ;  Hyt  nys,  hyt  nys  ;  s6]jlice  gyf  djer 
mare  by]?,  dset  bijj  of  yfele. 


V.  25-37]    WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

25  Be  thou  cousentynge  to  thin  atl- 
iicrsavic  soou,  the  whijlo  thou  art  in  the 
way  with  hyin,  lest  perauonture  thin  ad- 
ucrsarie  take  thee  to  the  iloniesnian,  and 
the  ilomesmau  take  thee  to  the  niynystre, 
and  thou  be  sente  in  to  prisoun. 

26  Trcwely  I  say  to  thee,  Thou  shalt 
not  go  thcnncs,  til  thou  5elde  the  last 
ferthing. 

27  5e  han  herd  fox*  it  was  said  to  olde 
men,  Thou  shalt  nat  do  leeherye. 

28  Forsothc  Y  saj'  to  5011,  for  why 
eaery  man  that  seeth  a  womman  for  to 
c  lueite  hire,  now  he  hath  do  lecherie  by 
hire  in  his  hertc. 

?9  That  5if  tin  ri^t  ei5e  sclaundre  thee, 
p  ille  it  out,  and  cast  it  fro  thee  ;  for  it 
s  leedith  to  thee,  that  oou  of  thi  luembris 
perishe,  than  al  thi  body  go  iu  to  lielle. 

30  And  5if  thi  ri5t  hond  sclaundre  thee, 
kitt  it  awey,  and  cast  it  fro  thee  ;  for  it 
spedith  to  thee,  that  oon  of  thi  membris 
perishe,  than  that  al  thi  body  go  in  to 
helle. 

3 1  Forsothe  it  is  said,  ^Yho  euere  shal 
leeue  his  wyf,  jeue  he  to  hir  a  libel.'*' 

32  Sothely  Y  say  to  50U,  that  euery 
n:an  that  shal  leeue  his  wyf,  outaken 
cause  of  foruicacioun,  he  niakith  hire  do 
lecherie,  and  he  that  wcddith  the  forsaken 
to'ijf,  doth  auoutrie. 

33  Efte  soouys  5ee  han  herd,  that  it  was 
said  to  olde  men.  Thou  shalt  not  for- 
swere,  sothely  to  the  Lord  thou  shalt 
jeeld  thin  oetliis. 

34  Forsothe  Y  say  to  50U,  to  nat  swere 
on  al  manere  ;  neither  by  heuene,  for  it 
is  the  trone  of  God  ; 

35  Xether  by  the  crthe,  for  it  is  the 
stole  of  his  feet ;  neither  by  Jerusalem, 
for  it  is  the  citee  of  a  greet  kyng ; 

36  Xeither  thou  shalt  swere  by  thin 
lieued,  for  thou  niaist  not  make  oon 
licer  whyt,  or  blak  ; 

37  But  be  ;oure  word  5ea,  3ea  ;  Nay, 
nay  ;  forsothe  that  that  is  more  than 
this,  is  of  yuel. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


21 


25  Agrc  with  thine  adversary  at  once, 
whyles  thou  arte  in  the  waye  with  hym, 
lest  thine  adversary  delyvi'e  the  to  the 
iudge,  and  the  iudge  delivre  the  to  the 
minister,  and  then  thou  be  cast  iu  to 
prcson. 

26  I  say  luito  the  vcix'ly,  Thou  shalt  not 
come  out  thence,  till  thou  have  payed  the 
vtniost  farthinge. 

27  Ye  have  herde  howe  yt  was  sayde  to 
them  off  olde  tyme,  Thou  shalt  nott  coni- 
mitt  ad\'outrie. 

28  But  I  say  vnto  you,  that  whosoever 
eyeth  a  wyfe  lustynge  affter  her,  hathe 
committed  advoutrie  with  her  alredy  in 
his  hert. 

29  Wherfore  yf  thy  right  eye  offende 
the,  plucke  hym  out,  and  caste  him  from 
the  ;  better  hit  is  for  the,  that  one  of  thy 
membrcs  perisshe,  then  that  thy  whole 
body  shuld  be  caste  in  to  hell. 

30  Also  yf  thy  right  honde  offend  the, 
cut  hym  off,  and  caste  hym  from  the  ; 
better  hyt  ys,  that  one  off  thy  inembres 
perisshe,  then  that  all  thy  body  shulde  be 
caste  in  to  hell. 

3  r  Hit  ys  sayd,  "Whosoever  put  awaye 
his  wyfe,  let  hym  geve  her  a  testymonyall 
of  her  devorcement. 

32  But  I  say  vnto  you,  whosoever  put 
awaye  hys  wyfe,  except  hyt  be  for  fornica- 
tion, causeth  her  to  breake  matrimony, 
and  whosoever  marycth  her  that  is  di- 
vorsed,  breketh  wedloeke. 

33  Agayne  ye  have  herde,  howe  it  was 
sayd  to  them  off  olde  tyme,  Thou  shalt 
not  forswere  thy  sllfe,  but  shaltt  performe 
thyne  othe  to  God. 

34  But  I  say  vnto  you,  swere  not  at  all ; 
nether  by  heven,  for  hit  ys  Goddes 
scate  ; 

35  Nor  yet  by  the  erth,  ffor  it  ys  hys 
fote  stole ;  nether  by  Jerusalem,  ffor  hit 
ys  the  cite  of  the  grete  kynge  ; 

36  Nether  shalt  thou  sweare  by  thy 
heed,  because  thou  canst  not  make  one 
heer  Avhyte,  or  blacke  ; 

37  ]'ut  your  communicacion  shalbe  Ye, 
ye  ;  Nay,  nay  ;  for  what  soever  is  more 
than  that,  cometh  off  y veil. 


22 


GOTHIC,  360. 


38  Hausideclu}>  ])atei  qi})an  "ist,  Augo 
und  augin,  yali  tunj^u  und  tunj^au. 

39  Ij)  ik  qi))a  Vzwis,  ui  andstandan  allis 
})amma  unselyin ;  ak  yabai  whas  )juk 
stautai  bi  tailiswon  \>euvA  kinuu^  waudei 
imma  yali  \>o  anj^ara  ; 

40  Yah  jjamraa  wilyandin  mi])  ))us  staua, 
yah  paida  Jjelna  niman,  aflet  'imma  yah 
wastya ; 

41  Yah  yabai  whas  ]>\ik  ananaujjyai 
rasta  aina,  gaggais  mi))  "imma  twos. 

42  pamma  bidyandin  |)uk  gibais,  yah 
J)amma  wilyandin  af  ])us  leiwhan  sis  ni 
uswandyais. 

43  Hausidedu))  ))atei  qi|)an  ist,  Friyos 
newhundyan  J^einana,  yah  fiais  hand  ])ein- 
ana.''' 

44  Aj)})an  "ik  qijja  izwis,  friyo))  fiyands 
'izwarans,  ))iu))yai))  ]jans  wrikaudans  izwis, 
waila  tauyai])  J^aim  hatyandam  izwis,  yah 
bidyai)'/  bi  Jaans  usjjriutandans  izwis  ; 

45  Ei  wairjjaij)  sunyus  attins  izwaris  ])is 
"in  himinam,  unte  sunnon  seina  uvrannei)) 
ana  ubilans  yali  godans,  yah  rigneij?  ana 
garaihtans  yah  ana  inwlndans. 

46  Yabai  auk  friyo])  ])ans  friyondans 
izwis  ainans,  Avho  mizdono  habaijj  1  niu 
yah  ))ai  J)iudo  |)ata  samo  tauyand  1 

47  Yah  yabai  golei))  j^ans  friyonds  izwar- 
ans |)atainei,  whe  managizo  tauyi])  ?  niu 
yah  motaryos  J^ata  samo  tauyand. 

48  Siyai})  nu  yus  fullatoyai,  swaswe 
atta  izwar  sa  in  himinam  fullatoyis  ist. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Atsaiwhi}?,  armaion  iz- 
wara  ni  tauyan  in  andwairjjya  manne,  du 
saiwhan  im,  aij)])au  laun  ni  habaij?  fram 
attin  izwaramma  Jjamma  in  himinam. 

2  pan  nu  tauyais  armaion,  ni  haurnyais 
faura  ]>us,  swaswe  ))ai  liutans  tauyand  in 
gaqum))im  yah  in  garunsim,  ei  hauhyain- 
dau  fram  mannam ;  amen  qijja  izwis, 
andnemun  mizdon  seina. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

38  Ge  gehyrdon'''  dset  gecweden  wses, 
Eage  for  eage,  and  toj)  for  te\>. 

39  S5))lice  ic  secge  eow,  ne  Avinne  ge 
ongen  da  de  eow  yfel  d5|) ;  ac  gyf  hwa, 
de  slea  on  din  swydre  wenge,  gegearwa 
him  dset  oder  ; 

40  And  dam  de  wylle  on  dome  wid  de 
flitan,  and  niman  dine  tunecan,  Iset  him 
to  dinne  wtefels  ; 

41  And  swa  hwa  swa  de  genyt  jiusend 
stapa,  ga  mid  him  odre  twa  ])useud. 

42  Syle  dam  de  de  bidde,  and  dam  de 
[wylle]  ■•■  set  de  borgian  ne  wyrn  du 
him.^ 

43  Ge  gehyrdon  dpet  gecweden  wses, 
Lufa  dinne  nextan,  and  hata  dinne  feond. 

44  S5})lice  ic  secge  eow,  lufiaj?  eowre 
fynd,  and  doj)  wel  dam  de  eow  yfel  do)?, 
and  gebidda])  for  eowi'e  ehteras,  and  tael- 
endum  eow ; 

45  Dset  ge  sin  eowres  feeder  beam  de 
on  heofonuni  ys,  se  de  de]>  dset  his 
sunne  up-aspringj)  ofer  da  godan  and 
ofer  da  yfelan,  and  he  Iset  rinan  ofer  da 
rihtwisan  and  ofer  da  unrihtwisan. 

46  Gyf  ge  s5))lice  da  lufia))  de  eow  luf- 
iaj),  hwylce  mede  habbaj)  ge  1  hu  ne  d6]> 
manfulle  swa  1 

47  And  gyf  ge  dset  an  d6]>  dast  ge  eowre 
gebrodra  wylcumia);,  hwset  d5  ge  mare? 
hu  ne  do))  hsedene  swa  1 

48  Eornustlice  beo])  fulfremede,  swa 
eower  heofonlica  feeder  is  fullfremed. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Begymaj),  dset  ge  ne 
don  eowre  rihtwisnesse  beforan  mannum, 
dset  ge  sin  geherede  fram  him,  elles 
nsebbe  ge  mede  mid  eowrum  feeder  de 
on  heofonum  ys. 

2  Eornustlice  donne  dii  dine  selmessan 
sylle,  ne  blawe  man  byman  beforan  de, 
swa  liceteras  do))  on  gesomnungum  and 
on  wicum,  dset  hi  sin  ge-arwur))ode  fram 
mannum  ;  so))  ic  secge  eow,  hi  onfengon 
hyra  mede. 


V.  38.-VL  2.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

38  5ee  han  horde  that  it  is  said,  Ei3C 
for  6150,  toth  for  toth. 

39  But  Y  say  to  50U,  to  nat  arjoiu  stonde 
yuel  ;  l)ut  5if  any  shal  sniyte  thee  in  the 
ri3t  cheeke,  3cue  to  hyni  and  the  tother  ; 

40  And  to  hym  that  wolc  stryuc  with 
thee  in  dome,  and  take  aM'ey  thi  coote, 
h"'eue  thou  to  hyni  and  thin  ouer  dothc  ; 

41  And  who  cuere  constraynoth  tliec  a 
thousand  pacis,  go  thou  with  hym  otlier 
tweyne. 

42  Forsothe  3if  to  hym  that  axith  of 
thee,  and  turne  thou  nat  awey  fro  hym 
that  wol  borwe  of  tlioe. 

43  5ee  han  lierd  that  it  is  said,  Thou 
shalt  loue  thin  nei5bore,  and  hate  thin 
enmy. 

44  But  Y  say  to  50U,  loue  506  30ure 
enniyes,  do  jce  wel  to  hem  that  haten 
50U,  and  preye  3ee  for  men  pursuynge, 
and  falsly  chaleugynge  30U  ; 

45  Tliat  3ee  be  the  sonys  of  30ure  fadir 
that  is  in  heuenes,  that  makith  his  sune 
to  springe  vp  vpon  good  and  yuel  men, 
and  rayneth  vpon  iuste  men  and  vniuste 
men. 

46  For  5if  5e  louen  hem  that  louen30u, 
what  meed  shul  5ee  haue  ?  whether  and 
puplicansdon  nat  this  thing? 

47  And  5if  3ec  greteu^  5oure  brethei^en 
oonly,  what  more  ouer  shul  500  don  ? 
whether  and  paynymmys  don  nat  this 
thing  i 

48  Thcrfure  be  3ee  parlit,  as  and  5oure 
heuenly  fadir  is  partit. 


TYNDALE,  J526. 


93 


Chap.  VI.  i  Take  300  hede,  lest  50 
don  5our  ri5twisne.sse  before  men,  that 
3ee  be  seen  of  hem,  ellis  30  shule  nat  han 
meed  at  50ure  fadir  that  is  in  heuenes. 

2  Therfore  when  thou  dost  almesse,  nyle 
thou  synge  byfore  thee  in  a  trumpe,  as 
ypocritis  don  in  synagogis  and  streetis, 
that  thci  ben  maad  worsliipful  of  men  ; 
forsothe  Y  saye  to  30U,  thei  han  resceyued 
her  meede. 


38  Ye  have  herdc  howe  it  ys  sayd,  An 
eye  for  an  eye,  a  tothe  for  a  totlie. 

39  But  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  ye  with- 
stond  not  wrongc  ;  but  yf  a  man  gevc 
the  a  blowc  on  thy  right  chekc,  tournc 
to  him  the  othre  ; 

40  And  yfl"  eny  man  will  sue  the  at  the 
lawe,  and  take  tliy  coutc  from  the,  Ictt 
hym  have  tliy  cloocke  also  ; 

41  And  whosoever  wyll  coinpcll  the  to 
goo  a  myle,  goo  Avyth  him  twayne. 

42  Geve  to  him  that  axcth,  and  from 
him  that  wolde  borowe  tourne  not  awaye. 

43  Ye  have  herde  howe  it  is  sayde.  Thou 
shalt  love  thyne  neghbour,  and  hate  thine 
enemy. 

44  i>ut  Y  saye  vnto  yt)U,  love  yourc 
enemies,  blesse  them  that  coursse  you, 
do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  praye 
ftbr  them  which  doo  you  wronge,  and 
persecute  you  ; 

45  That  ye  maye  be  the  chyldrcn  of 
youre  hevenly  father,  fibr  he  uiakcth  his 
sunne  to  aryse  on  the  yvell  and  on  the 
good,  and  sendeth  his  reyne  on  the  iustc 
and  on  the  iniuste. 

46  For  yf  ye  shall  love  them  which  love 
you,  what  rcwarde  shall  ye  have  1  doo 
not  the  publicans  even  so  ? 

47  And  if  ye  be  frendly  to  youre  bre- 
thren onli,  what  singulcr  thynge  doo  yel 
doo  nott  the  publicans  lykewyse  1 

48  Yc  shall  therfore  be  perfccte,  even 
as  youre  hevenly  father  is  perfecte. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Take  hede  to  yourc 
almes,  that  ye  geve  it  not  in  the  syght  of 
men  to  the  intent  that  ye  woldc  be  senc 
off  them,  or  els  ye  gett  no  rewarde  off 
youre  father  in  heven. 

2  Whensoever  therfore  thou  gevcst  thine 
almes,  thou  shalt  not  make  a  trompefc  to 
be  blowne  before  the,  as  the  ypocrites 
do  in  the  synagoges  and  in  the  stretes, 
ffor  to  be  prcysed  off  men  ;  verily  I  say 
vnto  you,  they  have  there  rewarde. 


24 


GOTHIC,  360. 


3  I]j  J5uk  tauyandan  armaion,  ni  witi 
Lleidumei  jjeinaAvlia  taiiyij^  taihswo  ]?eina, 

4  Ei  siyal  so  armaliairti]>a  jjeina  'in  fulh- 
snya,  yah  atta  jieins  saei  saiwhilj  in 
i'uihsnya,  usgibi}'  ))us  in  bairhtein. 

5  Yali  J)an  bidyai]^,  ni  siyaij^  swaswe  j^ai 
lintans,  unte  friyond  in  n-aqum)?im  yah 
waihstam  plapyo  standandans  bidyan,  ei 
t,^aumyaindau  mannam  ;  amen  qiJjaizwiS; 
Jjatei  haband  mizdou  seina. 

6  I}>  })U  pan  bidyais,  gagg  in  he})yon 
)>eina,  yah  galukands  haurdai  jjeinai, 
bidei  du  attin  }7einamma  Jjamma  in  fulh- 
snya,  yah  atta  j^eins  saei  saiwhif)  in 
fulhsnya,  nsgibi)>  pus  in  bairhtein. 

7  Bidyandansujj-pan  ni  fikiwaurdyai)?, 
swaswe  pai  piudo,  pugkei))  im  auk  ei  in 
filmvaurdein  seinai  andhausyaindau. 

8  Ni  galeikojj  nu  paim,  wait  auk  atta 
izwar  pizei  yus  paurbuj),  faurpizei  yus 
bidyai|>  ina. 

9  Swa  nu  bidyaip  yus,  Atta  unsar  ]ju  in 
liiminam,  weihnai  namo  pein ; 

10  Qimai  piudinassus  peins  ;  waii-pai 
wilya  peins  swe  in  himina  yah  ana  airpai; 

1 1  Hlaif  unsai-ana  pana  sinteinan  gif  uns 
Limma  daga ; 

^2  Yah  aflet  uns  patei  skulans  siyaima, 
swaswe  yah  weis  afletam  paim  skulam 
luisaraim ; 

1 3  Yah  ni  briggais  uns  in  fvaistubnyai, 
ak  lausei  uns  af  paninia  ubilin ;  unte 
peina  ist  piudangardi,  yah  mahts,  yah 
wuljius  in  aiwins.  Amen. 

1 4  Unte  yabai  afletip  mannam  missaded- 
ius  ize,  afletip  yah  izwis  atta  izwar  sa 
irf'ar  himinam. 

X  5  I)' yabai  ni  afletip  mannam  missaded- 
ius  ize,  ni  pan  atta  izwai-  afletij>  missa- 
dcdins  izwaros. 

1 6  Appan  bipe  fastaip,  ni  wairpaip  swa- 
swe ]?ai  liutans  gaurai,  frawardyand  auk 
andwairpya  seina,  ei  gasaiwhaindau  mann- 
am fastandans  ;  amen  qipa  izwis,  patei 
andnemun  mizdon  seina. 

17  Ij)  pu  fastands,  salbo  haubi})  |>ein, 
yah  kidya  peina  jnvah, 


ANGLO-SAXOI^,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

3  S5)5Hce  donne  du  dine  selmessan  do, 
nyte  din  wynstre  hAvset  do  din  swydre, 

4  Dset  din  selmesse  sy  on  diglum,  and 
din  feeder  hit  agylt  de,  se  de  gesyhjj  ou 
dighmi. 

5  And  donne  ge  eow  gebiddon,  ne  beo  ge 
swylce  liceteras,  da  lufiaj)  dtet  hig  gebid- 
don hi  standende  on  gesomnungum  and 
streeta  hyrnum,  dset  men  hig  geseon  ;  sop 
ic  secge  eow,  hi  onfengon  hyra  mede. 

6  Du  soplice  donne  du  de  gebidde,  gang 
into  dinum  bed-clyfan,  and  dinre  dura  be- 
locenre,  bide  dinne  feeder  on  dihlum,  and 
din  freder  de  gesyhp  on  dihlum,  hyt 
agylt^de. 

7  S6j)lice  donne  ge  eow  gebiddon  nell- 
on'''  ge  sprecan  fela,  swa  swa  hsedene, 
hig  wenap  dset  hi  sin  gehyrede  on  hyra 
menigfeaklan  sprsece. 

8  Nellen  ge  eornostlice  him  ge-efenlsec- 
an,  soplice  eower  feeder  wat  hweet  eow 
pearf  ys,  eerdam  de  ge  hyne  biddap. 

9  Eornusthce  gebiddap  eow  dus,  Feeder 
lire  dii  de  eart  on  heofonum,  si  din  nama 
gehalgod  ; 

I  o  To-becume  din  rice ;  gewurde  din 
willa  on  eorpan  swa  swa  on'  heofonum  ; 

II  U'rne  deeghwamhcan  hlaf  syle  us 
to-deeg  3 

12  And  forgj^f  us  ure  gyltas,  swa  swa 
we  forgyfap  urum  gyltendum  ; 

13  And  ne  geleed  dd  us  on  costnunge 
ac  alj-s  us  of  yfele 

.     .     .     .     Soplice. 

14  AVitodlice  gyf  ge  forgyfap  mannum 
hyra  synna,  donne  forgyfp  eower  se  heof- 
enlica  fa?der  eow  eowre  gyltas. 

1 5  Gyf  ge  soplice  ne  forgyfap  mannum, 
ne  eower  feeder  ne  foi'gyfp  eow  eowre 
syiina.''' 

16  S5plice  donne  ge  feeston,  nellon  ge 
wesan  swylce  lease-licceteras,  hig  fornym- 
ap  h}Ta  ansyna,  dset  hig  eeteowun 
mannum  feestende  ;  soplice  ic  secge  eow, 
da^t  hig  onfengon  hyra  mede. 

17  Du  s5plice  donne  du  feeste,  smyra 
din  heafod,  and  pweah  dine  ansyne, 


VI  3-17.]         WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

.3  But  thoc  (loyiige  almesse,  knowe  iiat 
the  loft  hoiul  what  thi  ri3t  hoiid  doth, 

4  That  thi  ahnos  bo  in  hidlis,  and  thi 
fadir  that  scetlt  in  hidlis,  shal  ^oldo  to 
thee. 

5  And  when  ;c  shnln  prove,  500  shuln 
iiat  bo  as  ypooritis,  the  whiolio  stond^'ngc 
loucn  to  prove  in  synanogis  and  corners 
of  streetis,  that  thci  bo  seen  of  men  ; 
trewly  Y  say  to  50U,  tlioi  hun  resseyued 
lier  nieedc. 

6  But  whan  thou  slialt  preye,  entre  in 
to  thi  couche,  and  the  dore  schet,  preye 
thi  fadir  in  hidlis,  and  thi  fadir  that  seeth 
in  hidlis,  shal  5eelde  to  thee. 

7  Sothely  preyinge  nyle  566  speke 
niocho,  as  hcthen  nion  don,  for  thci  gcssen 
that  tliei  ben  herd  iu  tlieire  moche  spcche. 

8  Therforc  nyl  30  be  maad  liche  to  hem, 
for  5oure  fadir  woot  what  is  need  to  50U, 
before  that  50  axen  hym. 

9  Forsothe  thus  50  shulen  preyen,  Oure 
fadir  that  art  iu  heuenes,  halwid  be  thi 
name  ; 

10  Thi  kyngdom  cumme  to;  be  thi 
wille  don  as  iu  heuen  and  in  crtlie ; 

1 1  5if  to  vs  this  day  oure  breed  oner 
other  substauncc  ; 

1 2  And  for5cuc  to  vs  oure  dettls,  as  we 
for5eue  to  oure  dettours  ; 

13  And  leedevs  nat  in  to  temptacioun, 
but  delyuere  vs  fro  yuel.     Amen.^ 


14  Forsothe  ^if  3oe  shulen  forgone  to 
men  her  synnys,  and  joure  hcuenly  fadir 
shal  for5eue  to  30U  3ourc  trospassis. 

15  Sothely  5if  306  shulon  for5eue  not  to 
men,  neither  3oure  fadir  shal  for3eue  to 
50U  3oure  synnes. 

1 6  But  when  5ec  fasten,  nyl  3c  be  maad 
'as  ypocritis  sorweful,  for  thei  putten  her 

facis  out  of  kyndly  termys,  that  thei 
seme  fastyn^^e  to  men  ;  trewly  Y  say  to 
50U,  thei  ban  resseyued  her  meede. 

17  But  whan  thou  fastist,  anoynte  thin 
hede,  and  washe  thi  face. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


25 


3  But  when  thou  doest  thine  almes,  let 
not  thy  lyfte  bond  knowe  what  thy 
rinhte  hand  doth, 

4  That  tliync  almcs  may  be  secret,  and 
thy  father  whioh  seith  iu  secret,  shall 
rcwardo  the  openly. 

5  And  when  thou  praycst,  thou  shalt 
nott  be  as  the  ypocritos  arc,  for  they  love 
to  stond  and  praye  in  the  synagogges 
and  in  corners  of  the  stretes,  because 
they  wolde  be  sene  of  men  ;  A^ereley  I  saye 
vnto  you,  they  have  there  rewarde. 

6  But  Avlien  thou  prayest,  entre  into  thy 
chamber,  and  shutt  thy  dore  to  the,  and 
praye  to  thy  father  which  ys  in  secrete, 
and  thy  fatlicr  which  scith  in  secret,  shal 
rewarde  the  openly. 

7  But  when  ye  praye  bable  not  moche, 
as  the  gentyls  do,  for  they  tliincke  that 
they  shalbe  herdc  tfor  thei'C  moche  bab- 
lynges  sake. 

8  Be  ye  not  lyke  them  thei-e  fore,  for 
youre  father  knowoth  wherof  ye  have 
neade,  before  ye  axe  olf  him. 

9  After  thys  manor  there  fore  praye  ye, 
O  oure  fiither  which  arte  in  lieven,  halow- 
ed  be  thy  name  ; 

10  Let  thy  kingdom  come;  thy  wyll 
be  fultilled  as  well  in  erth  as  hit  ys  in 
heven ; 

1 1  Geve  vs  this  daye  oure  dayly  breade  ; 

1 2  And  forgeve  vs  oure  treaspases,  even 
as  we  forgeve  them  which  treaspas  vs  ; 

13  Leede  vs  not  into  tcmptacion,  but 
delyvre  vs  ffrom  yvell.     Amen. 


14  For  and  yff  ye  shall  forgeve  other 
men  there  treaspases,  youre  father  in 
heven  shal  also  forgeve  you. 

15  But  and  ye  wyll  not  forgeve  men 
there  trespases,  no  more  shall  youre 
fatlier  forgeve  youre  treaspases. 

16  ]\Ioreovrc  when  ye  faste,  be  not  sad 
as  the  yprocrites  arc,  for  they  disfigure 
there  fiiccs,  that  hit  myght  aperc  vnto 
men  that  they  faste  ;  verely  Y  say  vnto 
you,  they  have  there  rewarde. 

17  But  thou  when  thou  fastest,  ann- 
oynte  th}ne  heed,  and  washe  thy  face. 


20  GOTHIC,  360. 

18  El  nl  gasaiwliaizau  mannam  fastantis, 
ak  attin  jjeinamma  }iamma  'in  fulhsnya, 
yah  atta  )ieiiis  saei  saiwlii)?  in  fulhsnya, 
usgibit>  jms. 

1 9  Ni  huzdyai]?  Vzwis  huzda  ana  airjjai, 
barei  raalo  yah  nidwa  frawardeij),  yah 
Jjarei  })iubos  vifgraljand  yah  hlifand  ; 

20  1]>  huzdyai})  "izwis  huzda  in  himina, 
})ai-ei  nih  nialo  nih  nidwa  frawavdei}^,  yah 
jjarei  Jjiubos  ni  ufgraband,  nih  stiland. 

2 1  pai-el  auk  I'st  huzd  izwar,  J)aruh  ist 
yah  hairto  izwar. 

22  Lnkarn  leikis  ist  augo  ;  yabai  nu 
augo  ])eiu  ainfal})  ist,  allata  leik  jjeiu  liuh- 
adein  wairjji)^  ; 

23  I)j  yabai  augo  Jjein  imsel  ist,  allata 
leik  ]>ein  riqizein  wairjji}).  Yabai  nu 
liuhajj  l^ata  in  ]>us  riqiz  ist,  })ata  riqiz 
"Nvhan  filu  1 

24  Ni  manna  mag  twaim  frauyam 
skalkinon,  unte  yabai  fiyai))  ainana,  yah 
an]jarana  friyoj? ;  ai])]>au  ainamma  ufhaus- 
e\]>,  'i]>  an|)aramma  fi-akann.  Xi  magu]? 
Gujja  skalkinon  yah  mammoninj 

25  Du)j]5eqi)>a  izwis,  ni  maurnai}?  saiw- 
alai  izwarai,  Avha  matyaij)  yah  Avha 
di-igkai|)  ;  nih  leika  izwaramma,  whe 
wasyai}).  Niu  saiwala  mais  ist  fodeinai, 
yah  leik  wastyom  1 


26  Insaiwhi})  du  fuglam  himinis,  }>ei  nl 
saiaud,  nih  sneij^and,  nih  lisand  in  banst- 
ins ;  yah  atta  izwai'  sa  ufar  himinam 
fodei})  ins.  Niu  yus  mais  wulj?rizans 
slyuj)  ))aim  1 

27  Ij>  whas  izwara  maurnands  mag 
anaaukan  ana  wahstu  seinana  aleina 
alnal 

28  Yah  bi  wastyos  wha  saui-gaij?  1  Ga- 
kunnai|j  blomans  hai})yos,  whaiwa  wahs- 
yand.     Nih  arbaidyand,  nih  spinnand  ; 

29  Qi))uh  ])an  izwis,  {jatei  nih  Saulaumon 
in  allamma  Avuljjau  seinamma  gawasida 
sik  swe  ains  ]>\ze. 

30  Yah  jjande  j^ata  hawl  hal[jyos,  himma 
daga  wisando,  yah  gistradagis  in  auhn 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

18  Doet  du  ne  sy  gesewen  fram  mann- 
um  fa?stende,  ac  dinum  feeder  de  ys  on 
dyglum,  and  din  fiedei'  de  gesyh])  on. 
dyglum,  hyt  agylt  de. 

19  Nellen  ge  gold-hovdlan  eow  gold- 
hordas  on  eorjjan,  diser  6m  and  mo])J)e  hit 
fornimj),  and  dser  Jjeofas  hit  delfaj?  and 
forstela]) ; 

20  Gold-hordia])  eow  s6})lice  gold-hordas 
on  heofeuan,  dier  nadov  6m  ne  nioJ)J>e 
hit  ne  fornim]?,  and  dai-  Jjeofas  hit  ne 
delfaj),  ne  ne  forste]a]>. 

21  Witodlice  daer  din  gold-hord  is, 
doer  is  din  heorte. 

22  Dines  lichaman  leohtfoet  is  din 
eage  ;  gyf  din  eage  bij)  anfeakl,  eall  din 
lichama  bi]j  beorht ; 

23  Gif  din  eage  s6j)Iice  bij?  manfull, 
eall  din  Hchama  by];  jjysterfull.  Eorn- 
ustlice  gyf  dset  leoht  de  on  de  is  synt 
Jjystru,  hu  mycle  beo]?  da  ]?ystru  ?^ 

24  Ne  ma3g  nan  man  twam  hlafurdum 
Jjeowian,  odde  he  s6j)lice  Eenne  hataj), 
and  oderne  lufajj ;  odde  he  biJ)  unum 
gehyrsum,  and  6drum  ungehj'^rsum.  Ne 
magon  ge  Gode  Jjeowian  and  woruld- 
welan. 

25  Fovdam  ic  secge  eow,  d?et  ge  ne 
sin  ymbhydige  eowre  sawle,  hwtet  ge 
eton  ;  ue  eowrum  lichaman,  mid  hwani 
ge  syn  ymbscrydde.  Hii  nys  sco  sawl 
selre  donne  mete,  and  eower  lichama 
betera  donne  di'et  reaf  ? 

26  Behealdajj  heofonan  fuglas,  fordam 
de  hig  ne  sawaj),  ne  hig  ne  ripa]?,  ne  hig 
ne  gadria])  on  berne  ;  and  eower  heof- 
onlica  feeder  hig  fet.  Hii  ne  synt  ge 
selran  donue  hig  1 

27  Hwylc  eower  mseg  s6))lice  ge])encan 
dset  he  ge-eacnige  ane  elne  to  hys  an- 
licnesse  1 

28  And  to  hwi  synt  ge  ymbhydige  be 
reafe  1  Besceawiajj  tecyres  lilian,  liu 
hig  weaxa]).  Ne  swinca])  hig,  ne  hig  ne 
spinna]) ; 

29  Ic  secge  eow  s5])lice,  dfet  furdon 
Salomon  on  eallum  hys  wuldre  naes 
oferwrigen  swa  swa  an  of  dyson. 

30  Sojjlice  gyf  secyres  weod,  daet  de 
to-dseg  is,  and  bi])  to-moi'gen  on  ofen 


YI.  18-30.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

18  That  thou  l»c  iiat  seen  fastvii,!;c  to 
men,  but  to  thi  fadir  tliat  is  in  hidlis,  and 
thi  fadir  that  secth  in  hidlis,  shal  3celde 
to  thee. 

19  Nyle  30  tresoui-c  to  50U  tresours  in 
erthe,  wher  rust  and  niou-jthc  distruy- 
ctli,  and  -wher  thecues  delueu  out  and 
stelen  ; 

20  But  tresoure  5CC  to  50U  trcsouris  in 
hcucne,  wher  neither  rust  ne  mou3the 
distruyeth,  and  wher  theues  deluen  nat 
cut,'*'  ne  stelen. 

2  1  Forsothc  wlier  thi  tresour  is,  there 
and  thin  herte  is. 

22  The  lanternc  of  thi  body  is  thin  C3e  ; 
5if  thin  ei3e  be  symple,  al  thi  body  shal 
be  li5tful ; 

23  But  5if  thyn  ei^e  be  weyward,  al  thi 
body  shal  be  devkful.  Therfore  3if  the 
li3t  that  is  in  thee  be  derknessis,  how 
grete  sliulen  thilk  derknessis  be  1 

24  No  man  may  sei'ue  to  two  lovdis,  for- 
sothe  ethir  he  shal  haat  the  toon,  and 
loue  the  tother ;  other  he  shal  susteyn  the 
toon,  and  dispise  the  tothir.  ^e  mown 
nat  sei'ue  to  God  and  richessis. 

25  Therfore  Y  say  to  3011,  that  5e  ben 
nat  besie  to  30iu-e  lijf,  what  30  shulen 
ete  ;  othir  to  30ure  body,  with  what  3e 
shuln  be  elothid.  ^Yher  3oure  lijf  is  nat 
more  than  mete,  and  the  body  more  than 
clothe  1 

26  Beholde  36  the  flee3inge  foulis  of 
the  eir,  for  thei  sowen  nat,  ne  repyn, 
neither  gadrcn  in  to  bernys  ;  and  3ouie 
fadir  of  Jieuen  fedith  hem.  AYher  3e  ben 
nat  more  worth!  than  thei  ? 

27  Sothely  who  of  30U  thenkinge  may 
putte  to  to  his  stature  00  cubitc  ? 

28  And  of  clothing  what  ben  3e  besye  1 
Beholde  30  the  lilies  of  the  feelde,  how 
thei  wexen.  Thei  traucilen  nat,  nether 
spynnen ; 

29  Trewlyl  say  to  30U,  for  whi  neither 
Salamon  in  al  his  glorie  was  keuerid  as 
oon  of  thcs. 

30  For  vf  God  clothith  thus  the  lieye 
of  the  feeld,  that  to  day  is,  and  to  morwe 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


27 


18  That  it  appere  nott  vnto  men  howe 
that  thou  fastest,  but  vnto  thy  father 
whieh  is  in  secrete,  and  thy  father  which 
seith  in  secret,  shall  rewarde  the  openly. 

19  Gaddre  not  treasure  together  ou 
erth,  where  rust  and  mothes  coirupte, 
and  where  theves  breake  through  and 
steal  e  ; 

20  But  gaddre  ye  treasure  togedder  in 
heven,  Avhcrc  nether  rust  nor  mothes 
corrupte,  and  wher  theves  nether  breake 
vp,  nor  yet  stcale. 

2 1  For  whearesocver  youre  treasure  ys, 
there  are  youre  hertcs  also. 

22  The  light  off"  thy  body  is  tliyne  eye  ; 
wherfore  if  thyne  eye  be  single,  all  thy 
body  ys  full  of  light ; 

23  But  and  if  thyne  eye  be  Avycked, 
then  is  all  thy  body  full  of  derckues. 
Wherefore  yf  the  light  that  is  in  the  be 
dercknes,  howe  greate  ys  that  dercknes  1 

24  No  man  can  serve  two  masters,  for 
other  he  shall  hate  the  one,  and  love  tlie 
other  ;  or  els  he  shall  lene  the  one,  and 
despise  the  other.  Ye  can  nott  sei-A^c 
God  and  mammon. 

25  Therefore  I  saye  vnto  you,  be  not 
carefuU  for  youre  lyfe,  what  ye  shall  eate, 
or  what  yn  shall  dryncke  ;  nor  yet  for 
youre  boddy,  what  rayment  ye  shall  weare. 
Ys  not  the  lyfe  more  worth  then  meate, 
and  the  bodily  more  off"  value  then  ray- 
ment 1 

26  Beholde  the  foules  of  the  aier,  for 
they  sowc  not,  neder  reepe,  nor  yet  cary 
into  the  barnes  ;  and  yett  youre  hevenly 
father  fedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  better 
then  they  1 

27  Whiche  off"  you  though  he  toko 
tought  therefore  coulde  put  one  cubit 
vnto  his  stature  1 

28  And  wliy  care  ye  then  for  rayment? 
Beholde  the  lyles  off"  the  felde,  howe 
thy  growc.  They  labour  not,  nether 
spynn  ; 

29  And  yet  for  all  that  I  sale  vnto  you, 
that  even  Solomon  in  all  his  royalte  was 
nott  ai-ayed  lyke  vnto  one  of  these. 

30  'Wherfore  yf  God  so  clothe  the 
grasse,  which  ys  to  dayc  in  the  felde,  and 


28  GOTHIC,  360. 

galagi[),  Gu}>  swa  wasyij),  whaiwa  mais 
izwis  leitil  galaubyandaus  1 

3 1  Ni  maurnaij?  nu,  qi)>aiidans,  Wlia 
mat}' am  1  ai}>l'au,  Wba  drigkam  ?  ai|)])au, 
Wlie  wasyaima  1 

32  All  auk  Jiata  l^iudos  sokyand ;  waituh 
Jjan  atta  izwar  sa  ufar  liiminam  Jjatei 
j;aurbu]) 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

asend,    God   sciyt,    eala    ge   geliwaedes 
geleafan,  dam  mycle  ma  lie  sciyt  eow  ? 

3 1  Nellen  ge  eornustlice  beon  ymbbyd- 
ige,  dus  cwedende,  Hwtet  ete  we?  odde, 
Hwiet  driuce  we  1  odde,  Mid  bwani  beo 
we  oferwrogene  1 

32  SoJ)lice  ealle  das  Jjing  Jjeoda  secea]> ; 
witodlice  eowei'  fajder  wat  daet  ge  ealra 
dyssa  Jjinga  be];urfon. 

33  Eornustlice  secea]?  merest  Godes 
rice  and  bys  ribtwisnesse,  and  ealle  das 
|)ing  eow  beo})  dser-to  ge-eacnode. 

34  Ne  beo  ge  na  bogiende  ymb  da 
morgenlican  neode,  sojjlice  se  morgenlica 
dseg  carajj  ymb  byne  sylfue;  segbwylc 
dfEg  btefjj  geuob  on  bys  agenum  ymb- 
bogan. 


■''Chap  VII.   i  Nellen  ge  deman,  dset 
ge  ne  syn  fordemede  ; 

2  Witodlice  dam  ylcan  dome  de  ge 
demajj,  eow  bi]j  gedemed,  and  on  dam 
ylcan  gemete  de  ge  meta|),_  eow  byj) 
gemeteu. 

3  To  bwi  gesibst  du  dset  mot  on  dines 
br5dor  egan,  and  dii  ne  gesybst  done 
beam  on  dinum  agenum  eagan  1 

4  Odde  bumeta  cwyst  du  to  dinum 
breder,  Brodur,  |)afa  d?et  ic  ut-ad5  dast 
mot  of  dinum  eagan,  doune  se  beam 
bi]>  on  dinum  agenum  eagan  1 

5  La  du  liccetere,  ado  serest  ut  done 
beam  of  dinum  agenum  eagan,  and  be- 
bawa  donne  dset  du  ut-iido  dset  mot  of 
diues  br5dur  eagan. 

6  Nellen  ge  syllan  dset  balige  bundum, 
ne  ge  ne  wurpen  eowre  mere-grotu  to- 
foran  eowrum  s\vynon,  de-lses  big  mid 
byra  fotum  big  foi'tredon,  and  big  donne 
ougean  gewende  eow  toslyton.'*' 

7  BiddaJ),  and  eow  bi})  geseald  ;  secea|j, 
and  ge  bit  finda]) ;  cnuciaji,  and  eow  bi]? 
ontyned. 

8  Witodlice  selc  dsera  de  bit,  he  onfebjj ; 
and  se  de  sec|?,  be  byt  fint ;  and  dam 
cuuciendum  bijj  ontyned. 


YI.3I.— YII.  8.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

is  sentc  in  to  the  fourneyse.  bow  moclic 
more  50U  of  litil  fcitli  I 

31  Thcrfore  nyl  5c  be  bisie,  sayinge, 
"Wliat  sbuleii  wo  oto  ?  or,  AVbat  sbulen 
we  (b-ynke  I  or,  AVitb  wluit  tiling  sbulen 
Ave  bo  kcuered  ? 

32  Forsotbe  bcitbcu  men  secbcn  alle 
these  tbingis  ;  trewly  joure  fiidir  wote 
that  50  ban  need  to  alle  these  tbingis. 

33  Tlicrfore  soke  500  first  the  kyngdam 
of  God  and  his  ri5twisnesse,  and  alle 
these  tbingis  sbuleu  be  cast  to  30U. 

34  Therfore  nyle  50  be  besie  in  to  the 
morwe,  for  the  morew  day  shal  be  besie 
to  it  self;  sothely  it  sufficith  to  the  day 
bis  malice. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


29 


Chap.  VII.   i  Xyle  30  deme,  that  36 
be  nat  demyd  ; 

2  For  in  what  dome  50  demen,  30  sbuleu 
ben  demyd,  and  in  what  mesure  36 
meten,  it  shal  be  meten  to  30U. 

3  But  what  seest  thou  a  festu'''  in  the 
ei3e  of  thi  brother,  and  thou  seest  nat  a 
beme  in  thin  owne  ei3e  ? 

4  Or  what  maner  saist  thou  to  thi 
brother,  Brother,  suffre  that  I  caste  out 
a  festu  fro  thin  0150,  and  loo  !  a  beme  is 
in  thin  owne  ei3e  1 

5  Ypocrite,  cast  out  first  a  beme  of  thin 
ei3e,  and  than  thou  shalt  see  for  to  cast 
out  a  festu  of  the  ei5e  of  thi  brother. 

6  Xyl  30  3eue  holy  thing  to  houndis, 
nether  sonde  30  30ur  margaritis^  before 
swyne,  lost  perauonture  thei  dofoulen 
hem  with  theire  foot,  and  lest  Jtoundis 
turned  to  gidre  al  to-broke  50U. 

7  Axe  30,  and  it  slial  be  30uen  to  30U  ; 
seke  50,  and  30  shulen  fynde  ;  knocke  30, 
and  it  shal  be  opnyd  to  50U. 

8  For  echo  that  axith,  takitb  ;  and  be 
that  secbitli,  fyndith  ;  and  it  shal  be 
opnyde  to  a  man  kuokynge. 


to  morowc  sbalbc  cast  into  the  fournacc; 
shall  be  not  mocbo  more  do  the  same 
vnto  you,  o  yc  oil"  lytic  faytb  l 

31  Thcrfore  take  no  thought,  saynge, 
What  shall  we  eate  I  or,  What  shall  we 
dryncke  ?  or,  Wherewith  shall  wc  ha 
clothed  i 

32  Aftre  all  these  thyngcs  soke  the 
gentyls  ;  for  youre  hevenly  father  know- 
ctli  that  ye  have  neade  off  all  these 
thynges. 

33  But  rather  seke  ye  fyrst  the  kyng- 
dom  off  heven  and  the  rightcwesnes  their 
of,  and  all  these  thynges  shalbe  miuistrecl 
vnto  you. 

34  Care  not  therfore  for  the  daye  folo- 
ynge,  for  the  daye  foloynge  shall  care  ffor 
yt  sylfe  ;  echo  dayes  trouble  ys  sufficient 
for  the  same  silfe  day. 


Chap.  YII.    i  Judge  not,  lest  ye  be 
iudged ; 

2  For  as  ye  iudge,  so  shall  ye  be  iudged, 
and  with  what  mesur  ye  mete,  with  the 
same  shall  it  be  mesurd  to  you  agayne. 

3  Why  seist  thou  a  moote  in  thy  brothers 
eye,  and  percevest  not  the  beame  that  ys 
in  tbyne  awne  eye  ? 

4  Or  why  sayest  thou  to  thy  brother, 
Suffre  me  to  plucke  oute  a  moote  oute 
off  tbyne  eye,  and  behold  !  a  beanie  is  in 
tbyne  awne  eye  1 

5  Ypocryte,  first  cast  oute  the  beame 
oute  of  thync  awne  eye,  and  then  §haltc 
thou  so  clearly  to  plucke  oute  the  moote 
oute  off  thy  brothers  eye. 

6  Geve  not  that  which  is  holy  to  doggcs, 
nether  cast  ye  youre  i)earlos  before 
swyne,  lest  they  trcade  thorn  vnder  their 
fete,  and  the  other  tournc  agayne  and  all 
to  rent  you. 

7  Axe,  and  it  shalbe  geven  you  ;  seke, 
and  ye  shall  fynd;  knocke,  and  it  shalbe 
opened  vnto  you. 

8  For  whosoever  axetb,  reccavotb  ;  and 
be  that  sekotb,  fyndeth  ;  and  to  byni 
that  knocketh  it  shalbe  opened. 


30 


GOTHIC,  360. 


yaina   izwis   mans,    swa 

3'ali  jvis  tauyai]>  "im,  ]jata  auk  ist  wito)? 
yali  praufeteis. 

1 3  Inngaggai|)  j^airli  aggwn  daur  ;  unte 
braid  daur,  yah  rums  wigs  sa  brigganda 
in  fralustai,  yali  managai  sind  ]>ai  inn- 
galeij^andaus  J^airh  Jjata. 

14  Whan  aggwu  jiata  daur,  yah  ]jraih- 
ans  wigs,  sa  brigganda  in  Ubainai,  yah 
fawai  sind  J^ai  bigitandans  jjana. 

1 5  AtsaiwhiJ?  swcjjauh  faura  liugnaprau- 
fetum,  |jaim  izei  qimand  at  "izwis  in 
wastyom  lambe,  \]>  innaj^ro  sind  wulfos 
wilwandans  ; 

1 6  Bi  akranam  ize  uf kunnaijj  'ins.  Ibai 
lisauda  of  Jjaurnum  weinabasya,  aiJ)J)au  af 
wigadeinom  smakkans  1 

1 7  Swa  all  bagme  godaize  akrana  goda 
gatauyi]?  ;  ij?  sa  ubila  bagms  akrana 
ubila  gatauj'i]?. 

■  18  Ni  mag  bagms  jjiujjeigs  akrana 
ubila  gatauyan,  nili  bagms  ubils  akrana 
jjiujjeiga  gatauyan. 

19  All  bagme  ni  tauyandane  akran 
god,  usmaitada,  yah  in  fon  atlagyada. 

20  pannu  bi  akranam  ize  ufkunnai]) 
ins. 

2 1  Ni  whazuh  sael  qij^i}?  mis,  Frauya, 
Frauya,  inngaleijji]?  in  Jjiudangardya  him- 
ine  ;  ak  sa  tauyands  wilyan  attins 
meinis  ]jis  in  himinam. 

22  Managai  qijjand  mis  in  yainarama 
daga,  Frauya,  Frauya,  niu  J^einamma  nam- 
in  praufetidedum,  yah  Jjeinamma  nam- 
in  unhuljjons  uswaurpum,  yah  j^einamma 
namin  mahtins  mikilos  satawidedum  ? 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

9  Hwylc  man  is  of  eow,  gyf  his  sunu 
hyne  bit  hlafes,  sylst  du  him  stan  1 

10  Odde  gyf  he  bytt  fisces,  sylst  du 
him  nteddran  ? 

11  Eornustlice  nil  ge,  cte  yfele  synt, 
cunnun  g5de  sylena  eowrum  bearnum 
syllan,  mycle  ma  eower  fpeder  cte  on 
heofenum  ys  syle]?  god  clam  de  hyne 
bidda))  ? 

12  Eornustlice  ealle  da  ]jing,  de  ge 
wyllen  djBt  men  eow  d5n,  do]?  ge  him 
dset  sylfe,  dset  ys  s5j)lice  se  and  Avitegena 
bebod. 

1 3  Ganga])  inn  jjurh  dset  nearwe  geat ; 
fordon  de  dset  geat  is  swyde  wid,  and  se 
weg  is  swide  rum  de  to  foi'spillednesse 
gelset,  and  swyde  manega  synt  de  jjui'h 
done  weg  fara|). 

14  Eala  hu  neara  and  hii  angsum  is 
dset  geat,  and  se  weg,  de  to  life  gelsedt, 
and  swyde  feawa  synt  de  done  Aveg 
findon.''" 

T  5  Warnia])  eow  fram  leasum  witegum, 
da  cuma])  to  eow  on  sceapa  geg}Telum, 
ac  hig  beoj?  innane  reafigende  wulfas  ; 

16  Fram  hyi'a  wsestmun  ge  hi  under- 
gytaj?.  Cwyst  du  gadera]>  man  win- 
berian  of  ])ornuin,  odde  fic-seppla  of 
])yi'ncinum  1 

17  Swa  selc  god  treow  byrjj  gode  wsest- 
mas ;  and  selc  yfel  treow  byr]?  yfele 
wsestmas. 

18  Ne  mseg  da?t  g5de  treow  beran 
yfle  wsestmas,  ne  dset  yfele  treow  g5de 
wsestmas. 

1 9  tE'Ic  treow  de  ne  byrj)  godne  wsestm, 
sy  hyt  forcorfen,  and  on  fyr  aworpen. 

20  Witodlice  be  hyra  wsestmum  ge  hig 
oncnawa]>. 

21  Ne  gsej>  selc  dsera  on  heofena  rice, 
de  cwyjj  to  me,  Drihten,  Drihten  ;  ac  se 
de  wyrcjj  mines  fsederwillan  de  on  heof- 
enum is,  se  gse]?  on  heofena  rice. 

2  2  Manege  cwedaj?  on  dam  dssge  to  me, 
Drihten,  Drihten,  hii  ne  Avitegode  we  on 
dinum  naman,  and  on  dinum  naman  we 
ut-awurpon  deoflu,  and  on  dinum  namau 
we  worhton  mycle  mihta  1 


VII.  9-22.]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

9  Other  who  of  5011  is  a  man,  whom 
^if  his  sone  axe  breed,  wher  he  shal 
<h-csso  to  hym  a  stooii  1 

10  Other  jif  he  shal  axe  a  fislie,  wher 
he  slial  dresse  to  hym  a  seri)ent  I 

1 1  Therfore  5if  5e,  when  5e  ben  yuel 
men,  ban  knt)wen  for  to  ^eue  good  thing- 
us  jouen  to  5oure  sonys,  liou  myche 
more  joure  fadir  that  is  in  henenes  shal 
^eue  good  thingis  to  men  axinge  hym  1 

1 2  Therfore  alle  thingis,  what  euer 
thingis  5ee  wolen  that  men  don  to  50U, 
iind  56  do  to  hem,  forsothe  these  thingis 
ien  the  lawe  and  propbetis. 

13  Entre  5e  l)i  the  streyt  5ate  :  for  the 
gate  that  Icdith  to  perdieioun'*'  is  brode, 
and  the  weye  large,  and  ther  ben  many 
that  entren  bi  it. 

14  How  streit  is  the  5atc,  and  narewe 
the  weye,  that  ledith  to  lijf,  and  there 
ben  fewe  that  fynden  it. 

15  Perceyue  5e,  and  flee  fi'O  fais  pro- 
pbetis, the  whiche  cumraen  to  50U  in 
ciothingis  of  sheepis,  bot  wythynne  thei 
ben  rauyshynge  wolues ; 

t6  Of  her  fruytis  5e  sbulen  knowe 
;  hem.  Whether  men  gaderen  grapis  of 
'   thonn's,  or  fijgis  of  brceris  1 

17  So  euerv  good  tree  makith  good 
fruytis;  sothely  an  yuel  tree  makith  yuel 
fruytis. 

18  A  good  tree  may  nat  make  yuel 
fruytis,  nether  an  yuel  tree  make  good 
fruytis. 

19  Euery  tree  that  makith  nat  good 
fruyt,  shal  be  kitte  doun,  and  shal  be 
sent  in  to  the  fire. 

?o  Therfore  of  her  fruytis  jee  shulen 
knowe  hem. 

2  1  Nat  eche  man  that  saith  to  me, 
Lord,  Lord,  shal  entre  into  the  kyngdam 
of  henenes  ;  but  he  that  doth  the  wille 
of  my  fadir  that  is  in  henenes,  he  shal 
entre  in  to  the  kyngdam  of  henenes. 

22  Many  shul  say  to  me  in  that  day. 
Lord,  Lord,  whether  we  han  nat  pro- 
jihecied  in  tin  name,  and  han  cast  out 
deuelis  in  thi  name,  and  han  don  many 
vcrtues  in  thi  name  1 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


31 


9  Ys  there  eny  man  among  you,  which 
wolde  proffer  his  sonne  a  stone,  if  he 
axed  him  breed  I 

I  o  Or  if  he  axed  fysshe,  wolde  he  pi'ofiFer 
hyme  a  serpent  ? 

II  Yrt'  ye  then,  whiche  are  evyll,  cami 
gcve  to  youre  cbyldren  good  gyftes,  howo 
mochc  nioore  shall  youre  father  which  ys 
in  heven  geve  good  thynges  to  them  that 
axe  off  hym  ? 

1 2  Therfore,  whatsoever  ye  wolde  that 
men  shulde  do  to  you,  even  so  do  ye  to 
them,  this  ys  the  lawe  and  the  pro- 
phettcs. 

13  Enter  in  at  the  strayte  gate  ;  ffbr 
wyde  is  the  gate,  and  broadc  ys  the  wayc 
thatt  leadeth  to  destruccion,  and  many 
there  be  which  goo  yn  there  att. 

14  For  strayte  ys  the  gate,  and  narowe 
is  the  wayc,  that  leadeth  vnto  lyfe,  and 
feawe  there  be  that  fyudc  it. 

1 5  Beware  off  falce  prophettes,  whiche 
come  to  you  in  shepes  elothynge,  but  in- 
wardly they  are  ravenynge  wolves  ; 

16  Ye  shall  knowe  them  by  their  frutes. 
Do  men  gaddre  grapes  of!"  thornes,  or 
figges  of  brp-es  1 

1 7  Even  soo  evry  good  tree  bryngethc 
forthe  good  frute  ;  butt  a  corrupte  ti'ce 
bryngethe  forthe  evyll  frute. 

18  A  good  tree  cannott  brynge  forthe 
bad  frute,  nor  yett  a  bad  tree  can  brynge 
forthe  good  frute. 

1 9  Every  tree  that  bryngethe  not  forthe 
good  frute,  shalbe  hewne  doune,  and  cast 
into  the  fyre. 

20  Wherforc  by  there  frutes  ye  shall 
knowe  them. 

21  Not  all  they  thatt  say  vnto  me, 
^Master,  ^Master,  shall  enter  into  the 
kyngdome  off"  heven  ;  but  he  that  ful- 
filleth  my  fathers  will  which  ys  in  heven. 

22  Many  will  saye  to  me  yn  that  daye, 
blaster,  Master,  have  we  nott  in  thy 
name  prophesied,  and  in  thy  name  have 
we  not  cast  oute  devyls,  and  in  thy  name 
have  we  nott  done  many  miracles  ? 


32 


GOTHIC,  360. 


23  Yah  'pan  anclliaita  im,  patei  ni  whan- 
hun  kun|)a  izwis  ;  aflei)>i])  fairra  mis,  yus 
waurkyandans  iinsibyana. 

24  Whazuli  nu  saei  liausei]?  Avaurda 
meina,  yali  tauyi]?  ]jo,  galeiko  ina  waira 
frodamma,  saei  gatimrida  razu  seiu  ana 
staina. 

25  Yah  atiddya  dala]j  rign,  yah  qemim 
awhos,  yah-waiwoun  windos,  yah  bistugq- 
uu  bi  jjanima  razna  yainamma  ;  yah  ui 
gadraus,  unte  gasuH]?  was  ana  staina. 

26  Yah  whazuh  saei  hausei]?  waurda 
meina,  yah  ni  tauyi]>  ]>o,  galeikoda  mann 
dwalamma,  saei  gatimrida  razn  sein  ana 
malmin. 

27  Yah  atiddya  dahaj)  rign,  yah  qemun 
awhos,  yah  waiwoun  windos,  yah  bistugq- 
un  bi  yainamma  razna ;  yah  gadraus, 
yah  was  drus  is  mikils. 

28  Yah  Avar]),  \>an  ustauh  lesus'''  |30 
waurda,  biabridedun  manageins  ana  lais- 
einai  is  ; 

29  Was  auk  laisyands  ins,  SAvewaldufni 
habands,  yah  ni  SAvasAve  bokaryos. 


Chap.  YIII.  i  Dala]?  j^an  atgaggandin 
i'mma  af  fairgunya,  laistidedun  afar  im- 
ma  iumyons  managos. 

2  Yah  sai !  manna  ]jrutsfill  habands 
durinnands  iuAvait  ina,  qi|)ands,  Frauya, 
yabai  Avileis,  magt  mik  gahrainyan. 

3  Yah  ufrakyands  handu,  attaitok  im- 
ma,  qijjands,  Wilyau,  Avairj)  hrains.  Yah 
suns  hrain  AA^ar]?  Jiata  ])rutsfill  is. 

4  Yah  qa))  irama  lesus,  SaiA\'h,  ei  mann 
ni  qijjais  ;  ak  gagg,  |)uk  silban  ataugei 
gudyin,  yah  atbair  gil^a  ])oei  anabau]) 
Moses,  du  weitAvodijjai  im. 

5  Afaruh  ]?an  Jiata  innatgaggandin  im- 
ma  inKafarnaum,duatiddya  imma  hunda- 
fajjs,  bidyands  ina, 

6  Yah  qi|)ands,  Frauya,  ])iumagus  meins 
ligi])  in  garda  uslijja,  harduba  bahvibs. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

23  Donne  cwede  ic  to  him,  Dret  ic  eoAV 
nffifre  ne  cude  ;  geAvita])  fram  me,  ge  de 
Avoi'hton  unryhtAA'ysn  esse. 

24  EornustHce  Eelc  daera  de  das  mine 
word  gehyrj),  and  da  wyrc}5,  bi|)  gehc 
dam  wisan  Avere,  se  hys  hus  ofer  stan 
getimbrode. 

25  Da  com  deer  ren,  and  mycele  flod, 
and  drer  bleoAvun  Avindas,  and  ahruron  on 
dset  hus  ■■,  and  hyt  na  ne  feoU,  s6|)lice  hit 
Avses  ofer  stan  getimbrod. 

26  And  Eelc  daera  de  gehyr})  das  mine 
AYord,  and  da  ne  Avyrc]),  se  bijj  gelic  dam 
dysigan  men,  de  getimbrode  hys  hus  ofer 
sand-ceosel. 

27  Da  rinde  hit,  and  daer  comun  flod, 
and  bleoAVun  Avindas,  and  ahruron  on 
diet  hiis  ;  and  dpet  -hus  feoU,  and  hys 
hryi*e  Avses  my  eel."'" 

28  Da  Avses  geAvorden,  da  se  Hselend 
das  Avord  ge-endode,  da  Avundrode  dset 
folc  his  lare  ; 

29  S6])hce  he  Iserde,  SAA'ylce  he  anweald 
hsefde,  and  na  swa  SAva  hyi-a  b5ceras,  and 
Sundor-halofan. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  S5])Hce  da  se  Hfelend"'' 
of  dam  munte  nyder-asttlh,  da  fyligdon 
hym  mycle  msenio. 

2  Da  genealsehte  an  hreofla  to  him,  and 
hine  to  him  ge-eadmedde,  and  dus  CAvaef), 
Drihten,  gyf  du  Avylt,  du  miht  me  ge- 
clcensian. 

3  Da  astrehte  se  Htelend  hys  hand,  and 
hrepode  hyne,  and  dus  cwsep,  Ic  Avylle, 
beo  geclaensod.  And  hys  hreofla  AVses 
hriedlice  geclsensod. 

4  Da  CAVtejj  se  Heelend  to  him,  Warna 
de,  da3t  du  hyt  Ucenegum  men  ne  secge  ; 
ac  gang,  seteoAve  de  dam  sacerde,  and 
bi'ing  hym  da  l;ic  de  Moyses  behead, 
on  hyra  gecydnesse. 

5  Sojjh'ce  da  se  Hfelend  ineode  on 
Capharnaum,  da  genealsehte  hym  fin 
hundredes  ealdor,  hyne  biddende, 

6  And  dus  CAvsedende,  Drihten,  m'n 
enapa  \i]>  on  minum  huse  lama,  and  mid 
yfle  ge|)read. 


VII.  23.-VIIL  6.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

23  And  than  Y  shal  knowliclie  to  licin, 
For  I  kuewe  50U  ueuer  ;  departe  awey 
fro  me,  50  that  worclien  wickidncsso. 

24  Tlicrfore  cche  man  that  hcrith  these 
my  wonlis,  and  doth  lieni,  slial  be  maad 
liche  to  a  wijse  man,  that  hath  biUlid  his 
hons  vpon  a  stoon. 

25  And  rayn  came  doun,  and  flodis 
camen,  and  wyndis  blewen,  and  rusheden 
in  to  that  hons  ;  and  it  fclle  nat  doun, 
for  it  was  foundid  on  a  stoon. 

26  And  cucry  man  thatheritli  those  my 
wordis,  and  doth  hem  nat,  is  lichc  to  a 
man  fool,  that  hath  bildid  his  hous  on 
grauel.^ 

27  And  rayn  came  doun,  and  floodis 
camen,  and  wyndis  blewen,  and  thei 
hurliden  in  to  that  hous  ;  and  it  felle 
doun,  and  the  fallyng  doun  therof  was 
grete. 

28  And  it  is  maad,  when  Jhesus  hadde 
eendid  these  wordis,  the  cumpauyes  wou- 
dreden  on  his  techyng  ; 

29  Sothely  he  was  tecli}Tige  hem,  as  a 
via II  hauynge  power,  and  nat  as  the 
scribis  of  hem,  and  Pharisees. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


33 


Chap.  VIII.  i  Forsothe  when  Jhesus 
hadde  comen  doun  fro  the  hil,  many 
cumpauyes  folewiden  hym. 

2  And  loo  !  a  leprouse  man  cum- 
mynge  worshipidc  hym,  sayinge,  Lord, 
jif  thou  wolt,  thou  maist  make  me  clene. 

3  And  Jhesus,  holdynge  forthe  the 
hond,  touchide  hym,  sayinge,  I  wole, 
be  thou  maad  clene.  And  anoon  the 
lepre  of  hym  was  clensid. 

4  And  Jliesus  saith  to  hym,  See,  say 
thou  to  no  man ;  but  go,  shewe  thee 
to  presti.s,  and  offre  that  jifte  that 
Moyses  comaundide,  in  to  witnessing 
to  hem. 

5  Sothely  when  he  hadde  entride  in 
to  Capharnaum,  centurio  nei5ide  to 
hym,  preyinge  hym, 

6  And  saide.  Lord,  my  child  lyeth  in 
the  lious  sike  on  the  palsie,  and  is  yuel 
tourmentid. 


23  And  then  will  I  knowlege  vnto  them, 
That  I  never  kncwc  them ;  depart  from 
me,  ye  workers  of  inicjuite. 

24  Whosoever  hearethe  off  me  these 
saynges,  and  doethe  the  same,  I  wyll 
lykon  hyme  vnto  a  wyseman,  which  byllt 
his  houssc  on  a  roeke. 

25  Andaboundance  offrayne  descended, 
and  the  Huddcs  cam,  and  the  wynddes 
blewe,  and  bctt  vppon  that  .same  houssc  ; 
and  it  was  not  over  throwcn,  because  it 
was  grounded  on  the  roeke. 

26  And  whosoever  heareth  of  me  these 
saingcs,  and  doth  not  the  same,  shalbe 
lykened  vnto  a  folysh  man,  which  bilt 
his  housse  apon  the  sonde. 

27  Andabundavmce  of  rayne  descended, 
and  the  fluddes  cam,  and  the  wynddes 
blewe,  and  beet  vppon  that  housse  ;  and 
it  was  over  throwen,  and  great  was  the 
fall  off  it. 

28  And  it  cam  to  passe,  that  when 
Jesus  had  ended  these  saynges,  the  peplc 
were  astonnied  at  his  doctryne  ; 

29  For  he  taught  them,  as  one  havynge 
power,  and  not  as  the  scribes. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  When  Jesus  was  come 
downe  from  the  mountaync,  moeh  people 
folowed  liim. 

2  And  lo  !  there  cam  a  lepre  and 
wor.sheped  him,  saynge,  Master,  if  thou 
wylt,  thou  canst  make  me  clene. 

3  He  putt  forthe  his  hond,  and 
touched  him,  saynge,  I  wyll,  be  clene. 
And  immediatly  his  leprosy  was  clensed. 

4  And  Jesus  said  -vnto  him,  Se,  thou 
tell  no  man ;  but  go,  and  shewe  thysilf 
to  the  preste,  and  offer  the  gyfte  that 
Moses  commauuded  to  be  offred,  in 
witncs  to  them. 

5  When  Jesus  was  cut  red  in  to  Caper- 
naum, there  cam  vnto  him  a  certa}ne 
Centurion,  besechyng  him, 

6  And  saynge.  Master,  my  servaunt  ly- 
eth sicke  att  home  off  the  palsye,  and 
is  grevously  payned. 


34  GOTHIC,  360. 

7  Yah  qa]5  du  imma  lesus,  Ik  qimands 
galiailya  ina. 

8  Yah  andhafyands  sa  hundafa)js  qa]>, 
Fraiiya,  m  im  wairJ)S,  ei  uf  hrot  mein 
inngaggais  ;  ak  })atainei  qi}^  waurda,  yah 
gahaihiijj  sa  })iumagus  meins. 

9  Yah  auk  ik  manna  i'm  habands  uf 
"waldul'nya  nieinamma  gadrauhtins  ;  yah 
qijia  du  Jjarama,  Gagg,  yah  gaggijj  ;  yah 
anjiaramma,  Qim,  yah  qimi]) ;  yah  du 
skalka  meinamma,  Tawei  Jiata,  yah  tau- 

10  Gahausyauds  ]ian  lesus  siklaleikida, 
yah  qa]>  du  )jaim  afarlaistyandam,  Amen 
qi}ia  izwis,  ni  in  Israela  swah^uda  gahxub- 
ein  bigat. 

1 1  Ajjjjan  qij^a  Tzwis,  J^atei  managai  fvam 
urrunsa  yah  saggqa  qimand,  yah  ana- 
kumbyand  mij?  Abraliama  yah  Isaka  yah 
lakoba  in  })iudangardyai  himine  ; 

12  I})  ]jai  sunyus  Jjiudangardyos  us- 
"vvairpanda  in  riqis  Jjata  hindumisto  ; 
yainar  wair})!])  grets,  yah  krusts  tun|)iwe. 

13  Yah  qaj)  lesus  jjamma  hundafada, 
Gagg,  yali  s  was  we  gahxubides,  Avair|3ai 
Jjus.  Yah  gahaihaoda  sa  Jjiumagus  is  in 
yainai  wheilai. 

14  Yah  qimands  lesus  in  garda  Pai- 
traus,  yah  gasawh  swaihron  is  ligandein 
in  heitom. 

1 5  Yah  attaitok  handau  izos,  yah  aflai- 
lot  iya  so  heito  ;  yali  urrais,  yah  and- 
bahtida  imma. 

16  At  andauahtya  ))an  waurjianamma, 
atbei'un  du  imma  daimonaryans  manag- 
ans,  yah  uswarp  ['ans  ahmans  waurda,  yah 
allaus  ]?ans  ubil  habandans  gahailida; 

17  El  usfullnodedi,  Jiata  gamelido  jjairh 
Esaian,  praufetu,  qij^andan,  Sa  mnnaht- 
ins  unsaros  usnam,  yali  sauhtins  usbar. 

18  Gasaiwhands  ])an  lesus  mauagans 
hiuhmaus  bi  sik,  hailiait  galeijjan  sipou- 
yans  hindar  marein. 

19  Yah  duatgaggands  ains  bokaveis, 
qaJ)  du  imma,  Laisari,  hiistya  ])ukj  |)is- 
wliaduh  Jnidei  gaggis. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

7  Da  cwsej)  se  Hadend  to  him,  Ic  cume, 
and  hyne  gehzele. 

8  Da  andswarode  se  hundredes  ealdor 
and  dus  cwfe)?,  Driliten,  ne  eom  ic  wyrde, 
daet  du  ingange  under  mine  {lecene  ;  ac 
cwej)  din  an  word,  and  min  cnapa  bi]j 
gehfeled. 

9  S6j;hce  ic  eom  man  under  anwealde 
geset,  and  ic  hsebbe  j^egnas  under  me ; 
and  ic  cwede  to  dysum,  Gang,  and  he 
gee})  ;  and  ic  cwede  to  odrum,  Cum, 
and  he  cymj? ;  to  minum  Jieowe,  Wyrc 
dis,  and  he  wyrc)?, 

I  o  Witodlice  da  se  Hselend,  dis  gehyrde, 
da  wundrode  he,  and  cwse})  to  dam  de 
hym  fyligdon,  S5|)  ic  seege  eow,  ne 
gemette  ic  swa  mycehie  geleafan  on 
Israheh 

I I  To  s5j)um  ic  secge  eow,  dset  man- 
ige  cumajj  fram  east-dcele  and  west- 
dsele,  and  AvuniaJ?  mid  Abrahame  and 
Isahace  and  lacobe  on  heofena  rice  ; 

12  Witodlice  discs  rices  bearn  beo]? 
•aworpene  on  da  ytemestan  Jjystro  ;  dser 
bi])  wop,  and  t6})a  gristbitung. 

13  And  se  Hselend  cwas})  to  dam  hund- 
rydes  ealdre,  Ga,  and  gewurde  de,  swa 
swa  du  gelyfdest.  And  se  cnapa  wses 
gehseled  on  dsere  tide.''" 

14  Da  se  Hselend  com  on  Petres  huse, 
da  geseah  he  hys  swegre  licgende,  and 
hri])igende. 

15  And  he  fethran  byre  hand,  and  se 
fefor  hig  forlet ;  da  aras  heo,  and  ];enode 
him. 

1 6  S5})lice  da  hyt  sefen  wses,  hig  broht- 
on  him  manege  deofol-seoce,  and  he 
ut-adrsefde  da  unclsenan  gastas  mid  hys 
worde,  and  he  ealle  gehsekle  da  yfel- 
hfebbeudan ; 

1 7  Dait  w^re  gefylled,  dset  de  gecwed- 
en  is  ))urh  Esaiam,  done  Avitegan,  dus 
cwedende,  He  onfeng  ure  untrumuessa, 
and  he  abser  iire  adla. 

1 8  Da  geseah  se  Hgelend  mycle  menig- 
eo  ymbutan  hyne,  da  het  he  hig  faran 
ofer  done  mu|)an.''' 

19  Da  genealsehte  him  an  bocere,  and 
cwpe]),  Lareow,  ic  fylige  de,  swa  hwasder 
swa  dii  fserst. 


VIII.  7-19-]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

7  Ami  Jhcsiis  saitli  to  Iiym,  I  shal 
ciimc,  and  shal  hele  liym. 

8  And  oenturio  answcryngc  saith  to 
lij'm,  Loi'd,  I  am  not  wortlii,  that  thou 
entre  vndir  my  roof;  but  oonly  say 
bi  word,  and  my  child  shal  be  helid. 

9  For  will  and  I  am  a  man  ordeynd 
vnder  power,  hauynge  vndir  me  kni3tis  ; 
and  I  say  to  this,  Go,  and  he  goth  ; 
and  to  an  othei%  Come  thou,  and  he 
cometh  ;  and  to  my  seruaunt,  Do  thou 
this  thing,  and  he  doth. 

10  Sotlicly  Jhesus,  hecrj-nge  these 
thingis,  wondride,  and  saide  to  men 
suynge  hym,  Trewly  I  saye  to  50U,  I 
foudc  nat  so  grete  feith  in  Yrael. 

1 1  Sothely  Y  say  to  30U,  that  manye 
simlen  come  fro  the  est  and  west,  and 
shulen  rest  with  Abraham  and  Ysaac 
and  Jacob  in  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes ; 

12  Forsothe  the  sonys  of  the  rewmc 
shulen  be  cast  out  in  to  vttremest 
dcrknessis  ;  there  shal  be  weepynge, 
and  bcctyngc  togidre  of  teeth. 

13  And  Jhesus  saide  to  ccnturio,  Go, 
and  as  thou  hast  bileeued,  be  it  don  to 
thee.  Aud  the  child  was  helid  fro  that 
hourc. 

14  And  when  Jhesus  hadde  comcn  in 
to  the  hous  of  Symoud  Pctre,  he  say  his 
wyues  modcr  liggynge,  and  shakun  with 
feueris. 

15  And  he  touchide  hir  bond,  aud  the 
feuer  lefte  hir  ;  and  she  roose,  and 
seruyde  hem. 

16  Sothely  whan  the  eucnyng  was 
maad,  thci  brou-te  to  hym  many  hau- 
ynge deuelys,  and  he  castide  out  spiritis 
by  word,  aud  liclide  allc  hauynge  yuel ; 

17  That  it  shulde  be  fulfillid,  that  thing 
that  was  said  by  Ysaie,  the  prophcte, 
sayinge.  He  toke  oure  infirmytees,  and 
bore  oure  sykenessis. 

18  Sothely  Jhesus  sccyngc  many  cum- 
panyes  about  hym,  bad  Ms  disclplis  go 
ouer  the  water. 

19  And  00  scribe '^  commyngc  to,  saide 
to  hym,  Maistre,  I  shal  sue  thee,  whidir 
ouor  thou  shalt  tro. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


35 


7  And  Jesus  sayd  vnto  him,  I  wyll 
come,  and  cure  him. 

8  The  Centurion  answered  and  saide, 
Syr,  I  am  not  worthy,  that  thou  shuldest 
com  vnder  the  rofe  of  my  housse  ;  l)ut 
spoake  the  worde  only,  and  my  servaunt 
shalbe  healed. 

9  For  Y  also  my  selfe  am  a  n^an  vndre 
power,  and  have  sowdccres  vndre  me ; 
and  Y  saye  to  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth  ; 
and  to  anothre.  Come,  and  he  cometh  ; 
and  to  my  servamit.  Do  this,  and  he 
docth  it. 

10  When  Jesus  herdc  these  saynges, 
he  marveyled,  and  said  to  them  that 
folowed  him,  Verely  Y  say  A^nto  you, 
I  have  not  founde  so  great  fayth,  no, 
not  in  Israeli. 

Ill  say  thcrfore  vnto  you,  that  many 
shall  come  froni  the  eest  and  weest,  and 
shall  rest  with  Abraham  Ysaac  and 
Jacob  in  the  kyngdom  of  heven ; 

1  2  And  the  children  of  the  kingdom 
shalbe  cast  out  in  to  the  vtmoost  dcrck- 
nes  ;  there  shalbe  wepingc,  and  gnassh- 
ing  of  tethe. 

1 3  Then  Jesus  said  vnto  the  Centurion, 
Go  thy  waye,  and  as  thou  hast  beleued, 
so  be  it  vnto  the.  And  his  servaunt  was 
healed  that  same  houre. 

14  And  Jesus  went  into  Peters  housse, 
and  sawe  his  wyvcs  mother  lyingc  sicke 
of  a  fevre. 

15  And  he  thouched  her  hande,  and 
the  fevre  leeft  her ;  and  she  arose,  and 
ministred  vnto  them. 

16  When  the  even  was  come,  they 
brought  vnto  him  many  that  were  pos- 
sessed with  devylles,  and  he  cast  out  the 
spiritcs  with  a  worde,  and  healed  all  that 
Avere  sicke  ; 

17  To  fulfill  that  whiche  was  spoken 
by  Esay,  the  jirophet,  sainge.  He  toke 
on  him  oure  infirmytcs,  and  bare  oure 
sicknesses. 

18  Wlien  Jesus  sawmoche  people  about 
him.  he  commaunded  to  go  over  the 
water. 

19  .And  tiiere  cam  a  scril)e,  and  said 
vnto  him,  Master,  I  woll  folowe  the, 
whythcrsumcvcr  tiiou  goest. 

V  2 


36 


GOTHIC,  360. 


20  Yali  qa|>  du  inima  lesus,  Fauhons 
gTobos  aiguu,  yah  fuglos  himinis  sitlans, 
'i\)  sunus  maus  ui  babaij)  whar  haubijj 
sein  aiiabnaiwyai. 

21  AnJ)arub  )?an  siponye  is  qajj  du  im- 
ma,  Frauya,  uslaubei  mis  frumist  galei])- 
an,  yah  gafilhan  attan  meinana. 

22  Ij)  lesus  qajj  du  imma,  Laistei  afar 
mis,  yah  let  jjans  dau})ans  filhan  seinans 
dau|)ans. 

23  Yah  innatgaggandin  imma  in  skip, 
afariddyedun  imma  siponyos  is. 

24  Yah  sai !  wegs  mikils  war))  in  mar- 
ein,  swaswe  |)ata  skip  gahuli];  waii'jjan 
fram  wegim  ;  if)  is  saislep. 

25  Yah  duatgaggandans  siponyos  is, 
urraisidedun  ina,qijjandans,  Frauya,  nasei 
unsis  ;  fraqistnam. 

26  Yah  qaj)  du  im  lesus,  Wha  faurht- 
eif)  leitil  galaubyandans  ?  panuh  urreis- 
ands  gasok  windam  yah  marein,  yah 
war])  wis  mikil. 

27  I))  Ipa]  mans  sildaleikidedun,  qij^and- 
ans,  Whileiks  ist  sa,  ei  yah  Aviudos  yah 
marei  ufhausyand  imma  1 

28  Yah  qimandin  imma  hindar  marein 
in  gauya  Gairgaisaine,  gamotidedun 
imma  twai  daimonaryos,  us  hlaiAvasnom 
rinnandans,  sleidyai  filu,  swaswe  ni  mahta 
manna  uslei))an  J;airh  J^ana  wig  yainana. 

29  Yah  sai!  hropidedun,  qijjandans, 
Wha  uns  yah  Jms,  lesu,  sunau  Gu])S  1 
qamt  her  faur  mel  balwyan  unsis  1 

30  Wasuh  ]>an  fairra  im  hairda  sweine 
managaize  haklana. 

31  t\>  ]>o  skohsla  bedun  ina,  qij^andans, 
Yabai  uswairpis  uns,  uslaubei  uns  galeijj- 
an  in  ])0  hail-da  sweine. 

32  Yah  qa})  du  im,  Gaggi)).  tp  eis 
usgaggandans  galijjun  in  hairda  sweine  ; 
yah  sai  !  run  gawaurhtedun  sis  alia  so 
hairda  and  driuson  in  marein,  yah  ga- 
daujjnodedun  in  watnam. 

33  Ij)  Ipa'i  haldandans  gaj^lauhun,  yah 
galei|)andans  gataihun  in  baurg  all  bi 
})ans  daimonaryans. 

34  Yah  sai !   alia  so  baurgs  usiddya 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

20  Da  cw?e|)  se  Hselend  to  him,  Foxas 
habbaj)  holu,  and  heofenan  fuglas  nest, 
s5))lice  mannes  sunu  nsefj)  hwser  he  hys 
heafod  ahylde. 

2 1  Da  cw£b])  to  him  oder  of  hys  leorn- 
ing-cnihtum,  Drihten,  alyfe  me  serest  to 
farenne,  and  bebyrigean  minue  freder. 

22  Da  cwjef)  se  Heelend  to  him,  Fylig 
me,  and  leet  deade  bebyrigean  hyra 
deadan.''' 

23  And  he  astah  on  scyp,  and  hys 
leorning-cnyhtas  hym  fyligdon. 

24  Da  wear|j  mycel  styrung  geworden 
on  dsere  sse,  swa  dset  dset  scyp  wear]? 
ofergoten  mid  ydum  ;  witodlice  he  slep. 

25  And  hig  genealeehton,  and  by  aweht- 
on  hyne,  dus  cwedende,  Drihten,  hsele 
us  :  we  moton  forwurdan. 

26  Da  cwagj)  he  to  him,  To  hwi  synt  ge 
forhte  ge  lytles  geleafan  1  Da  aras  he 
and  behead  dam  winde  and  dfere  sse, 
and  dser  wear))  geworden  mycel  smylt- 
ness. 

27  Gewisslice  da  men  wundrodun,  and 
dus  cwsedon,  Hwa^t  is  des,  daet  windas 
and  see  him  hyrsumiaj?  1 

28  Da  se  Heelend  com  ofer  done  mu]?- 
an  on  Geraseniscra  rice,  da  urnon  him 
togenes  twegen  de  hsefdon  deofol-seoc- 
nesse,  of  byrgenum  utgangende,  da  waer- 
on  swide  rede,  swa  dpet  nan  man  ne 
mihte  faran  Jjurh  done  weg. 

29  And  hig  hrymdon,  and  cwsedon,  La  ! 
Hselend,  Godes  sunu,  hwpet  ys  de  and 
us  gemsene  1  come  du  hider  ser  tide  us 
to  |)reagenne  ? 

30  Dser  wses  soj^lice  unfeorran  swyna 
heord  manegra  manna  laeswiende. 

31  Da  deofla  s6})lice  hyne  btedon,  dus 
cwedende,  Gyf  du  us  ilt-adrifst,  asende 
us  on  das  swina  heorde. 

32  Da  cw8e]>  he  to  hym,  Fara|).  And 
hig  da  utgangende  ferdon  on  da  swin ; 
and  deer  rihte  ferde  eall  seo  heord  myc- 
lum  onreese  niwel  on  da  sse,  and  big 
wui'don  deade  on  dam  wsetere. 

33  Da  hyrdas  witodlice  flugon,  and 
comun  on  da  ceastre,  and  cyddon  ealle 
das  J'ing,  and  be  dam  de  da  deoful- 
seocuyssa  htefdon. 

34  Da  code  eall  seo  ceaster-waru  to- 


VIIL  20-34.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

20  And  Jhcsus  said  to  liyni,  Foxis  han 

dicliis,^  and  briddis  of  the  eir  han  ncstis, 
bnt  immnes  sone  hath  nat  wher  he  reste 
his  hcued. 

21  Sotheli  an  other  of  his  disciplis  saide 
to  hym,  Lord,  suftVe  nie  go  first,  and  j 
birye  my  fadir.  ! 

22  Forsothe  Jhesus  saide  to  hym,  Sue   [ 
thon  me,  and  hite  dede  men  birye  her 
dead  men. 

23  And  Jhesu  steyinge  vj)  in  to  a  litel 
sliip,  his  disciplis  sueden  hym. 

24  And  loo  I  a  grete  steryng  was  maad 
in  the  see,  so  that  the  litil  ship  was  hilid 
with  wawis  ;  bnt  he  slepte. 

25  And  his  disciplis  camen  ni3  to  hym, 
and  raysiden  hym,  sayinge.  Lord,  saue 
vs ;  we  perishen. 

26  And  Jhesus  seith  to  hem.  What  ben 
jee  of  litil  feith  agast  1  Thanne  he  rys- 
ynge  comaundide  to  the  wyndis  and  the 
see,  and  a  grete  pesiblenesse  is  maad. 

27  Forsothe  men  wondreden,  sayinge, 
What  manere  man  is  he  this,  for  the 
wyndis  and  the  see  obeishen  to  hym  ? 

28  And  whan  Jhesus  hadde  comen  ouer 
the  water  in  to  the  cuntre  of  men  of 
Genazereth,  twey  men  hauynge  deuelis 
runnen  to  hj'm,  goynge  out  fro  birielis, 
ful  feerse,"*"  so  that  no  man  mi3te  passe 
by  that  wey. 

29  And  loo  I  thei  crieden,  sayinge, 
What  to  vs  and  to  thee,  Jhesu,  the 
sone  of  God  ?  hast  thou  comen  hidir 
before  the  tyme  for  to  tourmente  vs  ? 

30  Sothely  a  floc^  of  many  hoggis 
lesewj-nge  was  nat  fer  from  hem. 

31  But  the  deuelis  preyeden  him,  sey- 
inge,  3if  thou  castist  out  vs  hennes,  seude 
vs  in  to  the  drone  of  hoggis. 

32  And  he  saith  to  hem.  Go  5ee.  And 
thei  goynge  out  wente  in  to  the  hoggis ; 
and  loo  !  in  a  greet  hire  al  the  droue 
wente  heedlyngc  in  to  the  see,  and  thei 
ben  dead  in  watris. 

33  Forsothe  the  hirdes  fledden  awey, 
and  cummynge  in  to  the  citee,  tolden 
alle  these  thingis,  and  of  hem  that  had- 
den  the  fendis. 

34  And  loo  I  al  the  citee  wente  a3einis 


TYNDALE,  1^526. 


37 


20  And  Jesus  said  vnto  him.  The  foxes 
have  holes,  and  the  bryd  of  the  aier 
have  nestes,  but  the  Sonne  of  the  mjin 
hath  not  where  on  to  leye  his  hecde. 

21  Anothre  that  was  one  of  hys  dis- 
ciples seyd  vnto  him,  Master,  suffrc  me 
fyrst  to  go,  and  burye  my  father. 

22  But  Jesus  said  vnto  him,  Folowe 
me,  and  let  the  deed  burie  their  deed. 

23  And  he  entred  in  to  a  shyppe,  and 
his  disciples  folowed  him. 

24  And  lo  !  there  arose  a  great e  storme 
in  the  see,  in  so  moche  that  the  shippe 
was  hyd  with  waves ;  and  he  was  aslepe. 

25  And  his  disciples  cam  vnto  him, 
and  awocke  hym,  sayinge.  Master,  save 
vs  ;  we  perislie. 

26  And  he  said  vnto  them,  Why  are 
ye  fearfuU  o  ye  eudewed  with  lytell 
faithe  ?  Then  he  arose  and  rebuked  the 
wyndes  and  the  see,  and  there  folowed  a 
great  e  calme. 

27  And  men  marveyled,  and  said.  What 
man  is  this,  that  bothe  wyndes  and  see 
obey  hym  ? 

28  And  when  he  was  come  to  the  other 
sydc  in  to  the  countre  off  the  Gergesens, 
there  met  him  two  possessed  of  devylles, 
which  cam  out  off  the  graves,  and  were 
out  off  measure  fearce,  so  that  no  man 
my  gilt  go  by  that  waye. 

29  And  lo  !  they  cryed  out,  saynge,  O 
Jesii,  the  Sonne  off  God,  what  have  we 
to  do  with  thee  ?  art  thou  come  hyther 
to  torment  vs  before  the  tyme  be  come? 

30  There  was  a  good  waye  off  from 
them  a  greate  heerd  of  swyne  fedinge. 

31  Then  the  devyles  besought  him, 
saynge.  If  thou  cast  vs  out,  suffre  vs  to 
go  oure  waye  into  the  heerd  of  swyne. 

32  And  he  said  vnto  them.  Go  youre 
waycs.  Then  went  they  out  and  de- 
parted into  the  heerd  of  swyne  ;  and  lo  ! 
all  the  heerd  of  swyne  was  earyed  with 
violence  hedlinge  into  the  sec,  and 
perisshed  in  the  water. 

33  Then  the  heei-dmen  fleed,  and  went 
there  ways  into  the  cite,  and  tolde  eveiy 
thinge,  and  what  had  fortuned  vnto  them 
that  were  possessed  of  the  devyls. 

34  And  lo !  all  the  cite  cam  out,  and 


38 


GOTHIC,  360. 


•\vi})ra  lesu ;  yali  j^asaiwliandans  iua,  bed- 
im ei  usli])i  hindar  markos  ize. 


Chap.  IX.  i  Yah  atsteigands  in  skip, 
ufarlai];,  yah  qam  in  seinai  baurg. 

2  pamih  atberun  du  imma  usli|jan,ana 
ligi'a  Ugandan.  Yah  gasaiwhands  lesus 
galaubein  ize,  qa|>  du  jjamma  usli))in, 
prafstei  j)uk,  barnilo  ;  afletanda  ])us  fra- 
waurhteis  })einos. 

3  painih  sumai  ])ize  bokaiye  qe))un  in 
sis  silbam,  Sa  wayamerei}). 

4  Yah  witands  lesns  fjos  mitonins  ize, 
qa|>,  Duwhe  yus  mito]?  ubila  in  hairtam 
izwaraim  1 

5  Whajmr  ist  raihtis  azetizo  qij^au, 
Afletanda  ]>x\s  frawaurhteis,  Jiau  qij^an, 
Urreis,  yah  gagg  1 

6  A]j})an  ei  AviteiJ?,  ))atei  waldufni  habaij) 
sa  sunus  mans  ana  air}iai  afleitan  fra- 
wanrhtins,  {janiih  qap  du  j^amma  uslij>in, 
Urreisands  ;  nim  })ana  ligr  J^einana,  yah 
gagg  in  gard  )?einana. 

7  Yah  urreisands,  galaij)  in  gard  sein- 
ana. 

8.  Gasaiwhandeins  ))an  manageins,  oht- 
edun  sildaleikyandans,  yah  mikilidedun 
Gu)>,  ])ana  gibandan  -vvaldufni  swaleikata 
mannam. 

9  Yah  Jjaii'hleijjands  lesus  yain]3ro,  ga- 
sawh  mannan  sitandan  at  motai,  Ma]?jjaiu 
haitanana.  Yah  qa}>  du  imma,  Laistei 
afar  mis.  Yah  usstandands,  iddya  afar 
imma. 

10  Yah  Avarjj,  bi|)e  is  anakimibida  in 
garda,  yah  sai !  managai  motaryos  yah 
frawaurhtai  qimandans  mi]5anakumbide- 
dun  lesua  yah  siponyam  is. 

1 1  Yah  gaumyandans  Fareisaieis  qe])un 
du  jjaim  siponyam  is,  Duwhe  mi])  motar- 
yam  yah  frawaurhtaim  matyi})  sa  laisareis 
izwar  1 

12  Ij)  lesus  gahausyands,  qa)?  du  im, 
Ni  })aurbun  hailai  lekeis,  ak  Jjai  unhaili 
habandans. 

13  Ajjj^an  gaggaijj  ganimi]>  vrha  siyai, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  gg^^.     [St.  Matt. 

geanes  dam  Hgelende ;  and  da  da  hig 
hyne  gesawun,  da  bsedon  hig  hyne,  dset 
he  ferde  fram  heora  gemserum. 


■•■Chap.  IX.  i  Da  astah  he  on  scyp, 
and  ofer-seglode,  and  com  on  his  ceastre. 

2  Da  brohton  hig  hym  Eenue  laman,  on 
bedde  licgende.  Da  geseah  se  HEelend 
hyra  geleafau,  and  cwsej)  to  dam  laman. 
La  beam,  gelyfe  de ;  beop  dine  synna 
forgifene. 

3  Da  cwsedon^  sume  da  boceras  him 
betwinan,  Des  spryc))  bysmor-sprsece. 

4  Da  se  Hseleud  geseah  hyra  gejjanc, 
da  cwse})  he,  To  hwi  Jjence  ge  yfel  on 
eowrum  heortum  1 

5  Hwset  is  eadelicre  to  cwedenne,  De 
beo))  forgyfene  dine  synna,  odde  to  cwed- 
aune,  Aris,  and  ga? 

6  Dset  ge  sojjlice  witon,  dset  mannes 
sunu  hsef  j)  anweald  on  eorjjan  synna  to 
forgyfenne,  da  cwse})  he  to  dam  laman, 
A'ris ;  nym  din  bedd,  and  gang  on  dia 
hus. 

7  And  he  aras,  and  ferde  to  hys  huse. 

8  S5{)lice  da  da  seo  rasenigeo  dis  gesaw- 
on  da  ondredon  hig  hym,  and  wuldrod- 
on  God,  de  sealde  swylcne  anweald  man- 
num.+ 

9  Da  se  Haelend  danon  ferde,  he  geseah 
senne  man  sittende  set  toll-sceamule,  dses 
nama  wses  Matheus.  And  he  cwse]>  to 
him,  Fylig  me.  And  he  aras,  and  fyligde 
him. 

10  And  hyt  wses  geworden,  da  he  sset 
innan  huse,  da  comun  mauega  manfulle 
and  .synfulle  and  sseton  mid  dam  Heelende 
and  mid  hys  leorning-cnyhtum. 

1 1  Da  da  Sundor-halgan  dset  gesawon 
da  cwsedon  hig  to  hys  leorning-cnyhtum, 
Hwi  yt  eower  lareow  mid  manfuUum 
and  synfullum  1 

12  And  se  Hselend  cwse})  dis  gehyrende, 
Nys  halum  Iseces  nan  ])earf,  ac  seocum. 

1 3  GaJ)  s5])lice  and  leornigeaj)  hwset  is. 


IX.  1-13.]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Jhcsii,  metynge  hyni ;  and  hyni  seen, 
thei  prciileu  hym,  that  he  shuUle  pa&so 
fro  her  coostis. 


TYNDALK  1526. 


■19 


Chap.  IX.  i  And  Jhcsus,  goyng  vp 
in  to  a  boot,  passidc  oucr  the  water,  a)id 
came  in  to  his  citce. 

2  And  loo  !  thei  offreden  to  hym  a  man 
syke  in  palsie,  liggynge  in  a  bed.  For- 
sothc  Jhcsus,  seeynge  the  fcith  of  hem, 
saiile  to  the  man  sike  in  palsie,  Sone, 
haue  thou  trust  ;  thi  synnes  ben  for- 
5eucu  to  thee. 

3  And  lo  !  sum  of  the  scribis  said  wit;i 
}-nue  hem  self,  This  blasfometh. 

4  And  when  Jhcsus  haddc  seen  her 
thou5tis,  he  said,  Wherto  thcukcn  30 
yuel  thingis  in  5our  hertis  ? 

5  What  is  li5ter  to  saye,  Thi  synnes 
ben  for5euen  to  thee,  other  to  saye,  Kyse 
thou,  and  walke  ] 

6  Forsothe  that  50  wite,  that  mannes 
sone  hath  power  to  forjeue  synnes  in 
erthc,  thanne  he  saide  to  thilke  man  in 
palsie,  llyse  vp  ;  take  thi  bed,  and  go 
in  to  thin  house. 

7  And  he  roose,  and  wcnte  in  to  his 
house. 

8  .Sothely  the  companycs  seeynge  dred- 
deu,  and  gloriiiedcu  God,  that  3auc  siche 
power  to  men. 

9  And  when  Jhesus  passidc  thennis,  he 
sei3  a  man  sittynge  in  a  tolbothe,  Matheu 
by  name.  And  he  saide  to  hym,  Sue 
thou  me.  And  he,  rysynge,  folowide 
hym. 

10  And  it  is  don,  hym  sittynge  at  the 
mete  in  the  house,  loo !  many  pujili- 
canys  and  synncful  men  cummynge  saten 
at  the  mete  with  Jhesu  and  his  disciplis. 

1 1  And  Pharisees  seeynge  saidcn  to  his 
disciplis,  Whi  etith  30ure  maister  with 
puplicanys  and  synful  men  ? 

12  And  Jhesus  herynge  saide,  A  leche 
is  nat  nede  to  men  that  faren  wel,  but 
to  men  hauynge  yuel. 

13  Sothely  566  goynge  lerne  what  it  is, 


met  Jesus ;  and  when  they  sawe  him, 
they  besought  him  to  departe  out  off 
there  costtcs. 


Cii-vr.  IX.  I  And  he  entred  into  the 
shippe,  and  passed  over,  and  cam  into 
his  awne  cite. 

2  And  lo  !  they  brought  vuto  him  a 
man  sicke  off"  the  palscy,  lyinge  in  his 
bed.  And  when  Jesus  sawe  there  faith, 
he  said  to  the  secke  off'  the  palscy, 
Sonne,  be  off"  good  chere  ;  thy  sinnes 
are  forvevcn  the. 

3  And  lo  !  ccrteyne  of  the  scribes  said 
in  them  selves,  He  blasphemeth. 

4  And  when  Jesus  sawe  there  thouglitcs, 
he  said,  Wherforc  thinkc  ye  evyll  in  your 
herttes  ? 

5  Whether  ys  esyer  to  saye,  Thi  sinnes 
ar  forvevcn  the,  or  to  SJiye,  Arise,  and 
walkc  ? 

6  That  ye  may  knowe,  that  the  sonnc 
of  man  hathe  power  to  forycve  synnes 
in  crth,  then  sayd  he  vnto  the  sicke  of 
the  palscy,  Aryse  ;  take  vppc  thi  becd, 
and  go  home  to  thyne  houssc. 

7  And  he  arose,  and  departed  to  his 
houssc. 

8  The  people  that  sawe  it  marvcylled, 
and  glorified  God,  which  had  gcven 
suche  power  to  men. 

9  And  as  Jesus  passed  forth  from 
thence,  he  sawe  a  man  sytt  at  the  re- 
ceyte  off"  custume,  named  Matheu.  And 
said  to  him,  Folowe  me.  And  he  arose, 
and  fulowcd  him. 

10  And  hit  cam  to  passe,  thatt  Jesus 
satt  at  meate  in  his  houssc,  and  lo ! 
many  publicans  and  synncrs  cam  and 
satt  downe  also  with  Jesus  and  his 
disciples. 

11  When  the  Pharyscs  had  pcrceavcd 
that  they  sayd  vnto  hys  disciples.  Why 
eateth  youre  master  with  publicans  and 
synncrs  ? 

12  When  Jesus  herde  that  he  sayde 
vnto  them.  The  whole  ncade  not  the 
visicion,  but  they  thatt  arc  sicke. 

13  Goo  and  Icarue  what  that  mcancth, 


40 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Armahairti})a  wilyau,  yali  ni  Imnsl ;  ni|)- 
\>&n  qam,  la})on  uswaurhtans,  ak  fra- 
"wauvlitans. 

14  panuh  afidtlyedun  sijoonyos  lolian- 
nes,  qil)anclans,  Duwhe  weis  j^ah  Farei- 
saieis  fastam  filu,  'i]>  ]?ai  siponyos  Jjeinai 
ni  fastand  1 

15  Yah  qa|i  du  im  lesus,  Ibai  magun 
simyus  l)ni})fadis  qainon,  und]jata  wheil- 
os  jjei  mijj  'ira  I'st  bruj)faj)s  1  1]>  atgagg- 
and'''  dagos,  ]ian  afnimada  af  im  sa 
brujjfajjs,  yah  J^an  fastand. 

16  A]j))an  ni  whashun  lagyi])  du  plata 
fanan  );ai'ihis  ana  snagan  fairnyana  ;  unte 
afnimi))  fuUon  af  J^amma  siiagin,  yah 
"wairsiza  gataura  wair])i]), 

17  NiJ)-])an  giutand  wein  niuyata  in 
balgins  fairnyans,  aij)}iau  distanrnand 
balgeis,  bi|)eh  ])an  yah  weiu  usgutni]>, 
yah  balgeis  fraqistnand.  Ak  giutand 
Avein  yuggata  in  balgins  niuyans,  yah 
bayojjum  gabairgada. 

18  Mil'l^anei  is  rodida  J)ata  du  im, 
})aruh  i-eiks  ains  qimands,  inwait  ina, 
qijjands  j^atei,  Dauhtar  meina  nu  gaswalt ; 
akei  qimands,  atlagei  handu  })eina  ana 
iya,  yah  libai)\ 

19  Yah  urreisands  lesus  iddya  afar 
imma,  yah  siponyos  is. 

20  Yah  sai !  qino  blo))ariunandei  .ib. 
Avintrnns,  duatgaggandei  aftaro,  attaitok 
skauta  wastyos  is. 

21  Qa]>uh  auk  in  sis,  Yabai  ]jatainei 
atteka  wastyai  is,  ganisa. 

22  I|>  lesus  gawandyands  sik,  yah  ga- 
saiwhands  jjo,  qa]>,  prafstei  ))uk,  dauhtar ; 
galau1)eiiis  {leina  ganasida  ))uk.  Yah 
ganas  so  qino  fram  j^izai  wheilai  yainai. 

23  Yah  qimands  lesus  in  garda  }jis 
reikis,  yah  gasaiwhands  swiglyans,  yah 
haurnyans  haurnyandans,  yah  managein 
auhyondein, 

24  Qajj  du  im,  Aflei)>i}),  unte  ni  gaswalt 
so  mawi,  ak  slepi)>.     Yah  bihlohun  ina. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Ic  wylle  mild-heortnesse,  nses  onstegd- 
nesse ;  s5))lice  ne  com  ic,  rihtwise  to 
gecigeanne,  ac  da  synnfullan.^ 

1 4  Da  genealsehton  lohannes  leorning- 
enihtas  to  hym,  and  dus"*"  cwsedon,  Hwi 
fseste  we  and  da  Sundor-halgan  gelom- 
lice,  s5|)lice  dine  leorning-cnihtas  ne 
fiestajj  ? 

15  And  se  Hselend  cwsej?  to  him,  Cwede 
ge  sceolun  dses  brydguman  cnihtas  wep- 
an,  da  hwile  de  se  brydguma  mid  hym 
hj\>  1  S6j>lice  da  dagas  cuma)),  daet  se 
brydguma  by]?  afyrred  fram  hym,  and 
donne  on  dam  dagum^  hig  fsestajj. 

16  Ne  de\>  Avitodlice  nan  man  niwes 
clades  scyji  on  eald  reaf  ;  he  to-brycl>  hys 
stede  on  dam  reafe,  and  se  slite  bi])  de 
wyrsa. 

17  Ne  hig  ne  do]>  niwe  win  on  ealde 
bytta,  gyf  hi  dojj,  da  bytta  beoj)  to- 
brocene,  and  dset  win  agoten,  and  da 
bytta  forwurda}).  Ac  hig  d5j>  niwe  win 
on  niwe  bytta,  and  segder  byjj  gehealdeu.''' 

18  Da  he'''  das  ]>ing  to  him  spraec,  da 
genealsehte  an  ealdor,  and  ge-eadmedde 
hyne  to  him,  dus  cwedende,  Drihten, 
min  dohtor  is  dead ;  ac  cum,  and  seta 
dine  hand  uppan  hig,  and  heo  lyfa)?. 

19  And  se  Hselend  aras  and  fyligde 
hym,  and  hys  leorning-cnihtas. 

20  And  da  an  wif  de  jjolode  blod-ryne 
twelf  gear,  genealsehte  widseftan,  and 
sethran  hys  reafes  fnaed. 

21  Heo  cw8e|j  soj^lice  on  h}Te  mode, 
For  an  ic  beo  hal,  gyf  ic  hys  reafes 
sethrine. 

22  And  se  Hselend  bewende  hyne, 
and  hig  geseah,  and  cwpej),  Gelyf,  dohtor  ; 
din  geleafa  de  gehselde.  And  dset  wif 
waes  gehseled  on  dsere  tide. 

23  And  da  se  Hselend  com  into  dses 
ealdres  healle,  and  geseah  hwistleras,  and 
hlydende  menigeo, 

24  He  cw8e|>,  Ga[)  heonun,  nys  dys 
mseden  dead,  s6j)lice  ac  heo  slsep}?.  And 
hig  taeldon  hyne. 


IX.  14-24.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Y  wole  mcrcye,  and  nnt  sacrifice  ;  for- 
sothe  Y  came,  uat  to  clepc  n3tful  men, 
bot  synful  men. 

14  Thannc  the  disciplis  of  Joon  camen 
11150  to  liym,  sayiiige,  Wlii  we  and  Phari- 
sees fasten  ofte,  but  thi  disciplis  fasten 
nat? 

15  And  Jhosus  saide  to  hem,  "Whether 
the  sonys  of  the  spouse^  mow  weileii,''' 
how  longe  tlie  spouse  is  with  hem  ? 
Sotliely  days  slmlen  come,  when  the 
spouse  shal  be  taken  awey  fro  hem,  and 
thanne  thei  shulen  faste. 

16  Sothely  no  man  sendith  ynne  a 
medlyngc  of  rudee^  clothe  in  to  an  olde 
clothe  ;  sothely  he  takith  awey  the 
jilente  of  it  fro  the  clothe,  and  a  Avors 
kittyng  is  maad. 

17  Xether  men  sendcn  newe  wijne  in 
to  olde  botelis,'''  ellis  the  wijn  vessels 
ben  broken,  and  the  wijn  is  shed  out, 
and  the  wijn  vesscllis  jjerishen.  But 
men  senden  newe  wijn  in  to  newe  wiju 
vessellis,  and  botlie  ben  kept. 

18  Jhcsu  spekynge  these  thingis  to 
hem,  loo !  00  prince  came  to,  and  wor- 
shipid  hym,  sayinge,  Lord,  my  doujtir 
is  now  dead  ;  but  cume  thou,  and  put 
thin  bond  vpon  hire,  and  she  shal  lyae. 

19  And  Jliesus  lysynge  suede  hym, 
and  his  disciplis. 

20  And  loo  !  a  womman  that  suffiide 
the  fiix^  of  blood  twelue  5cer,  cam  to 
byhynde,  and  touchide  the  hemnie  of  his 
clothe. 

2.1  Sothely  she  saide  with  ynne  hir 
self,  )'if  I  touche  oonly  the  clothis  of 
hym,  I  shal  be  saaf. 

22  And  Jhesus  turnyde,  and  sceynge 
hir,  saide,  Dou5tcr,  haue  thou  trust ;  thi 
faith  hath  made  thee  saaf.  And  the 
womman  was  maad  saaf  fro  that  houre. 

23  And  when  Jhesus  came  in  to  the 
hous  of  the  prince,  and  see3  mynstrelis, 
and  the  companye  makynge  noyse, 

24  He  saide,  Go  56  awey,  for  the 
wcnche  is  nat  dead,  but  sleplth.  And 
thei  scornyden  hym. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  11 

I  have  pleasure  in  mercy,  and  not  in 
offerynge  ;  for  I  am  not  come  to  call 
the  riglitewes,  but  the  sinners  to  repcnt- 
aunce. 

14  Then  cam  the  desciplcs  of  Jhon  to 
hym,  saynge,  Why  do  we  and  the  Farises 
fust  ofte,  but  thy  disciples  fast  not  ? 


15  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Can 
the  weddynge  chyldren  morne,  as  longe 
as  the  bridegrom  is  with  them  1  The 
tym  will  come,  when  the  brydgrome 
shalbe  tackcn  uwaye  from  them,  and 
then  shall  they  faste. 

16  Noo  man  peceth  an  olde  garment 
with  a  pece  off  newe  cloothe ;  for  then 
tacketh  he  away  the  pece  agayne  from 
the  garment,  and  the  rent  ys  made 
worsse. 

17  Nether  do  men  put  newe  wyne  into 
olde  vessels,  for  then  the  vessels  breake, 
and  the  wyne  i-unneth  oute,  and  the 
uessels  perysshe.  But  they  powi'e  newe 
wyne  into  newe  vessels,  and  so  ai-e  both 
saved  togedder. 

•  18  Whyls  he  thus  spake  vnto  them, 
lo !  there  cam  a  certayne  rulei',  and 
worshipped  hyme,  saynge.  My  doghter 
is  deed  all  redy  ;  but  com,  and  lay  thy 
honde  on  her,  and  she  shall  live. 

19  And  Jesus  arose  and  folowed  hym, 
with  hys  disciples. 

20  And  beholde  !  a  woman  which  was 
diseased  with  an  issue  of  bloud  xij  yeres, 
cam  behynde  hym,  and  toched  the  hem 
off  hys  vesture. 

2  r  For  she  sayd  in  her  silfe,  Yff  I  mayc 
toche  but  even  his  vesture  only,  I  shal 
be  safe. 

22  Jesus  tourned  hym  about,  and  be- 
hekle  her,  saynge,  Doughtcr,  be  off 
goode  comforte  ;  thy  fayth  hath  made 
the  safe.  And  she  was  made  whole  even 
that  same  houre. 

23  And  when  Jesus  cam  into  the  ruelers 
housse,  and  sawe  the  minstrels,  and  the 
people  wondrynge, 

24  He  sayde  vnto  them.  Get  you  hence, 
for  the  mayde  is  not  deed,  but  slopeth. 
And  they  leughe  hym  to  scorne. 


42  GOTHIC,  360. 

25  panuli  ))an  usdribana  war})  so  man- 
agei,  atgaggaucls  inn,  habaida  handu 
izos  ;  yah  urrais  so  mawi. 

26  Yah  usiddya  merijja  so  and  alia 
yaina  air))a. 

27  Yah  wharbondin  lesua  yainJ?ro,  laist- 
idedun  afar  imma  twai  blindans,  hrop- 
yandans,  yah  qijjandans,  Armai  uggkis, 
sunau  Daweidis. 

28  Qimandin  |>an  in  garda,  duatiddye- 
dun  imma  )jai  blindans ;  yah  qa])  im 
lesus,  Gaulaubyats,  jjatei  magyau  ];ata 
tauyan  1   Qejjun  du  imma,  Yai,  Frauya. 


29  panuh  attaitok  augam  ize,  qij^ands, 
Bi  galaubeinai  iggqarai  waii-})ai  iggqis. 

30  Yah  usluknodedun  im  augona.  Yah 
inagida  ins  lesus,  qi|>ands,  Saiwhats,  ei 
manna  ni  witi. 

31  Ij>  eis  usgaggandans,  usmeridedun 
ina  in  allai  airj^ai  yainai. 

32  panuh  bifje  ut  usiddyedun  eis,  sai ! 
atberun  imma  mannan  baudana,  daimon- 
ari. 

33  Yah  bi})e  usdribans  war  J?  unhuljjo, 
rodida  sa  dumba.  Yah  sildaleikidedun 
manageins,  qi|)andaus,  Ni  aiw  swa  us- 
kun))  was  in  Israela. 

34  I))  Fareisaieis  qe})un,  In  fam'amaj)lya 
imhuljjono  usdreibi))  unhulj^ons. 

35  Yah  bitauh  lesus  baurgs  alios  yah 
haimos,  laisyands  in  gaqumj)im  ize,  yah 
meryands  aiwaggelyon  Jjiudangardyos, 
yah  hailyands  alios  sauhtins,  yah  alia 
unhailya. 

36  Gasaiwhands  ])an  ]jos  manageins, 
infeinoda  in  ize  ;  unte  wesun  afdauidai, 
yah  frawaurpanai  swe  lamba  ni  haband- 
ona  hairdeis. 

37  panuh  qa]j  du  siponyam  seinaim, 
Asans  raihtis  mauaga,  ip  waurstwyans 
fawai. 

38  Bidyijj  nu  frauyan  asanais,  ei  us- 
sandyai  Avaurstwyans  in  asan  seina. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

25  And  da  he  da  menigeo  ut-adrJif,  he 
eode''"  in,  and  nam  hyre  hand  ;  and  dset 
mseden  aras. 

26  And  des  hlisa  sprang  ofer  eall  daet 
land.t 

27  Da  se  Hcelend  danun  f5r,  da  fylig- 
dun  hym  twegyn  blinde,  hrymynde.  and 
ewedende,   La   Dauides   sunu,   gemiltsa 

UDC. 

28  So|>lice  da  he  ham  com,  da  blindan 
genealsehton  to  him ;  and  se  Hselend 
cwjse])  to  him,  Gelyfe  gyt,  dnet  ic  inc  mseg 
gehselan  1  Hig  cwsedon  to  him,  Witod- 
lice,  Drihten. 


29  Da  sethran  he  hyra  eagena,  cwed- 
ynde,  Sy  inc  teftyr  incrun  geleafan. 

30  And  hyra  eagan  wserun  ont5'nede. 
And  se  Heelynd  behead  him,  ewedende, 
Warniaj),  dset  ge  hyt  nanum  men  ne 
secgeon. 

31  Hig  sojjlice  utgangynde,  gewidmser- 
sudun  hyne  ofer  eall  daet  land. 

32  Da  hig  wseron  soj^lice  ut-agune, 
hig  brohton  him  dumbne  man,  se  wses 
deofol-seoc. 

33  And  ut-adryfenum  dam  deofle,  se 
dumba  sprsec.  And  da  menigeo  wuudre- 
don,  ewedende,  Ntefre  setywde  swylc  on 
Israhela  folce. 

34  S6[)lice  da  Sundor-halgan  cwsedon, 
On  deofla  ealdre  he  drifjj  ut  deoflu. 

35  And  se  Hselend  ymbfor  ealle  burga 
and  ceastra,  leerende  on  hyra  gesom- 
nungum,  and  bodiende  rices  g5dspell, 
and  hselende  selce  adie,  and  eelce  un- 
trumnesse. 

36  He  gemiltsude  s5l3lice  dsere  menigeo, 
da  he  hi  geseah ;  fordan  hig  wserun 
gedrehte,  and  licgende  swa  swa  sceap  de 
hyrde  nabbaj). 

37  Da  he  ssede  hys  leorning-cnihtun, 
Witodlice  micel  rip  ys,  and  feawa  wyrht- 
yna. 

38  Biddajj  dses  ripes  hlaford,  daet  he 
sende  wyrhtan  to  hys  ripe. 


IX.  25-38.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

25  And  when  tlic  cunipanye  was  cast 
out,  he  cntriile  in,  and  hehl  hir  hondc ; 
and  the  wenche  roose  vp. 

26  And  this  fame  wente  out  in  to  al 
the  londe. 

27  And  Jhesu  jiassyngc  thcnnes,  twey 
blynde  men  sueden  hym,  oryini^o,  and 
sayinge,  Thou  sone  of  Dauith,  hauc 
mercy  of  vs. 

28  Sothely  when  thei  came  home,  the 
blynde  men  camen  ni';  to  hym ;  and 
Jhesus  saith  to  liem,  What  wole  5c,  that 
I  do  to  50U  /  And  thei  seiden,  Lord,  that 
cure  ec5en  ben  opnyd.  And  Jhesus  saide, 
Bileeue  5e,  that  I  may  do  this  thing  to 
50U?    And  thei  sayn,  Sothely,'''  Lord. 

29  Than  he  touchide  her  ec5en,  say- 
iuge,  Yp  30ur  feith  be  it  don  to  30U. 

30  And  the  ee5cn  of  bothe  ben  opnyde. 
And  Jhesus  thretyuyde  to  hem,  sayinge, 
See  566,  that  no  man  wite. 

31  But  thei  goynge  out,  defameden 
hym  thorw5  al  that  lond. 

32  Sothely  thei  gon  out,  loo !  thei 
ofFrideu  to  hym  a  man  doumb,  hauyugc 
a  deuel. 

33  And  whan  the  deuel  was  cast  out, 
the  doumbe  man  sj)ac.  And  the  cum- 
panyes  wondrcden,  sayinge,  It  aperede 
neuere  so  in  Yrael. 

34  But  the  Pharisees  saiden,  In  the 
prince  of  deuelis  he  castith  out  deuelis. 

35  And  Jhesus  compaside  aboute  alle 
citees  and  castels,  techynge  in  synagogis 
of  hem,  and  prechynge  the  gospel  of 
kyngdam,  and  helynge  al  languyshynge '', 
and  al  siknesse. 

36  Forsothe  Jhesus,  siynge  cumpanyes, 
hadde  rewthe  of  hem  ;  for  thei  weren 
traueilld,  and  liggynge  as  sheep  nat 
hauynge  a  sheperde. 

37  Thaime  he  saide  to  his  discipHs, 
Sothely  t/iere  ia  moche  rype  come,  but 
fewe  werkmen. 

38  Therfore  preyc  50  the  lord  of  the 
rijpe  corn,  that  he  sende  workmen  into 
his  rijp  corn. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


43 


25  As  sone  as  the  peojjlc  wer  put 
forthe  a  doros,  he  went  in,  and  toke  her 
by  the  bond  ;  and  the  maydc  arose. 

26  And  this  was  noysed  through  out 
all  the  londe. 

27  And  as  Josus  departed  thence,  two 
blynde  men  folowed  hym,  crying,  and 
sayng,  O  thou  sonnc  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  vs. 

28  And  when  he  was  come  into  the 
housse,  the  blyud  cam  to  hym ;  and 
Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Beleve  ye,  that 
I  am  able  to  do  thys  1  They  sayde  vnto 
hyme,  Ye,  Mastei-. 


29  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,  sayng, 
Acordynge  to  yourc  fay  the  be  it  vnto 
you. 

30  And  their  eyes  wer  opened.  And 
he  chaurged  them,  sayng,  Se,  that  no 
man  knowe  of  it. 

3 1  But  they  as  sone  as  they  were  de- 
parted, spreed  abroade  hys  name  through 
oute  all  the  londe. 

32  As  they  went  out,  beholde !  they 
brought  to  hym  a  domne  man,  possessed 
of  a  devyll. 

33  And  as  sone  as  the  devyll  was  cast 
oute,  the  domne  spake.  And  the  people 
merveled,  saynge,  It  never  soo  appered 
in  Israhel. 

34  Butt  the  Pharises  sayde,  He  casteth 
oute  devyls  by  the  power  of  the  chefe 
devyll. 

35  And  Jesus  went  about  all  the  cites 
and  tounes,  teachyngc  in  their  sina- 
goages,  and  preachyng  the  gospell  off 
the  kyngdome,  and  hcalinge  all  mancr 
sicknes,  and  deseasc  amonge  the  people. 

36  But  when  he  sawe  the  people,  he 
hadd  pite  on  them ;  because  they  were 
pined  awayc,  and  scattered  abroade  even 
as  shepe  havynge  no  shephecrd. 

37  Then  suyde  he  to  hys  disciples.  The 
hervest  is  greate,  but  the  laborers  ar 
feawe. 

38  Wherfore  praye  the  harvest  lorde,  to 
sende  forthe  labourers  into  hys  harvest. 


44 

Chap.  X. 
twalif  si 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Yah   atliaitands   ])ans 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  X.  i  And  to  somne  gecigyd- 
um  hys  twelf  leorning-cnihtun,  he  seal- 
de  him  unclsenra  gasta  anweald,  dset  hig 
adryfon  hig  lit,  and  hseldun  adle,  and 
selce  untrumnysse. 

2  Dis  synt  sdjjHce  dsera  twelf  Apostola 
naman ;  se  forma  ys,  Simon,  de  ys  ge- 
nemned  Petrus,  and  Andreas,  hys  bro- 
dor ;  lacobus  Zebedei,  and  lohannes, 
hys  brodur ; 

3  Philippus,  and  Bartholomeus  ;  Thom- 
as, and  Matheus  Publicanus ;  and  lac- 
obus Alphei,  and  Taddeus ; 


4  Simon  Cbananeus,  and  ludas  Sca- 
rioth,  de  hyne  belsewde. 

5  Das  twelf  se  Hselynd  sende,  him 
bebeodende,  and  cwedende,  Ne  fare  ge 
on  )?eoda  weg,  and  ne  ga  ge  innan  Samar- 
itana  ceastre ; 

6  Ac  ga))  ma  to  dam  sceapum  de  for- 
wui'dun  Israela  hiw-rsedene. 

7  Se  Hselend  cwse))  to  hys  leorning- 
cnihtun,  GaJ>  and  bodia]),  cwedende,  daet 
heofona  rice  genealsecj) ; 

8  Hsela))  untrume,  aweccea]?  deade, 
clsensia})  hreofle,  drifa))  ut  deoflu ;  ge 
onfengun  to-gyfe,  sylla|)  to-gyfe. 

9  Nsebbe  ge  gold,  ne  seolfer,  ne  feoh 
on  eowi'um  bigyrdlum,  • 

10  Ne  codd  on  wege,  ne  twa  tunecan, 
ne  gescy,  ne  gyrde ;  s6})lice  se  wyrhta 
ys  wyrde  hys  metys. 

1 1  On  swa  hwylce  biirh,  odde  ceastre, 
swa  ge  ingaj),  ahsia]>  hwa  si  wyrde  on 
daere,  and  wunia})  doer,  od  ge  lit-gan. 

1 2  Donne  ge  ingan  s6))lice  on  daet  hus, 
greta})  hit,  cwedende,  Sy  syb  disum  huse. 

13  And  gyf  doet  bus  witodlice  wyrde 
bijj,  eower  syb  cyme])  ofer  hyt ;  gyf  hyt 
sol^lice  wyrde  ne  byj),  eowur  syb  by])  to 
eow  gecyrred. 

14  And  swa  hwa  swa  eow  ne  under- 
fehj),  ne  eowre  sprseca  ne  gehyr|),  donne 
ge  ut-gan  of  dam  huse,  odde  of  dsere 
ceastere,  asceacaj>  daet  dust  of  eowrum 
fotum. 

15  Sojjlice  ic  eow  secge,  acumendlicre 


X.  1-15]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Cil.vr.  X.  I  And  the  twclue  tlisciplis 
cleind  to  gidrc,  he  5:1110  to  Iicni  power  of 
vuolene  spiritis,  that  thei  shulde  oasteu 
hem  out,  and  that  thei  shuldeii  heclc  al 
nehe,  and  al  siknesse. 

2  Tliesc  ben  the  names  of  twelue  apo- 
stehs  ;  the  Hrst,  Syinoun,  that  is  clepid 
Petre,  and  xVudrcw,  his  brother ; 


3  Philip,  and  Bartilmew ;  Jamys  of 
Zebcdee,  and  Joou,  his  brother  ;  Tho- 
mas, and  Matheu  pupliean ;  and  James 
Alphei,  and  Tliadce  ; 

4  Syniount  Canane.  and  Judas  Scarioth, 
the  whiche  betraiedc  Crist. 

5  Jhesus  sente  these  twelue,  comaund- 
ynge  to  hem,  and  sayinge,  Goth  je  nat 
into  the  wey  of  heithen  men,  and  entre 
56  nat  in  to  the  citees  of  Samarietanys  ; 

6  But  rather  goth  to  the  sheep  of  the 
hous  of  Yrael,  that  perishideu. 

7  Sothely  5ee  goynge  preche,  sayinge, 
for  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes  shal  nei3e  ; 

8  Hele  56  seke  men,  vpreyse  566  dead 
men,  dense  5e  meselis,  cast  ■^e  out  deuelis  ; 
frely  30  han  taken,  frely  3eue  30. 

9  Nyl  3e  welden  gold,  nether  syluer, 
ne  money  in  30ui'e  girdlis, 

10  Not  a  sci'ipe  in  the  weye,  nether 
two  cootis,  nether  shoon,  nether  3eerd  ; 
for  a  workman  is  worthi  his  mete. 

11  In  to  whateuer  citee,  or  castel,  30 
shulen  entre,  axeth  who  therinne  is 
worthi,  and  there  dwelle  3e,  til  that  30 
gon  out. 

1 2  Forsothe  3e  enti'ynge  in  to  an  house, 
grete  30'''  it,  sayinge.  Pees  to  this  hous. 

13  And  sothely  3if  that  ilk  hous  be 
worthi,  30ure  pees  shal  cume  on  it ; 
forsothe  3if  that  house  be  nat  worthy, 
3oure  pees  shall  turne  a5ein  to  30U, 

14  And  who  euere  shall  nat  resceyue 
30U,  nether  heer  30ure  wordis,  366  goynge 
forth  fro  that  hous/  smytith  awey  the 
dust  fro  30ure  feet. 

15  Trewly  I  say  to  30U,  it  shall   be 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


4,3 


CiiAP.  X.  I  And  he  called  his  xij 
disciples  viito  him,  and  gave  them  power 
over  all  vnclcne  sprites,  to  cast  them 
oute,  and  to  heale  all  maner  of  sick- 
nesses, and  all  maner  off  deseases. 

2  The  names  of  the  xij  apostles  arc 
these ;  the  fyrst,  Simon,  which  ys  called 
Peter,  and  Andrew,  his  brother  ; 


3  James  the  sonnc  off'  Zebede,  and 
Jhon,  his  brother ;  Philip,  and  ]5artlc- 
mew ;  Thomas,  and  Mathew  the  publican ; 
James  the  sonne  oft"  Alphc,  and  Lebbeus, 
otherwyse  called  Taddcus  ; 

4  Simon  off"  Cane,  and  Judas  Iscarioth, 
which  also  betrayed  hym. 

5  These  xij  sent  Jesus,  and  com- 
maunded  them,  saynge.  Goo  nott  into 
the  wayes  thatt  leade  to  the  gentyls,  and 
into  the  cites  off"  the  Samaritans  enter 
ye  nott ; 

6  But  go  rather  to  the  lost  shepe  off 
the  housse  of  Israhel. 

7  Go  and  preach,  sayng,  that  the  kyng- 
dome  off"  heven  ys  at  hande  ; 

8  Heale  the  sicke,  dense  the  lepers, 
rayse  the  deed,  caste  oute  the  devils ; 
frely  ye  have  receved,  frely  geve  agayne. 

9  Posses  nott  golde,  nor  silver,  nor 
brasse  yn  youre  gerdels, 

10  Nor  yet  scrip  towardes  your  iorney, 
nether  two  cotes,  nether  shues,  nor  yet 
a  rod ;  for  the  Avoi-kman  is  worthy  to 
have  his  meate. 

11  Into  whatsoever  cite,  or  toune,  ye 
shall  com,  enquyrc  who  ys  worthy  yn  it, 
and  there  abyde,  till  ye  goo  thence. 

1 2  And  when  ye  come  into  an  housse, 
grete  the  same. 

13  Andyff"  the  housse  be  worthy,  youre 
peace  shall  come  apon  the  same  ;  but  yf 
it  be  not  worthy,  youre  peace  shall  re- 
tourne  to  you  agayne. 

14  And  whosoever  shall  nott  reeeavc 
you,  nor  will  heare  youre  preachynge, 
when  ye  departe  oute  off"  that  housse,  or 
that  cite,  shake  of  the  dustc  of  youre 
fete. 

15  Ti-uely  I  say  vnto  you,  it  shalbe 


4t} 


GOTHIC,  3(5o. 


23 


})izai  baurg,  j^liuliai})  in 

anjiara.  Amen  auk  qi]ja  izwis,  ei  ni  iis- 
tiuhi})  baurgs  Israelis,  unte  qimi]?  sa 
sunus  mans. 

24    Nist    siponeis    ufai-   laisarya,    nib 
skalks  ufar  frauj'in  seinamma  ; 


25  Ganab  siponi,  ei  Ayaii'}iai  swe  laisar- 
eis  is,  yab  skallvS  swe  fraiiya  is.  Yabai 
gardawaldand  Baiailzaibiil  baibaitun,  und 
"wban  iilu  mais  Jjans  innakundans  is  1 


26  "Ni  nunuogeij)  izwis  ins  ;  ni  waibt 
auk  ist  gabuliji,  jjatei  ni  andbulyaidau ; 
yab  fulgin.  Jjatei  ni  ufkunnaidau. 

27  patei  qi|ia  izwis  in  riqiza^  qi})ai)>  in 
liubada;  yab  })atei  in  auso  gabausei}), 
nieryai))  ana  brotani. 

28  Yab  ni  ogeijj  izAvis  )jans  usqimand- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

byjj   Sodoma    lande    and    Gomorra   on 
domes  dseg,  donne  dsere  ceastre.''' 

16  Nu!  ic  eowsende  swa  sceap  gemang 
wulfas ;  beoj)  eornustbce  gleawe  swa  naed- 
dvan,  and  bilwyte  swa  culfran. 

J.  7  Warnia]?  eow  s6]>lice  fram  mannura, 
big  sylla]?  eow  sojjlice  on  gemotum,  and 
swingaj)  eow  on  byra  gesomnungum  ; 

1 3  And  ge  beoj)  gelaedde  to  demum, 
p.v.d  to  cynyngum  for  me,  to  byra  dome, 
and  {jeodun. 

1 9  Donne  belsewa)?  big  and'''  syllajj  eow, 
ne  jjence  ge,  bu  ocJcte  bwset  ge  sprecun, 
eow  byj)  geseald  sujjlice  on  dtere  tide, 
hwset  ge  sprecun  ; 

20  Ne  synt  ge  na  de  dser  spreca]?,  ac 
eowres  foder  gast,  de  sprycj?  on  eow. 

21  So))lice  brodur  syl)?  bys  brodur  to 
deajje,  and  faeder  bys  sunu,  and  beam 
arisajj  ongen  magas,  and  to  deaj^e  bi 
ford5J5. 

22  And  ge  beo|)  on  batunge  eallum 
mannum,  for  minum  naman  ;  s5{>lice  se 
purbwunaj)  od  ende,  se  by{)  bal. 

23  Donne  bi  eow  ebtat?  on  dysse  byrig, 
fleo)?  on  6di*e ;  and  donne  bi  on  dsere 
eow  elitajj,  fleo]?  on  da  l-ryddan.  S5|ince 
ic  eow  secge,  ne  befarajj  ge  Israbela 
burga,  serdan  de  mannes  sunu  cume. 

24  Nys  se  leorning-cnibt  ofer  bys  la- 
reow,  ne  })eow  ofer  bys  blaford  ; 

25  Genob  by|7  s5)5Hce  dam  leorning- 
cnibte,  dset  be  sy  swylce  bys  lareow,  and 
jjeow  swylce  bys  blaford.  Gyf  bi  dses 
biredes  fseder  Belzebub  clypedun,  mycle 
swydur  big  eow  clypia]?  1 

26  Eornustlice  ne  ondraede  ge  big  ;■*■ 
nys  s5J3lice  nan  ))ing  dyble,  dset  ne  w'urde 
geswutelod;  ne  nan  dible  ['ing,  da?t  ne 
wurde  geopenod. 

27  Dret  ic  eow  secge  on  J)ystrum,  sec- 
ga]j  byt  on  leobte ;  and  dset  ge  on  eare 
gebyraji,  bodia]?  uppan  brofum. 

28  And  ne  ondrsede  ge  da  de  eowyrne 


X.  1 6-28.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

more  suftVeablc  to  the  loiul  of  men  of 
Sotlom  and  (uimor  in  the  clay  of  iuge- 
ment,  than  to  that  citcc. 

1 6  Li)0  !  I  sonde  ^ou  as  sheep  in  to 
the  myiHl  of  wohies  ;  thorfove  be  5c  war^ 
as  sorpentis,  and  syniple  as  downes. 

17  Forsothe  be  5e  war  of  men,  for  thei 
shnhi  taken  50U  in  coiinscilis,  and  thei 
shuhi  bete  50U  in  there  synagogis  ; 

18  And  to  prcsidentis,^  and  to  kyngis 
50  shulen  be  led  for  me,  in  to  witness- 
ynge  to  hem,  and  hethcn  men. 

19  But  whenue  thei  shulen  take^  50U, 
nyl  ;e  thc.ike,  how  or  what  thing  500 
spceken,  fo  sothe  it  shal  be  5oucn  to  50U 
ill  tha:  hour,  what  5e  shuln  spcke  ; 

20  For  it  lieu  nat  50  that  spoken,  but 
the  spirit  of  50urc  fadir,  that  spokith  in 
50U. 

2 1  Sothely  the  brother  shal  take  the 
brother  in  to  deth,  and  the  fadir  the 
sone,  and  the  sonys  shulen  ryse  a5oins 
fadir  and  modir,  and  shulen  tourmente 
hem  bi  deth. 

22  And  56  shulen  ])e  in  hate  to  alle 
men,  for  my  name ;  forsothe  he  that 
shall  dwelle  stille  in  to  the  eeude,  this 
shal  be  saaf. 

23  Sothely  whenue  thei  shulen  pursue 
;ou  in  this  citec,  flee  50  in  to  an  other. 
Trewly  I  saye  to  50U,  50  shulen  nat 
eende  the  citees  of  Yrael,  til  that  mannes 
sone  cume. 

24  The  disciple  is  nat  aboue  the  maistre, 
ne  the  seruaunt  aboue  his  lord  ; 

25  It  is  ynow  to  the  disciple,  that  he 
be  as  his  maistre,  and  to  the  scniaunt 
as  his  lord.  y\f  thei  han  clepid  the 
husbonde  man^  Belzcbub,  hou  mychc 
more  his  housholdc  meynee? 

26  Thorfore  drede  50  nat  hem  ;  for  no 
thing  is  couerid,'*'  that  shal  nat  be  showid; 
and  no  thing  is  preuy,  that  shal  nat  be 
wist. 

27  That  thing  that  Y  say  to  5()U  in 
dercncssis,  saye  566  in  the  li5t ;  and 
preclie  50  vpon  housis,  that  thing  that 
500  Iieore  in  ere. 

28  And  nyl  50  drecde  hem  that  slcon 


TYNDALE,  1526.  47 

easier  for  the  londe  off  Zodoma  and  Go- 
mora  in  the  daye  oft'  iudgement,  then  for 
that  cite. 

1 6  Lo !  I  sonde  you  forthe  as  shcpe 
amonge  wolves  ;  be  ye  therfoi-e  wyse  as 
seri)ontos,  and  innocent  as  doves. 

17  Beware  oft'  men,  ttbr  thoy  shall  de- 
liver you  vp  to  the  counseils,  and  shall 
scourge  you  in  there  sinagoggcs  ; 

18  And  ye  shall  be  brought  to  the  heed 
mielers,  and  kynges  for  my  sake,  in  wit- 
nes  to  them,  and  to  the  gentyls. 

19  But  Avhen  they  put  you  vp,  take  no 
thought,  howe  or  Avhat  ye  shall  sp(>ake, 
for  yt  shall  be  gevon  you  even  in  that 
same  hourc,  what  yo  shall  saye  ; 

20  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speko,  but  the 
spretc  of  your  father,  which  siieaketh  in 
you. 

21  The  brother  shall  betraye  the  bro- 
ther to  decth,  arid  the  father  the  sonnc, 
and  the  chyldren  shall  aryse  agynstc 
their  fathers  and  mothers,  and  shall  jiut 
them  to  deethc. 

22  And  ye  shall  be  hated  oft'  all  men, 
ftbr  my  name  ;  but  whosoever  shall  con- 
tinew  vnto  the  ende,  shalbe  saved. 

23  When  they  persecute  you  in  wone 
cite,  flye  in  to  another.  I  tell  you  for  a 
trcutli,  ye  shal  nott  fynysshe  all  the  cites 
of  Israhel,  tyll  the  sonne  of  man  be 
come. 

24  The  disciple  ys  nott  above  hys 
master,  nor  yet  the  scn'aunt  above  his 
lorde  ; 

25  It  is  ynough  for  the  disciple,  to  be 
as  hys  master  ys,  and  that  the  sor\annt 
be  as  his  lorde  ys.  Yf  they  have  called 
the  lorde  oft"  the  housse  Beelzebub,  howe 
moche  more  shall  they  call  them  of  his 
household e  so  ] 

26  Fcare  them  nott  therefore  ;  there 
is  no  thinge  so  close,  that  shall  not  be 
openned ;  and  no  thinge  so  hyd,  that 
shall  not  be  knowen. 

27  What  I  tell  you  in  dereknes,  that 
speakc  ye  in  lyght  ;  and  what  ye  heare 
in  the  earc,  that  preachc  ye  on  the 
housse  tojipes. 

28  And  feare  ye  nott  them  which  kyll 


48 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ans  leika  ])atainei ;  iJj  saiwalai  ni  mag- 
audans  usqiman ;  i\>  ogei\>  mais  |^ana 
magandaii  yah  saiwalai  yah  leika  fraqist- 
yan  in  gaiainiian. 

29  Niu  twai  sparwans  assaryau  bug- 
yanda '?  yah  aiiis  'ize  ni  gadriusij)  ana 
air|)a  inuh  attins  i'zwaris  wilyan. 

30  A}5))au  izwara  yah  tagla  haubidis 
alia  garajjana  sind. 

3 1  Ni  nvmu  ogei}? ;  managaim  sparwam 
batizans  siyu]>  yus. 

32  Sawhazuh  nu  saei  andhaitijj  mis  in 
andwairjjya  manne,  andhaita  yah  ik  im- 
ma  in  andwairjjya  attins  meiuis  saei  in 
himinani  I'st. 

33  I})  ))is\vhanoh  saei  afaikijj  mik  in 
andwair})ya  manne,  afaika  yah  ik  ina  in 
andwairjjya  attins  meinis  |)is  saei  in  him- 
inam  ist. 

34  Nih  ahyaifi,  patei  qemyau  lagyan 
gawair|)i  ana  air})a ;  ni  qam  lagyan  ga- 
wair))i,  ak  hairu. 

35  Qam  auk  skaidan  mannan  wij)i-a 
attan  is,  yah  dauhtai-  wij^ra  ai|)ein  izos, 
yah  brujj  Avijjra  swaihron  izos  ; 

36  Yah  fiyands  mans  innakundai  is. 

37  Saei  friyo]?  attan  ai]3}?au  ai})ein  ufai- 
mik,  nist  meina  wair|)S.  Yah  saei  friyo}> 
sunu  aijjjjau  dauhtar  ufar  mik,  nist  meina 
wairjjs. 

38  Yah  saei  ni  nimi[)  galgan  seinana, 
yah  laistyai  afar  mis,  nist  meina  wairjjs. 

39  Saei  bigiti}?  saiwala  seina,  fraqistei]? 
izai ;  yah  saei  fraqisteij)  saiwalai  seinai 
in  meina,  bigitij)  \>o. 

40  Sa  andnimands  izwis,  mik  andnim- 
i\> ;  yah  sa  mik  andnimands,  andnim- 
i\>  J)ana  sandyandan  mik, 

41  Sa  andnimands  praufetu  in  namin 
praufetaus,  mizdon  praufetis  nimij).  Yah 
sa  andnimands  garaihtana  in  namin  ga- 
raihtisj  mizdon  garaihtis  nimi|j. 


42  Yah  saei  gadragkeijj  ainana  ]jize 
minnistane  stikla  kaldis  watins  Jjatainei 
in  namin  siponeis,  amen  qijja  izwis,  ei 
ni  fraqisteijj  mizdon  seinai. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

lichaman  ofsleajj ;  ne  magon  hig  s6})lice 
da  sawle  ofslean  ;  ac  ondreeda))  ma  done, 
de  mseg  sawle  and  lichaman  fovdon  on 
belle. 

29  Hu  ne  becypa})  hig  twegen  spear- 
Avan  to  peninge  1  and  an  of  dam  ne  be- 
fy]\>  on  eorj^an  butan  eowvun  fa^der. 

30  And  sc-l^lice  ealle  eowres  heafdes 
loccas  synt  getealde. 

3 1  Ne  ondrsede  ge ;  ge  synt  selran 
donne  manega  spearwan.''" 

32  JE'lcne  eornustlice  de  me  cj\>  be- 
foran  mannum.  ic  cyde  hyne  beforan 
minum  feeder  de  on  heofonum  ys. 

33  Se  de  me  Avidssecj)  beforan  mannum, 
and  ic  widsace  hyne  befdran  minum  fseder 
de  on  heofenum  ys. 

34  Ne  wene  ge,  daet  ic  come  sybbe  on 
eorjjan  to  sendanue ;  ne  com  ic  sybbe 
to  sendanne,  ac  swurd. 

35  Ic  com  s6t?lice  mann  asyndrian 
ongen  hys  feeder,  and  d5htur  ongen  hyre 
modur,  and  snore  ongen  hyre  swegre  ; 

36  And  mannes  fynd  hys  gehusan.''' 

37  Se  Hselend  cwpe))  to  hys  leorning- 
cnihtum,  Se  de  lufaj?  feeder  odde  modor 
ma  donne  me,  nys  he  me  wyrde.  And 
se  de  lufa})  sunu  odde  dohtor  SAvydur 
donne  me,  nys  he  me  wyrde. 

38  And  se  de  ne  nimjj  hys  cwylminge, 
and  fylig|>  me,  nys  he  me  wyrde. 

39  Se  de  gemet  hys  sawle,  se  forspilj) 
hig ;  and  se  de  forsi^iljj  hys  sawle  for 
me,  he  gemet  hi. 

40  Se  de  eow  underfeh|),  he  underfeh]) 
me  ;  and  se  de  me  underfeh]?,  he  under- 
fehj;  done  de  me  sende. 

41  Se  de  underfeh j>  witegan  on  witegan 
naman,  he  onfehj)  witygan  mede.  And 
se  de  underfeli|)  rihtwisne  on  riht\vises 
naman,  he  onfehj)  rihtwises  mede. 


42  And  swa  hwylc  swa  syl|)  anne  driuc 
cealdes  waeteres  anum  dyssa  lytylra  man- 
na on  leorning-cnihtes  naman,  s6|j  ic 
secge  eow,  ne  arayrjj  he  hys  mede. 


X.  29-42-]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

the  boily  ;  ticwly  thel  mowcu  nat  slea 
the  soule  ;  bot  rathci*  clroede  50  hym, 
that  may  lese  soulc  ami  body  in  to  hellc. 

29  Whether  twey  sparwis  ben  not  sold 
for  an  haljieny  ?  and  oon  of  hem  shal  nat 
falle  on  the  erthe  withouten  5oure  fadir. 

30  Forsothe  alle  the  hceris  of  30ure 
heued  be  noumbrid. 

3 1  Therfore  uyle  ;e  drcde ;  30  ben 
better  than  many  sparwis. 

32  Therfore  euery  man  that  shal  know- 
leche  me  before  men,  and  I  shal  know- 
leche  hym.  byfore  my  fadir  that  is  in 
heuenes. 

33  Sothely  he  that  shal  denye  me 
bifore  men,  and  I  shall  deni5e  hym  be- 
fore my  fadir  whiche  is  in  heuenes. 

34  Nyl  5ee  deme,  that  I  cam  to  sende 
pees  in  to  erthe ;  I  cam  not  to  sende 
pees  in  to  erthe,  but  swerd. 

35  Sothely  Y  cam  to  departe  a  man 
a5eins  his  fadir,  and  the  dou5ter  a5einys 
hire  modir,  and  the  sonys  wyf  a3eins  the 
wyues,  or  husbondis,  modir  ; 

36  And  the  enmyes  of  a  man  hen  his 
homly  meynee. 

37  He  that  loueth  fadir  or  modir  more 
than  me,  is  nat  worthi  o/me.  And  he 
that  loueth  sone  or  dou5ter  ouer  me,  is 
nat  worthi  of  me. 

38  And  he  that  takith  nat  his  crosse, 
and  sueth  me,  is  not  worthi  ofu\c. 

39  He  that  fyndith  his  soule ^,  shal 
leese  it;  and  he  that  lesith  his  soule ^ 
for  me,  shal  fynde  it. 

40  He  that  resseyueth  30U,  resceyueth 
me ;  and  he  that  resceyueth  me,  re- 
sce}'ueth  liym  that  sentc  me. 

41  And  he  that  resceyueth  a  ]irophete 
in  the  name  of  a  prophete,  shal  take  the 
mede  of  a  prophete.  And  he  that  re- 
sceyueth a  iust  man  in  the  name  of  a 
iust  man,  shal  take  the  meede  of  a  iust 
man. 

42  And  who  euer  5iueth  drynke  to  oon 
of  these  leste  a  cuppe  of  cold  water 
oonly  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  trewly  I 
■^aye  to  50U,  he  shal  nat  leese  his  mede. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


9 


the  body  ;  and  be  nott  able  to  kyll  the 
soule ;  but  rather  fearc  him,  which  is 
able  to  destroye  bothe  soulc  and  body 
in  hell. 

29  Arc  nott  two  sparowcs  solde  for  a 
farthingc  %  and  none  of  them  dothe  lyjjht 
on  the  grounde  with  out  yourc  father. 

30  And  nowe  are  all  the  heeres  of. 
youre  heedes  numbred. 

3 1  Fearc  ye  not  therfore  ;  ye  are  off 
more  value  then  many  sparrowes. 

32  Who  soever  therfore  kno\Ylcgeth 
me  befoi'e  men,  him  will  I  knowledge 
before  my  father  in  heven. 

33  But  whosoever  shall  denye  me  be- 
fore men,  him  Avill  T  also  denye  before 
my  father  which  ys  in  heven. 

34  Thynke  not,  that  Y  am    come  to 
sende  peace  in  to  the  erth  ;    I  cam  nott  ■ 
to  send  peace,  but  a  swearde. 

35  For  Y  am  come  to  sett  a  man  att 
varyaunce  ageynst  hys  father,  and  the 
doughter  ageynst  her  mother,  and  the 
doughterelawe  ageinst  her  motherelawe  ; 

36  And  a  mannes  fooes  shalbe  they 
of  his  owne  housholde. 

37  He  that  lovith  hys  father  or  mother 
more  then  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me. 
And  he  that  loveth  his  sonne  or  doughter 
more  then  me,  is  not  mete  for  me. 

38  And  he  that  taketh  nott  his  crosse, 
and  foloweth  me,  ys  nott  mete  for  me. 

39  He  that  fyndeth  his  lyfe,  shall  lose 
it ;  and  he  that  losith  hys  lyfe  for  my 
sake,  shall  fynde  it. 

40  He  that  receavith  you,  receavith 
me  ;  and  he  that  receavith  me,  receavith 
him  that  sent  me. 

4  r  He  that  receavith  a  prophet  in  the 
name  of  a  prophet,  shall  receave  a  ])ro- 
phetes  rewarde.  And  he  that  receavith 
a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righ- 
teous man,  shall  receave  the  reward  of  a 
righteous  man. 

42  And  whosoever  shall  geve  vnto  won 
of  these  lytic  wouncs  to  drinkc  a  cuppe 
of  colde  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  dis- 
ciple, I  tel  you  of  a  trueth,  he  shall  not 
lose  his  rewarde. 


:>;> 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Chap.  XI.  i  Yah  war)?,  bij'e  usful- 
lida  lesus,  anabiudauds  )>aim  twallf  sip- 
onyam  seinaim,  usliof  sik  yainjjro  du 
laisyan  yah  mer^'au  and  baurgs  Tze. 

2  If)  lohannes  gahausyands  in  karkarai 
waurstwa  Christaus,  insandyands  bi  sip- 
onyam  seinaim, 

3  Qa]?  du  inima,  pu  is  sa  qiraanda,  Jjau 
an))ai-izuh  beidaima  1 

4  Yah  andhafyands  lesus,  qa);  du  i'm, 
Gaggandans  gateihi|j  lohanne  ))atei  ga- 
hausei])  yah  gasaiwhi)?. 

5  Blindai  ussaiwhand,  yah  haltai  gagg- 
and,  [jrutsfillai  hrainyai  wairj^and,  yah 
baudai  gahausyand,  yah  daujjai  uri'eis- 
and,  yah  unledai  wailameryanda. 

6  Yah  audags  ist  whazuh,  saei  ni  ga- 
marzyada  in  mis. 

7  At  ))aim  J^an  afgaggandam,  dugann 
lesus  qij^an  jjaim  manageim  bi  lohannen, 
Wha  usiddyeduf)  ana  au))ida  saiwhan  1 
raus  fram  winda  wagidata  1 

8  Akei  wha  usiddyedu))  saiwhan  1  mann- 
an  huasqyaim  wastyom  gawasidana  1 
Sai  !  [jaiei  hnasqyaim  wasidai  sind  in 
gardim  })iudane  sind. 

9  Akei  wha  usiddyedujj  saiwhan?  prauf- 
etu  1  Yai,  qi]>a  izwis,  yah  managizo 
praufetau. 

10  Sa  ist  auk,  bi  Jjanei  gameli}?  ist, 
Sai  !  ik  insandya  aggilu  meinana'''  faura 
|jus,  saei  gamanweij)  wig  jjeinana  faura 

j)US. 

1 1  Amen  qij^a  Vzwis,  ni  urrais  in  baur- 
im  qinono  maiza  lohanne  })amma  Daup- 
yandin  ;  i);  sa  minniza  in  ))iudangardyai 
himine,  maiza  imma  ist. 

12  Framuh  ])an  jjaim  dagam  lohannis 
\>\s  Daupyandins  und  hita  [jiudangardi 
himine  anamahtyada,  yah  anamahtyand- 
ans  frawilwand  ^o. 

13  Allai  auk  praufeteis  yah  wito)^  und 
lohanne  fauraqe})un. 

14  Yah  yabai  wildedeijj  mijjniman,  sa 
ist  HeHas  saei  skulda  qiman. 

15  Saei  habai  au[sona'''  hausyandona, 
ga]hausya[i]. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt 

Chap.  XI.  i  And  hyt  wses  gewordeu, 
da  se  Hselynd  dys  ge-endude,  hys  twelf 
leorning-cnihtum  bebeodende,  he  f5r 
danun  da^t  he  leerde  and  bodude  on  hjTa 
burgum.''' 

2  Da  lohannes  on  bendum  gehyrde 
Cristes  Aveoruc,  da  sende  he  to  him 
twegen  hys  leorning-cnihta, 

3  And  cw?e]5,  Eart  du  de  to  cumenne 
eart,  odde  we  odi-es  sceolon  abidan  1 

4  Se  Hselend  antswarude,  and  cwse|) 
to  him,  GaJ3  and  cydaj)  lohanne  da  Jjing 
de  ge  gehyrdon  and  gesawon. 

5  Bhnde  geseoj),  healte  ga)?,  hreofe 
synt  aclseusude,  deafe  gehyrajj,  deade 
arisa|j,  ))earfan  bodiajj. 

6  And  eadig  ys,  se  de  ne  swicajj  on  me. 

7  Da  hi  ut-eodon,  s'j'lice  da  ongan  se 
Hselynd  secgan  be  lohanne,  and  cwse)) 
to  diere  menigeo,  Hwi  code  ge  lit  on 
westeu'*'  geseon  1  winde  awegyd  hreod? 

8  Odde  hwi  eode  ge  ilt  geseon  1  maun 
hnescum  gyrlum  gescrydne  1  Nu !  da 
de  synt  hnescum  gyi4um  gesciydde  synt 
on  cyninga  husum. 

9  Ac  hwfet  eode  ge  ut  witegan  geseon  ? 
Ic  eow  secge,  eac  maran  donne  "witegan. 

10  Des  ys  s6}ilice,  be  dam  awryten  ys, 
Nu  !  ic  sende  minne  engyl  befoi'an  dine 
ansyne,  se  gegearwa]?  dinne  weg  beforan 
de. 

1 1  S6|)lice  ic  eow  secge,  ne  aras  be- 
,twyx  wifa  bearnum  mara  lohanne  Ful- 

wihtere ;    s6}?lice  se  de  Isessa  ys,  ys  on 
heofena  I'ice  him  mara. 

12  S6))lice  fram  lohannes  dagum  Ful- 
wihteres  od  dis  heofena  rice  })ola}i  nead, 
and  strece  nimaj?  dset. 

13  Soj^lice  ealle  Avitegan  and  se  witeg- 
udun  od  lohannes. 

14  And  gyf  ge  wylla})  gelyfan,  he  ys 
Helias  de  to  cumenne  ys. 

15  Se  de  earan  hsebbe  to  gehyrynne, 
gehyre. 


XL  1-15.]   WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

Chap.  XI.  i  Ami  it  is  don,  when 
Jliesu>5  liiuldo  eeiulid,  he,  eomiuindync^e 
to  his  twelue  ilisciplis.  pnsside  fro  tluMines 
for  to  prcche  and  toche  in  the  eitoos  of 
hem. 

2  Forsothe  wlicn  Joon  in  boondis  hadde 
herd  the  werkis  of  Crist,  he  sendynge 
two  or  three  of  his  disciplis, 

3  Seide  to  hym,  Art  thou  he  that  art 
to  cummyngc,  or  we  abideu  an  other  ? 

4  And  Jhosus  answerynp^e,  seide  to  hem, 
3ee  goyngo  telle  a^oin  to  Joon  the  thingis 
that  5e  han  herde  and  seen. 

5  Blynde  men  seen,  crokid  men  wan- 
dren,  mesels  ben  maad  clene,  deef  men 
hecren,  dead  men  risen  a5ein,  pore  men 
ben  taken  to  prechjTige  of  the  gospel.^ 

6  And  he  is  blessid,  that  shal  nat  be 
sclaundrid  in  me. 

7  Sothely  hem  goynge  awey,  Jhesus 
biganne  for  to  seye  of  Joon  to  the  cum- 
panyes,  ^Vhat  thing  wenten  ^e  out  for 
to  see  in  desert]  whether  a  reede  wawid 
with  wynd  ? 

8  But  what  thing  wente  36  out  for  to 
seen  ?  whether  a  man  clothid  with  soft 
thingis  1  Loo  !  tbei  that  ben  clothid 
with  softe  thingis  ben "  in  housis  of 
kyngis. 

9  But  what  thing  wenten  56  out  for  to 
se  1  whether  a  prophete  ]  ^e,  I  seie  to 
50U,  and  more  than  a  prophete. 

10  For  this  is  he,  of  whom  it  iswTityn, 
Loo  !  I  sende  myne  aungel  before  thi 
face,  that  shal  make  redy  thi  wey  bifore 
thee. 

11  Trewly  I  say  to  50U,  tlier  roose 
noon  more  than  Joon  Baptist  amonge 
children  of  wommen  ;  forsothe  he  that 
is  lesse  in  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes,  is 
more  than  he. 

12  Sothely  fi'O  the  days  of  Joon  Baptist 
til  now  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes  snffveth 
strengthe,^  and  violent  men  rauyshen  it. 

13  For  alle  prophetis  and  the  lawe  til 
Joon  Baptist  propheeieden  ; 

14  And  jif  3e  wolen  resseyuen,  he  is 
Ely  that  is  to  cume. 

15  He  that  hath  eeris  of  heerynge, 
heere  he. 


TYISDALE,  1526. 


lii 


Chap.  XL  i  And  it  cam  to  passe, 
when  Jesus  had  ended  his  preceptes  viito 
his  disciples,  he  departed  thence  to 
preaehe  and  teache  in  there  cites. 

2  Wlien  Jhon  beingc  in  preson  herde 
the  workes  of  Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his 
disciples, 

3  And  sayde  vnto  him,  Arte  thou  he 
that  shall  come,  or  shall  we  lokc  for 
another  1 

4  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Go  and  shewe  Jhon  what  ye  have  herde 
and  sene. 

5  The  blind  se,  the  halt  goo,  the  lyj)- 
pers  ar  clensed,  the  deef  heare,  the  ded 
are  reysed  vp  ageine,  and  the  gospell  is 
preachede  to  the  povre. 

6  And  happy  is  he,  thatt  is  noott  hurte 
by  me. 

7  Even  as  they  departed,  Jesus  began 
to  speake  vnto  the  people  of  Jhon,  What 
went  ye  for  to  se  in  the  wyldernes  ? 
went  ye  out  to  se  a  rede  waveringe  with 
the  wynde 1 

8  Oder  what  went  ye  out  for  to  se  1 
went  ye  to  se  a  man  clothed  in  soofte 
rayment  1  Bcholde !  they  that  weare 
soofte  clothing  are  in  kynges  bowses. 

9  Butt  what  went  ye  oute  for  to  se  1 
went  ye  outt  to  se  a  prophet  ■?  Ye,  I 
saye  \^lto  you,  and  more  then  a  prophet. 

10  For  this  is  he,  off  whom  it  is  wryt- 
ten,  Beholde  !  I  sende  my  messenger 
before  thy  face,  which  shall  prepare  thy 
waye  before  the. 

1 1  Verely  Y  saye  vnto  you,  amonge 
the  chyldren  off  women  arose  there  not 
a  gretter  then  Jhon  Baptist ;  not  with 
stondinge  he  that  ys  lesse  in  the  kyng- 
dom  oft"  heven,  ys  gretter  then  he. 

12  From  the  tyme  off  Jhon  Baptist 
hytherto  the  kyngdom  of  heven  suftreth 
violence,  and  they  that  make  vyolence 
pull  it  vnto  them. 

13  For  all  the  prophetes  and  the  lawe 
prophesyed  vnto  to  tyme  of  Jhon  ; 

14  Also  yf  ye  wyll  reccave  it,  thys  ys 
Ilelyas  which  shuld  come. 

15  He  that  hath  eares  to  heare,  let  him 
here. 

£  2 


52  GOTHIC,  360. 

1 6  [We  nu  galeiko]  ))ata  ku[ni  1  Galeik 
'ist  barnam]  sitandam  [in  garunsai,  yah 
wopyan]dam  anj'ar  anjya[ris,  yah  qij»- 
an]dam, 

1 7  Swiglodedum  izw[is,  yah]  ni  plinsid- 
eduj) ;  huf  [um,  yah]  ni  qainodedu}>. 

J  8  Qam  raihtis  Iohan[nes  uih  mat]- 
yands  nib  drigkan[ds,  yah  qi]})and,  Un- 
Iiul))[on  habai)>]. 

1 9  [Qam]  sa  sunus  man[s  matyands 
yah]  drigkands,  y[ah  qifiand,  Sai !  man]- 
na  afetya,  yah  af[drug]kya,  [mo]tarye 
friyonds  yah  frawaurhtaize.  Yah  us- 
waurhta  gadomida  war)?  handugei  fram 
barnam  seinaim. 

20  panuh  dugann  idweitya[n]  bam-g- 
ini,  'in  )5aimei  waurjjun  );os  managistons 
mahteis  is,  [jiatei  ni  idreigodedun]  sik. 

2 1  [Wai  ))us  !  Kaurazein,  wai  ))]us  I  Be})- 
[saidan  ;  unte  i]j  Ava]ur)5eina  [in  Tyre  yah 
Seidon]e  landa  mah[teis  j)OS  waur][)anons 
in  izwis,  [airis  [']au  in  sakkau  yah  azgon 
[idreig]odedeiua. 

22  Swejjauh  qi[jja  izAvis],  Tyrim  yah 
Seidonim  [sutizo  wa]irj)i]>  in  daga  stau- 
[os,  I'au  izwi]s. 

23  Yah  |m,  Kafarna[um,  ]>-a  und  hi]min 
ushauhida,   [dalajj    und   haly]a   galeil^is. 

Unte  yabai  in  S]audaumyam  [wau]rj)e- 
ina  m]ahteis,  jjos  waurjjanons  in  izwiS; 
ai|)J)au  eis  weseina  und  hina  dag. 

24  Swejjauh  qijja  izwis,  )^atei  airjjai 
Saudaumye  sutizo  wair[)i))  in  daga  stauos, 
|jau  }nis. 

25  luuh  yainamma  mela  andhaf-     .     . 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

1 6  Soj>lice  hwam  telle  ic  das  cneorysse 
gelice  ?  Heo  ys  gelic  sittendum  cnapun 
on  foretige,  da  hryma})  to  hyra  efengelic- 
on,  and  c\veda|>, 

17  We  sungun  eow,  and  ge  ne  fricud- 
un  ;  we  cwiddun,  and  ge  ne  weopun. 

18  Sol^lice  lohannes  com  ne  etende  ne 
drincende,  and  hi  cwicdun.  He  hsefj? 
deoful-seocnysse. 

1 9  Mannes  sunu  com  etende  and  drync- 
ende,  and  hi  cweda}),  Her  ys  ettul-man, 
and  win-drincende,  manfulra  and  syn- 
fulra  freond.  And  wisd5m  ys  geriht- 
wisud  fram  heora  bearnum."*' 

20  Da  ongan  he  hyspan  da  burga,  on 
dam  wterun  gedone  manega  hys  msegena, 
fordam  de  hi  ne  dydon  daed-bote. 

2 1  Wade!  Corozaim,wade!  Bethsaida; 
fordam  gyf  on  Tyro  and  Sydone  waerun 
ged5ne  da  msegnu  de  gedone  synt  on 
eow,  gefyrn  hi  dydun  dsed-bote  on  liseran 
and  on  axan. 

22  Deah  ic  secge  inc,  Tyro  and  Sydone 
by]>  forgyfendlicur  on  domes  dseg,  donne 
eow. 

23  And  dii,  Capharnaum,  cwyst  dii  byst 
du  up-ahafen  od  heofen  1  Ac  du  nider- 
ferst  od  helle.  Fordam  gyf  on  Sodomum 
wseron  gedone  da  msegnu,  de  gedone 
synt  on  de,  witodlice  hi  wuneduu  od 
dysne  dseg. 

24  Deah  hwsedere  ic  secge  eow,  dset 
Sodom-wara  lande  by]?  forgyfenlicre  on 
domes  d?eg,  donne  de.''" 

25  Se  Hselynd  cwsej^  andswariende,  Ic 
andytte  de,  drihten  heofenes  and  eorj^an, 
du  de  behyddyst  das  );ing  fram  wisum 
and  gleawum,  and  onwruge  da  lytling- 
um  ; 

26  Swa,  fseder,  fordam  hyt  wees  swa 
gecweme  beforan  de. 

27  Ealle  ])ing  me  synt  gesealde  fram 
minum  fsedyi-,  and  nan  man  ne  can  done 
sunu,  butuu  fsedyr,  ne  nan  maun  ne 
can  done  fa^dyr,  biitun  sunu,  and  dam 
de  se  sunu  wyle  ouwreun. 

28  Cuma])  to  me,  ealle  de  swinca)?,  and 
gesymede  synt,  and  ic  eow  geblissige. 


XI.  1 6-28.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

16  But  to  whom  slial  I  gcsse  tin's 
generaeioun  lichy  1  It  is  lichi  to  chil- 
dren sittynge  in  chcepyngc,  the  whiche, 
cryinge  to  her  peeris,  scien, 

1 7  AVe  han  sungcn  to  50U,  and  je  hau 
nat  lippid ;  we  han  mourned  to  50U, 
and  50  han  nat  weilid. 

18  Suthely  .Toon  cam  neither  etyinge 
ne  drynkynge,  and  thei  scien,  He  hath 
a  denel. 

19  The  sone  of  man  came  ctynge  and 
drynkynge,  and  tlici  seyen,  Loo  !  a  man 
deuourer,+  and  drj-nker  of  wyn,  and 
frend  of  puplican3's  and  synful  men. 
And  wijsdam  is  iustified  of  her  sonys. 

20  Thanne  Jhesus  began  for  to  seie 
repreue  to  citees,  in  whiche  ful  manye 
vertues  of  hym  ben  don,  for  thei  diden 
nat  penaunce. 

2 1  Woo  to  thee  !  Corozaym,  woo  to 
thee  !  Bethsaida  ;  for  5if  tho  vertues 
that  ben  don  in  30U  hadden  ben  don  in 
T}Te  and  Sydon,  sum  tyme  thei  hadden 
don  penaunce  in  haire  and  asch. 

22  Xetheles  T  say,  it  shal  be  softer^  to 
Tyre  and  Sydon  than  to  30U,  in  the  day 
of  dome. 

23  And  thou,  Caphernaum,  whether 
til  in  to  heuen  thou  shalt  be  rerid  vp  ] 
Thou  shalt  go  doun  til  into  helle.  For 
jif  the  vertues  tiiat  ben  don  in  thee, 
hadden  be  don  in  Sodom,  perauenture  thei 
shulden  han  dwellid  til  vn  to  this  day. 

24  Xetheles  Y  saye  to  50U,  for  to  the 
lond  of  Sodom  it  shal  be  softer^  in  the 
day  of  dome,  than  to  thee. 

25  In  the  ilk  tyme  Jhesus  answerynge 
saide,  I  knowleche  to  thee,  fadir,  lord  of 
heuen  and  erthe,  for  thou  hast  hid  these 
thingis  fro  wijse  men  and  ware/  and 
hast  shewid  hem  to  litil  men ; 

26  So,  fadir,  for  whi  so  it  was  plesynge 
tofore  thee. 

27  Alle  thingis  ben  taken  to  me  of  my 
fadir  ;  and  no  man  knewe  the  sone,  no 
but  the  fadir,  neither  eny  man  knewe 
the  fadir,  no  but  the  sone,  and  to  whom 
the  sone  wolde  shewe. 

28  Alle  50  that  traueilen,  and  ben 
chargid,  come  to  me,  and  I  shal  refresbe'' 
50U. 


TYNl^aLE,  1526. 


53 


16  But  whcarc  vnto  .shall  Y  lyken  this 
generacion  ]  It  ys  lyke  vnto  chyldren 
which  syt  in  the  markett,  and  call  vnto 
there  felowes,  and  saye, 

17  We  have  pyped  vnto  you,  and  ye 
have  not  daunsed  ;  we  have  morned  vnto 
you,  and  ye  have  not  sorowd. 

18  For  Jhon  cam  nether  eatynge  nor 
drinkinge,  and  they  saye,  He  hath  the 
devyll. 

19  The  Sonne  of  man  cam  eatynge  and 
drinkyngc,  and  they  saye,  Beholde !  a 
glutton,  and  a  drynker  of  wyne,  and  a 
frend  vnto  publicans  and  synners.  And 
wysdome  ys  iustified  off  her  chyldren. 

20  Then  began  he  to  vpbraid  the  cites, 
in  which  most  of  his  miracles  were  don, 
because  they  did  not  repent. 

21  Wo  be  to  the!  Chorasin,  wo  be  to 
the  !  Betzaida  ;  for  if  the  miracles  which 
wer  shewd  in  you  had  bene  done  in  Tiyre 
and  Sidon,  they  had  repented  louge  agon 
in  sack  cloth  and  asshes. 

22  Neverthelesse  Y  say  to  you,  it  shall 
be  esier  for  Tjre  and  Sidon  at  the  day 
of  iudgment,  then  for  you. 

23  And  thou,  Capernaum,  which  art 
lift  vp  vnto  heven,  shalt  be  thrust  doune 
to  hell.  Ffor  if  the  miracles  which  have 
bene  done  in  the,  had  bene  shewed  in 
Zodom,  they  had  remayned  to  this  daye. 

24  Neverthelesse  I  say  vnto  you,  it 
shall  be  easiar  for  Zodom  in  the  day  of 
iudgement,  then  for  the. 

25  Then  Jesus  answered  and  sayd,  I 
prayse  the,  o  father,  lorde  of  heven  and 
eith,  because  thou  hast  hid  these  thynges 
from  the  wy^se  and  prudent,  and  hast 
opened  them  vnto  babes  ; 

26  Even  so,  father,  for  so  it  pleased 
the. 

27  All  thynges  are  geven  vnto  me  of 
my  father ;  and  no  man  knoweth  the 
Sonne,  but  the  father,  nether  knoweth 
eny  man  the  fother,  save  the  sonne,  and 
he  to  whome  the  sonne  will  open  hym. 

28  Come  vnto  me,  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  ar  laden,  and  Y  will  ese  you. 


ii4 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  ]\rATT. 

29  Nimaj)  min  geoc  ofer  eoAv,  and  leorn- 
ia))  set  me,  fordam  ic  eom  bilwite  and 
eadmod  on  heortan ;  and  ge  gemetajj 
reste  eoMTum  sawlum. 

30  S6}5liee  min  geoc  ys  wynsum,  and 
min  byrdyn  ys  leolit. 


Chap.  X1I.+  1  Se  Hselynd  f5i'  on  reste- 
dsege  of)  r  secyras  ;  sof^lice  hys  leorning- 
cnihtas  hiugryde,  and  big  ongunnun 
pluccian  da  ear,  and  etan. 

2  Sojjlice  da  da  Sundor-balgan  daet 
gesawon,  hi  cwsedon  to  him,  Nu !  dine 
leorning-cnihtas  doj?  dset  him  alyfyd  nys 
reste-dagum  to  donne. 

3  And  he  G\vse\>  to  him,  Ne  rsedde  ge 
hwfet  Dauid  dyde,  da  hyne  bingrede, 
and  da  de  mid  hym  wserun  1 

4  Hu  he  ineode  on  Godes  lius,  and  set 
da  ofFring-hlafas,  de  nperun  him  Tdyfede 
to  etynne,  ne  dam  de  mid  him  wserun, 
butun  dam  sacerdum  auum  1 

5  Odde  ne  I'Eedde  ge  on  dsere  se,  dset 
da  sacerdas  on  reste-dagum  on  dam 
temple  gewemma)?  done  reste-d^eg,  and 
synt  butan  leahtre  1 

6  Ic  secge  sojjh'ce  eow,  dset  des  ys 
mserra  donne  dset  tempeL 

7  Gyf  ge  s6|?Iice  wistun,  hwset  ys,  Ic 
wylle  mild-beortnesse,  and  na  onssegd- 
nysse,  ne  genydrude  ge  eefre  unscyldige. 

8  Sbjjbce  mannes  sunu  ys  eac  reste- 
dseges  hlafui'd. 

9  Da  se  Heelend  danun  f5r,  he  com 
into  hyra  gesomnunge. 

10  Da  wses  dser  an  man  se  hsefde  for- 
scruncene  hand.  And  hi  ahsudon  hyne, 
dus  cwedende,  Ys  hyt  alyfed  to  hselenne 
on  reste-dagum  1  dset  hi  wrehton  hyne. 

1 1  He  ssede  him  s5j)Hce,  Hwylc  man  ys 
of  eow  de  hsebbe  an  sceap,  and  gyf  daet 
afyljj  reste-dagum  on  pytt,  hii  ne  nim)> 
he  dset,  and  hef  j?  hyt  upp  1 


1 2  Witodlice  niicle  ma  mann  ys  sceape 


XLJ9-X1I.  12.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

29  Take  ^e  my  50c  vpon  5011,  ixiul  lerne 
50  of  mo,  for  I  am  mykle  ami  moekc  in 
hcrte ;  ami  50  shulou  fyiule  rcste  iu 
3oure  soulis. 

30  For  mv  50c  is  swete,^  and  my  charge 
li5t.^ 


Chap.  XII.  i  In  that  tyme  Jhcsus 
wente  by  coruys  on  the  sabot  (.lay ;  for- 
sothe  his  disciplis,  huugrynge,  bigunnen 
to  pluc  eris  of  com,  and  to  ete. 

2  Sothely  Pharisees  seeynge,  seiden  to 
hym,  Loo !  thi  disciplis  dou  that  thing 
that  is  nat  leeful  to  hem  to  do  in  sab- 
othis. 

3  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Whether  50 
ban  nat  rad,  what  Dauith  didde,  when 
he  huugride,  and  thei  that  weren  ^yith 
hym  I 

4  Hon  he  entride  in  to  the  hous  of 
God,  and  ete  loonis  of  proposiciouu,'''  the 
whiche  luuuis  was  nat  leeful  to  hym  to 
eet,  nether  to  hem  that  weren  with  hym, 
no  but  to  prestis  only  ? 

5  Or  whether  56  han  nat  rad  in  the 
lawe,  for  in  sabothis  prestis  iu  the  tem- 
ple defoulen  the  sabothis,  and  thei  ben 
with  outen  grete  synne] 

6  Sothely  Y  saye  to  50U,  for  this  is 
more  than  the  temple. 

7  Forsothe  3if  je  wisten,  what  it  is,  I 
wole  mercy,  and  nat  sacrifice.  5e  shulden 
neuer  ban  conderapnyd  innocentis. 

8  Trewly  mannys  sone  is,  311  e,  lord  of 
the  sabot. 

9  And  whenne  he  passide  tlicnnus,  he 
came  iu  to  the  synagoge  of  hem. 

I  o  And  loo !  a  man  hauynge  a  drye 
bond.  And  thei  axiden  hym,  sayinge, 
5if  it  is  leeful  to  heele  in  the  sabot  ]  that 
thei  shulden  acuse  hym. 

I I  Sothely  he  seide  to  hem,  Who  shal 
be  a  man  of  50U,  that  hath  00  sheep, 
and  5if  it  shal  falle  doun  in  to  a  dike  in 
the  sabotis,  whether  he  shal  nat  holde, 
and  lift  it  vp  ? 

12    Hou  moche  more  is  a  man  betre 


TYNDaLE,  1520.  bo 

29  Take  my  yoke  on  you,  and  lerne  of 
me,  for  Y  am  meke  anil  loly  in  herte ; 
anil  ye  shall  fynde  ese  vnto  youre  soules. 

30  For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden 

is  liirht. 


Chap.  XII.  i  In  that  tyme  went 
Jesus  on  the  sabot  day  thorow  the  corn  ; 
and  his  disciples  wer  anhongred,  and 
began  to  plucke  the  eares  off  coorne,  and 
to  eatc. 

2  When  the  Pharises  had  sene  that, 
they  sayde  vnto  him,  Behold  !  thy  dis- 
ciples do  that  which  is  not  lawful!  to  do 
apon  the  saboth  day. 

3  He  sayde  vnto  them.  Have  ye  nott 
reed,  whatt  David  did,  when  he  was  an- 
houngered,  and  they  alsoo  which  were 
with  hym  % 

4  Howe  he  entred  into  the  housse  of 
God,  and  ate  the  halowed  loves,  whiche 
weruot  lawfuU  ffor  hym  to  eate,  nether 
fi'or  them  which  were  with  hym,  but 
only  for  the  prestes  ? 

5  Or  have  ye  not  reed  in  the  lawe, 
howe  that  the  prestes  in  the  temple 
breake  the  saboth  daye,  and  yet  are 
blamlesse  % 

6  But  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  here  is  one 
greater  then  the  temple. 

7  Wherfore  if  ye  had  wist,  what  this 
saynge  meneth,  I  requyre  mercy,  and 
not  sacrifice,  ye  wold  never  have  con- 
demned inocentes. 

8  For  the  sonne  off  man  is  lord  even 
off  the  saboth  daye. 

9  And  he  departed  thence,  and  went 
into  their  sinagogge. 

I  o  And  beholde  1  there  was  a  man 
whiche  had  his  hande  dryed  vp.  And 
they  axed  hym,  saynge,  Ys  yt  lawfull  to 
heale  apon  the  saboth  daye?  because 
they  myglit  acuse  him. 

II  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  \Vliyche 
ys  he  a  monge  you,  iff  he  had  a  shepe, 
fallen  into  a  pitt  on  the  saboth  daye, 
that  wolde  not  take  hym,  and  lyft  hym 
out] 

1 2  And  howe  moche  ys  a  man  better 


56 


GOTHIC,  ^6o. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

betera  1  WitotUice  hyt  ys  alyfed  on  reste- 
dagum  wel  to  d5nne. 

13  Da  cw8e))  he  to  dam  menn,  A'j^ene 
dine  hand.  And  he  hi  ajjenede  ;  and  heo 
wses  hal  geworden  swa  seo  oder."^ 

14  Da  Sunder-halgan  eodun  da  ut 
s6|)l:ce,  and  worhton  ge])eaht  ongen 
hyne,  hii  hi  hyne  forspildon. 

15  Se  Hselend  sojjlice  dset  wiste,  and 
ferde  danon  ;  and  him  fyligdon  mycel 
msenigeo,  and  he  hselde  hig  ealle. 

16  And  behead  him,  dset  hig  hyt  nanum 
men  ne  ssedon  ; 

1 7  Dfet  wsere  gefylled,  dset  de  gecwed- 
en  wses  J)urh  Isaiam,  done  witegan,  dus 
cwedende, 

18  Her  is  min  cnapa,  done  ic  geceas, 
niin  secorena,  on  dam  wel-gelicode  minre 
sawle ;  ic  asette  minne  gast  ofer  hyne, 
and  dom  he  bodaj)  Jjeodum. 

19  Ne  flit  he,  ne  he  ne  hrymjj,  ne  nan 
man  ne  gehyrj?  hys  stemne  on  straetom. 

20  To-cwysed  hreodhe  ne  forbrytt,  and 
smeocende  flex  he  ne  adwsescjj,  serdam 
de  he  a\s'orpe  d5m  to  sige ; 

21  And  on  hys  namanj^eoda  gehyhtaj).^ 

22  Da  wfes  him  broht  an  deofol-seoc 
man,  se  Avses  bhnd  and  dumb ;  and  he 
hyne  hselde,  swa  dset  he  sprsec,  and  ge- 
seah. 

23  And  da  menigeo  ealle  wundi-udon, 
and  cwsedon,  Cwede  we  is  des  Dauides 
sunul 

24  S5])lice  da  da  Sundor-halgan  dis 
gehyrdon,  da  cwsedon  hig,  Ne  adrifjj  des 
deoflu  ut,  buton  Jjurh  Belzebub,  deofla 
ealdre. 

25  Se  Hgelend  s6))lice  wiste  hyra  ge- 
Jjancas,  and  cwae])  to  him,  JE'lc  rice  de 
by))  twyrsede  on  him  sylfum,  by))  to-worp- 
en,  and  selc  ceaster,  odde  bus,  de  by)) 
widerweard  ongen  hyt  sylf,  hyt  ne  stent. 

26  And  gyf  se  deoful  adrif[)  ut  done 
deoful,  hig  beo))  to-dselede  ;  hu  meeg  don- 
iie  hys  rice  standan  1 

27  And  gyf  ic  ))urh  Belzebub  adrife  ut 


XII.  13-2  7.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

than  a  sheep  ?    And  so  it  is  lecful  to  do 
good  in  the  sabot. 

1 3  Thaiine  ho  soide  to  the  man,  Strecche 
forth  thin  hond.  And  he  strei5te  forth  ; 
and  it  is  restorid  to  helthe  as  the  tothei. 

14  Forsothe  Pharisees  goynge  out, 
niaden  a  counsel  a5eins  hym,  hou  thei 
shulden  leese  hym. 

1 5  Sothely  Jhesus  witynge,  wente  awey 
thennes ;  and  many  sueden  hym,  and 
he  heHde  hem  alle. 

\6  And  he  comaundide  to  hem,  that 
tliei  shuUlon  nat  make  hj-m  opyn  ;^ 

17  That  that  thing  shukle  be  fulfilled, 
that  was  said  by  Ysay,  the  prophete, 
seyinge, 

1 8  Loo !  my  chosen  child,  whom  T 
haue  chosen,  ray  derlyng,  in  whom  it 
hath  wel  plesid  to  my  soule  ;  I  shal 
putte  my  spirit  on  hym,  and  he  shal 
telle  dome  to  heithon  men. 

19  He  shal  nat  stryue,  ne  crye,  nether 
eny  man  shal  here  his  voice  in  stretis. 

20  He  shal  nat  bi'eke  to  gidre  a  schak- 
en  reed,  and  he  shal  nat  quenche  smok- 
ynge  flax,  til  that  he  cast  out  dome  to 
victorie ; 

2 1  And  hethen  men  shulen  hope  in  his 
name. 

22  Thanne  a  blynd  man  and  doumb, 
hauynge  a  deuel,  was  offrid  vp  to  hym  ; 
and  he  helide  hym,  so  that  he  spac,  and 
say. 

23  And  alle  the  cumpanyes  wondreden, 
and  saiden,  Wher  this  be  the  sone  of 
Dauith  ? 

24  But  the  Pharisees,  herynge,  seiden, 
He  this  castith  not  out  feendis,  no  but 

'  in  Belzabub,  prince  of  fendis. 

25  Sothely  Jhesus,  witynge  her  thou5iis, 
scide  to  hem,  Eche  kyngdam  departid 
ajeins  hym  self,  shal  be  desolat,^  and 
eehe  citee,  or  hous,  departid  a3ein8  it 
self,  shal  nat  stonde. 

26  And  3if  Sathanas  castith  out  Sa- 
thanas,  he  is  departid  a5oins  hym  sell  ; 
therfore  hou  shal  his  kyngdam  stonde  ? 

27  And    5if  I    in    Belzubub    cast    out 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


57 


then  a  shepe  1    Whcrfore  it  ys  Icfull  to 
do  a  good  dede  on  the  saboth  dayc. 

13  Then  sayde  he  to  the  man.  Stretch 
forth  thy  hand.  And  he  stretched  it 
forthe  ;  and  yt  was  agaync  made  even 
as  whole  as  the  other. 

14  Then  the  Faryses  went  forthe,  and 
tokc  counsell  agaynst  hym,  howe  they 
myght  destroye  hym. 

1 5  When  Jesus  knewe  that,  he  departed 
thence  ;  and  moche  people  folowed  him, 
and  he  healed  them  all. 

16  And  charged  them,  that  they  shulde 
not  make  him  knowne  ; 

17  To  fulfyll  that  which  was  spoken 
by  Esay,  the  prophet,  which  sayeth, 

18  Beholde !  my  sonne,  whom  I  have 
chosen,  my  derlinge,  in  whom  my  soule 
hath  had  delite  ;  I  wyll  put  my  sprete 
on  him,  and  he  shall  shewe  iudgement 
to  te  gentyls. 

19  He  shall  not  stryve,  he  shall  not 
crye,  nether  shall  eny  man  heare  hys 
voyce  in  te  streetes. 

20  A  brosed  rede  shall  he  not  breacke, 
and  flaxe  that  begynncth  to  burne  he 
shall  not  quenche,  tyll  he  sende  forth 
iudgement  vnto  victory  ; 

2 1  And  in  hys  name  shall  the  gentyls 
truste. 

22  Then  was  brought  to  hym,  won 
possessed  with  a  devyll,  whych  was  both 
blynde  and  domne ;  and  he  healed  him, 
insomuch  tliat  he  which  was  blynd  and 
domne  both  spake,  and  sawe. 

23  And  all  the  people  were  amased, 
and  sayde,  Ys  not  this  the  sonne  of 
David  1 

24  When  the  Pharises  herde  that,  they 
sayde,  He  dryveth  the  devyls  no  nothcr 
wise  oute,  but  by  the  helppe  off  Belse- 
bub,  the  chefe  of  the  dcvylls. 

25  But  Jesus  knewe  their  thoughtes, 
and  sayde  to  them,  Every  kyngdom  de- 
vided  with  in  it  sylfe,  shalbe  desolate, 
nether  shall  eny  cite,  or  housholde, 
devyded  ayenst  it  sylfe,  contynue. 

26  So  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  then  ys 
he  devyded  avenst  him  sylfe ;  howe 
shall  then  hys  kyngdom  endure  ? 

27  AUso  yf  Y  by  the  helppe  of  Belze- 


58 


GOTHIC.  39°- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

deofla,  |)urh  hwsene  adrifajj  eowre  beam  ? 
Fordam  hig  sylfe  beoj)  eowre  deman. 

28  Gyf  ic  s5jjlice  on  Godes  Gaste  a- 
wurpe  deoflu,  witodiice  on  cow  becym)) 
Godes  rice, 

29  Odcte  hu  mseg  man  ingan  on  stranges 
hus,  and  liys  fata  liyne  bereafian,  buton 
he  gebinde  serest  done  strangan,  and 
donne  hys  hus  bereafige '?''■ 

30  Se  de  nys  mid  me,  he  is  ongen  me  ; 
and  se  de  ne  gaderaj?  mid  me,  he 
to-wyrp)?. 

31  Fordam  ic  secge  eow,  selc  synn 
and  bysmur-spreec  by]j  forgyfen  man- 
num,  s6[)!ice  dses  Halgan  Gastes  bysmur- 
sprsec  ne  hj\)  forgyfen. 

32  And  swa  hwylc  swa  cwyj>  word  on- 
gen mannes  sunn,  him  by])  forgyfen  ;  se 
de  s6])lice  cwyj)  ongen  Haligne  Gast,  ne 
by])  hyt  hym  forgyfen,  ne  on  dlsse  wor- 
ulde,  ne  on  dsere  toweai'dan. 

33  Odde  wyrcea])  god  treow,  and  hys 
weastm  godne  ;  odde  wyrceaj^  yfel  treow, 
and  hys  wsestm  yfehie  ;  witodiice  be  dam 
weastmme  by|)  dajt  treow  oncnawen. 

34  La  ge  naedrena  cynryn,  hu  magon 
ge  god  sprecan,  donne  ge  synt  yfele  1 
S6)jlice  of  doere  heortan  willan  se  muj) 
spicj). 

35  God  mann  s6))lice  of  godum  gold- 
horde  bring])  god  for]),  and  yfel  mann  of 
yfelum  gold-horde  bring])  yfel  for]). 


36  S6])lice  ic  secge  eow,  deet  selc  idel 
word  de  menn  spreca]),  hi  agylda])  ge- 
scead  be  dam  on  d5mes  d£ege; 

37  So])lice  of  dinum  wordum  du  byst 
geryhtwisod,  and  of  dinum  wordum  dii 
byst  genyderod.^ 

38  Da  andswarodun  hym  sume  da  boc- 
eras  and  da  Sundor-halgan,  dus  cwed- 
eade,  Lareow,  we  wylla]?  sum  tacn  of  de 
geseon. 

39  He  andswarode  hym  and  cwse]), 
Yfel  cneorys  and  forliger  sec])  tacn,  and 


XII.  28-39.]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

ileuells,  in  whom^  50urc  sonys  casten 
out  I  Thcrforc  tbei  slmlen  ben  joure 
duinys  men. 

28  Foisothe  5if  I  in  the  Spirit  of  God 
caste  out  fendis,  therfore  the  kyngdam 
of  God  is  cunimen  in  to  jou.^ 

29  Ether  hou  may  eny  man  entre  in 
to  the  hous  of  a  stronge  man,  and  take 
awey  his  vessel  is,  no  but  first  he  shal 
bynde  the  stronge  man,  and  than  he 
shal  rauyshe  his  hous  1 

30  He  that  is  nat  with  me,  is  a5einus 
me  ;  and  he  that  gadrith  nat  to  gidre 
with  me,  scatrith  abrood. 

31  Therfore  Y  seye  to  50U,  al  synne 
and  blasfemye  shal  be  for3ouen  to  men, 
but  the  spirit  of  blasfemye  shal  nat  be 
for50uen. 

32  And  who  euere  shal  seie  a  word 
ajeins  mannys  sone,  it  shal  be  for5ouen 
to  hym  ;  forsothe  he  that  shall  seye  a 
word  a5eins  the  Holy  Goost,  it  shal  nat 
be  for50uen  to  hym,  nether  in  this  world, 
ne  in  the  tother. 

^;]  Ether  make  ^e  the  tree  good,  and 
his  fruyt  good  :  ether  make  3e  the  tree 
yuel,  and  his  fruyt  euyl ;  forsothe  a  tree 
is  knowen  of  the  fruyt. 

34  5e  generacioun  of  eddris,  howe  mowe 
56  speke  good  thingis,  when  5e  ben  yuel  1 
Sothely  the  mouth  spekith  of  the  gi'ete 
plente  of  the  herte. 

35  A  good  man  brengitli  forth  good 
thingis  of  good  tresoure,  and  an  yuel 
man  bryngith  forth  yuel  thingis  of  yuel 
tresour. 

36  Forsothe  Y  seie  to  50U,  for  whi  of 
euery  ydel  word  that  men  speken,  thei 
shul  5elde  resoun  therof  in  the  day  of 
dome ; 

37  For  of  thi  wordis  thou  shalt  be 
iustified,  and  of  thi  wordis  thou  shalt  be 
dampnyd. 

38  Tlianne  sume  of  the  scribes  and 
riiarisces  answereden  to  hym,  seyinge, 
Maistre,  we  wolden  se  a  tokne  of  thee. 

39  The  whiche  answeryngc  seith  to 
hem,  An  iuel  generacioun  and  auoutrere 
sekith  a  tokne,  and  tokne  shal  nat  be 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


5^ 


bub  cast  out  devyls,  by  whose  helppe  do 
youre  children  cast  them  out  1  Therfore 
thei  shalbe  youre  iudges. 

28  But  if  I  cast  out  the  devyls  by  the 
Sprete  of  God,  then  ys  the  kyngdom  of 
God  come  on  you. 

29  Other  howe  can  a  man  enter  into  a 
mighty  manues  housse,  and  violently 
take  awayc  his  godes,  excepte  he  fyrst 
bynde  the  stronge  man,  and  then  spoyle 
hys  housse  ? 

30  He  thatt  ys  not  with  me,  ys  agaynst 
me ;  and  he  that  gaddereth  not  with 
me,  scattereth  abrode. 

31  Wherfore  I  say  vnto  you,  all  maner 
off  synne  and  blasphemy  shalbe  forgeven 
vnto  men,  but  the  blasphemy  against 
the  Holy  Goost  shall  not  be  forgeven 
vnto  men. 

32  And  whosoever  speaketh  a  worde 
agaynst  the  sonne  off  man,  it  shalbe 
forgeven  him  ;  but  whosoever  speaketh 
agaynst  the  Huly  Goost,  yt  shall  not  be 
fforgeven  hym,  no,  nether  in  this  worlde, 
nether  in  the  worlde  to  come. 

33  Other  make  the  tree  good,  and  his 
frute  good  also  ;  or  els  make  the  tree 
evyll,  and  his  frute  evyll  also ;  for  the 
tree  ys  knowen  by  hys  frute. 

34  O  generacion  of  vipers,  howe  can 
ye  saye  well,  when  ye  youre  selves  are 
evyll?  For  of  the  aboundance  of  the 
hert  the  mouthe  speaketh. 

35  A  good  man  oute  of  the  good  trea- 
sure of  hys  hert  bryngcth  forth  good 
thynges,  and  an  evyll  man  out  off  his 
evyll  treasure  bryngeth  forthe  evyll 
thinges. 

36  But  I  say  vnto  you,  that  of  every 
ydell  worde  that  men  shall  have  spoken, 
they  shall  geve  a  countes  at  the  daye  off 
iudgement ; 

37  For  by  thy  wordes  thou  shalt  be 
iustifyed,  and  by  thy  wordes  thou  shalt 
be  condemned. 

38  Then  answered  certayne  off  the 
scribes  and  off  the  Pharises,  saynge, 
Master,  we  wolde  fayne  se  a  sygnc  of 
the. 

39  He  answered  them  saynge.  The 
evyll  and  advoutrous  genci'acion  seketh 
a   signe,  but  there    shall   no   signe   be 


60 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

hyi'e    ne   bij)   nan  tacn  geseald,   buton 
lonas  tacn,  dses  witogan. 

40  AVitodlice  swa  swa  Tonas  wses  on 
dfBS  hwfeles  innojje  \>ry  dagas  and  Jjreo 
niht,  swa  by|>  mannes  sunu  on  eorl^an 
heortan  ]>rj  dagas  and  ))reo  niht. 

41  Niniuetisce  weras  ar:sa|j  on  dome 
raid  dysse  cneorysse,  and  big  genyderia)? 
hig ;  fordani  de  big  dydon  dsed-bote  on 
Tonas  bodunge,  and  des  is  mara  donne 
lonas 

42  Sujj-dseles  cwen  ar'st  on  d5me 
mid  disse  cneorysse,  and  heo  genyderajj 
hig ;  fordam  de  heo  com  fram  hmdes 
geniEei'um,  to  gehyranne  Salomones 
wisdom  and  des  is  mara  donne  Salom- 
on. 

43  S6|)lice  donne  se  unclsena  gast  ut- 
fser];  fram  menn,  he  gee})  geond  drige 
stoAva,  secende  reste,  and  he  ne  gemet. 

44  Donne  cwyj)  he,  Ic  gecyrre  on  mm 
hiis,  danon  ic  lit-eode.  And  cumende  he 
gemet  byt  pemtig,  and  geclsensod  mid 
besmum,  and  gefraetwod. 

45  Eonne  gse)?  he,  and  him  to-genimjj 
seofiin  odre  gastas,  wyrsan  donne  he ; 
and  ingangende  hig  eardigea]>  dser.  And 
donne  wurda})  dses  mannes  ytemestan 
wyrsan  donne  da  serran.  And  swa  byj> 
dysse  wyrrestan  cneorysse. 

46  Da  he  d;is  |jing  dfi  gyt  sprsec  to 
dam  msenegum,  da  st5d  hys  modor  and 
his  gebrodra  daer  ute,  secende  sprdecon 
to  him. 

47  S5}5l!ce  da  cw8e|}  sum  to  him,  Wit- 
odb'ce!  din  modur  and  dine  gebrodra 
standajj  her  ute,  de  secende. 

48  And  he  andswarode  hym  secgend- 
um,  and  cwsejj,  Hwylc  ys  min  modur  1 
and  hwylce  synt  mine  gebrodi-a  1 

jg  And  he  ajjenude  hys  hand  on  his 
leorning-cnihtas,  and  cwse]),  [Her  is  min 
moder  and  mine  gebrodru  f~\ 

50  Witodb'ce  swa  hwylc  swa  wyrcjj 
mines  fteder  willan  de  on  heofenan  is, 
he  is  min  brodur,  and  min  swustor,  and 
mod  or. 


XII.  40-50.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

jouen  to  it,  no  but  the  tokne  of  Jonas, 
the  proi)hcte. 

40  For  as  Jonas  was  in  the  womb  of 
a  whall  three  clays  and  three  nijtis,  so 
mannus  sone  shal  l)e  in  the  herte  of  the 
erthe  three  days  and  three  ni5tis. 

41  Men  of  Nynyue  shal  ryse  in  dome 
with  this  generaeioun,  and  shulen  eon- 
dempne  it ;  for  thei  diden  penaunee  in 
the  preehynge  of  Jonas,  and  loo  !  here 
is  more  than  Jonas. 

42  The  queen  of  the  south  shal  ryse  in 
dome  with  this  generation,  and  shal 
condempne  it ;  for  she  came  fro  the 
eendis  of  the  erthe,  for  to  here  the  wis- 
dani  of  Salomon,  and  loo  !  heere  is  raoi'e 
than  Salomon. 

43  Forsothe  whan  an  vnclene  spirit 
shal  go  out  fro  a  man,  he  goth  by  drye 
places,  seek}Tige  reste,  and  he  fyndyth 
nat. 

44  Thanne  he  saith,  I  shal  turne  a5ein 
in  to  my  hous,  fro  whennys  Y  came  out. 
And  he  eummynge  fyndith  it  voide, 
clensid  with  bismes,  and  maad  faire. 

45  Thanne  he  goth,  and  takith  seuen 
other  spiritis  with  hym,  worse  than  hym 
self  ;  and  thei  eutrynge  yn  dwellen 
there.  And  the  last  thingis  of  that  man 
ben  maad  worse  than  the  foi-mer.  So  it 
shal  be  and  to  this  worst  generaeioun. 

46  3it  hym  sjjekynge  to  the  cumpanyes 
of  peple,  loo !  his  modir  and  his  bre- 
theren  stoden  with  outeforth,  seekyng 
for  to  speke  to  hym. 

47  Sothely  sum  man  saide  to  hym. 
Loo  !  tin  modir  and  thi  brethren  stonden 
with  outforth,  seekynge  thee. 

48  And  he,  answerynge  to  the  man 
seiynge  to  hym,  seith,  Who  is  my  modir  1 
and  who  ben  my  brethren  1 

49  And  he  holdynge  forth  his  bond  in 
to  his  disciples,  seide,  Loo  !  my  modir 
and  my  bretheren  ; 

50  Trculy  whoeuer  doth  the  wil  of  my 
fadir  that  is  in  heuenes,  he  is  my  bro- 
ther, suster,  and  modir. 


TYNDALE,  1526 


(U 


geven  to  them,  but  the  signc  of  tlie  pro- 
phete,  lonas. 

40  For  as  lonas  was  thre  days  and  thre 
nyghtes  in  the  whales  belly,  soo  shall 
the  Sonne  of  man  be  thre  days  and  thre 
jiightes  in  the  hert  of  the  erth. 

41  The  men  of  Ninivite  shall  rise  at 
the  day  of  iudgemeut  with  this  nacion, 
and  condemne  them  ;  for  they  repented 
at  the  preaehynge  of  Jonas,  and  beliolde! 
a  greater  then  Jonos  ys  here. 

42  The  queue  of  the  south  shall  ryse 
at  the  day  of  iudgement  with  this  gene- 
racion,  and  shall  condemne  them  ;  for 
she  cam  from  the  vtmost  parties  of  the 
worlde,  to  heare  the  wisdome  of  Solo- 
mon, and  behold  !  heare  is  a  greater  then 
Solomon. 

43  When  the  vnclene  sprete  is  gone 
out  of  a  man,  he  walketh  throughout 
dry  places,  seking  reest,  and  fyudeth 
none. 

44  Then  he  sayeth,  I  will  retourne 
ageyne  into  my  housse,  from  whence  I 
cam  oute.  And  when  he  is  come  he 
fyndeth  the  housse  empty,  and  swepte, 
and  garnisshed. 

45  Then  he  goeth  his  waye,  and  taketh 
seven  spretes,  worsse  then  liym  silfe  ;  and 
so  entre  they  in  and  dwell  there.  And 
the  ende  of  that  man  is  worsse  then  the 
beginnyng.  Even  so  shall  it  be  to  this 
fi-owarde  nacion. 

46  Whill  he  yet  talked  to  the  people, 
beholde !  hys  moder  and  his  brethren 
stode  with  out  the  dores,  dcsyring  to 
speake  with  him. 

47  Then  won  said  vnto  him,  Dehold  I 
thy  moder  and  thy  brethren  stond  with- 
out, desiringe  to  speke  with  tlie. 

48  He  answered,  and  sayd  to  him  that 
tolde  him,  Who  is  my  mother  ?  or  who 
are  my  brethren  ? 

49  And  he  stretched  forth  his  bond 
over  his  disciples,  and  sayd.  Behold  !  my 
mother  and  my  brethren  ; 

50  For  whosoever  fulfilleth  my  fathera 
will  whiche  is  in  hevcn,  he  is  my  brother, 
my  suster,  and  my  mother. 


<)? 


aOTHfC.  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.  [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  XIII.  i  On  dam  da?ge  dam 
Hselende  ut-gangendum  of  huse,  he  sset 
wid  da  sse. 

2  And  mycle  msenigeo  wseron  gesam- 
node  to  hym,  swa  dast  he  eode  on  scyp 
and  dser  sset  ;  and  eall  seo  maenigeo 
stod  on  dam  waroj^e. 

3  And  he  sprajc  to  him  fela  on  bigspel- 
lum,  cwedende,  SoJjHce  !  ut-eode  se  ssed- 
ere'''  hys  ssed  to  slwenne. 

4  And  da  da  he  seow,  sume  hig  feoUon 
wid  weg,  and  fuglas  comun,  and  seton 
da. 

5  S6j)lice  sume  feollon  on  stsenihte, 
dajr  hyt  nsefde  mycle  eorjmn  ;  and  hrajd- 
lice  np-sprungon,  fordam  de  hig  nasfdon 
dajre  eorjjan  dypan. 

6  Sojjlice  up-sprungenre  sunnan,  hig  a- 
druwudon,  and  forscruncon,  fordam  de 
big  nfefdon  wyrtrnm. 

7  S6])lice  sume  feollon  on  })ornas  ;  and 
da  })ornas  weoxon,  and  for}>rysmudon 
da. 

8  Sume  s6|)lice  feollon  on  gode  eorj^an, 
and  sealdon  weastm  ;  sum  hund-fealdne, 
sum  sixtig-fealdne,  sum  Jjrittig-fealdue. 

9  Se  de  hsebbe  earan  to  gehyrenne, 
gehyre. 

10  And  da  genealsehton  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  and  cwsedon  to  hym,  For  hwig 
spycst  du  to  hym  mid  bigspellum  1 

1 1  Da  andswarode  he  hym,  Fordam 
de  eow  is  geseald  to  witanne  heofena 
rices  gerynu  ;  and  him  nys  na  geseald. 

12  S6])lice  dam  de  htefjj  him  by])  ge- 
seald, and  he  hfefj> ;  s6))lice  se  de  neef|), 
and  dset  de  he  hsefj)  him  bi))  setbroden. 


13  Fordam  ic  spsec  to  him  mid  big- 
spellum, fordam  de  15eiende  hig  ne  ge- 
seo|),  and  gehyrende  hig  ne  gehyraj),  ne 
ne  ongyta)) ;  ^ 

14  Da3t  on  him  sy  gefylled  Esaias  wit- 
egung,  Of  gehyrnysse  ge  gehj'raj),  and 
ge  ne  ongyta}) ;  and  lociende  ge  geseo]), 
and  ge  ne  geseo}) ; 

15  S6j)lice  discs  folces  heorte  is  ahyrd, 
and  hig  hefelice  mid  earum  gehyrdon, 


XIll.  1-15.]    AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Chap.  XIII.  i  In  that  day  Jlicsus 
goynge  out  of  the  hous,  sat  besklis  the 
sec. 

2  Ami  manye  cumpanyes  of  pcple  ben 
gedrid  to  hym,  so  that  he  stcyingc  vp 
in  to  a  boot  sat ;  and  al  the  cunipanye 
stode  in  the  biynke. 

.5  And  lie  spak  to  hem  many  thingis  in 
parablis,  soiynge,  Loo  !  he  that  sowith, 
goth  out  to  sowe  his  seed. 

4  And  the  while  he  soweth,  sum  felden 
byside  the  weye,  and  briddis  of  the  eyre 
camen,  and  eeten  hem. 

5  Sothely  other  seedis  felden  into  stoony 
placis,  Avher  thei  hadden  nat  moche 
erthe  ;  ami  anoon  thei  ben  sprungen  vp, 
for  thei  hailde  nat  depnesse  of  erthe. 

6  Sothely  the  sunne  sprung  vp,  thei 
swaliden,^  and  for  thei  hadden  nat  roote, 
thei  dricdon  vp. 

7  Forsothe  other  seedis  felden  amonge 
thornis  ;  and  the  thornis  wexcn  vp,  and 
strangliden  hem. 

8  But  other  seedis  felden  in  to  good 
lond,  and  5auen  fruyt ;  sume  an  hundred 
fold,  another  sexti  fold,  another  thritti 
fold. 

9  He  that  hath  eris  of  heerynge,  heere 
he. 

10  And  discijilis  cummynge  to  seiden 
to  hym,  Whi  spekist  thou  in  parablis  to 
hem  ? 

1 1  The  whiche  answerynge  seith  to 
hem,  For  to  5011  it  is  50uen  for  to  knowe 
the  mysterie^  of  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes; 
but  it  is  nat  30uen  to  hem. 

I  2  For  it  shal  be  50uen  to  hym  that 
hath,  and  he  shal  have  plentee  ;  trewly 
who  that  hath  nat,  that  thing  that  he  is 
seen  to  haue  shal  be  taken  awey  fro 
liyxn. 

13  Therfore  I  spckc  to  hem  in  parablis, 
for  thei  secynge  see  nat,  and  thei  heer- 
ynge heei-en  nat,  nether  vndirstonden  ; 

1 4  That  the  prophecie  of  Ysay  seiynge 
be  fultiliid  in  hem.  With  heerynge  36 
shulen  heere,  and  3ee  shulen  nat  vnder- 
stonde ;  and  366  seeynge  shulen  see,  and 
3ee  shulen  nat  see  ; 

15  For  the  hcrte  of  this  peple  is  en- 
fat  tid,  and  thei  herdeu  greuously  with 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


Ci 


Chap.  XIII.  i  The  same  daye  went 
Jesus  out  off  the  housse,  and  sat  by  the 
see  syde. 

2  And  moch  people  resorted  vnto  him, 
so  gretly  that  he  went  and  sat  in  a 
shyppe ;  and  all  the  people  stode  on  the 
shoore. 

3  And  he  spake  many  thynges  to  them 
in  similitudes,  sayinge,  I^eholde  I  the 
sower  wentt  forth  to  sowe. 

4  And  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the 
wayes  syde,  and  the  fowlles  cam,  and 
devoured  it  vpjie. 

5  Some  fell  ajion  stony  groundc,  where 
it  had  not  moche  ci'th  ;  and  a  non  it 
s])ronge  vpi)e,  because  it  had  no  depht 
off  erth. 

6  And  when  the  sun  was  vppe,  hitt 
cauth  heet,  and  for  lake  off  rotynge, 
wyddred  awaye. 

7  Some  fell  amonge  thornes  ;  and  the 
thornes  arose,  and  chooked  it. 

8  Parte  fell  in  goode  grunde,  and  broght 
forth  good  frute  ;  some  an  hundred  fold, 
some  fifty  fold,  some  thyrty  folde. 

9  Whosoever  hath  eares  to  lieare,  let 
him  heare. 

10  And  hys  disciples  cam  and  sayde  to 
him,  Why  speakest  thou  to  them  in 
parables  ? 

1 1  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them. 
Hit  is  geven  vnto  you  to  knowe  the 
secrettes  off  the  kyngdom  of  hevt  n  ;  but 
to  them  it  is  not  geven. 

1 2  For  whosumever  hath  to  him  shall 
hit  be  geven,  and  he  shall  have  abound- 
ance  ;  but  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him 
shalbe  takyn  awaye  even  that  same  that 
he  hath. 

13  Therfore  spcake  Y  to  them  in  simi- 
litudes, for  though  they  se,  tliey  se  not, 
and  hearinge  tliey  heare  not,  nether 
vnderstonde ; 

14  And  in  them  ys  fulfylled  the  pro- 
phesy of  Esay  which  prophesi  sayth, 
With  youre  eares  ye  shall  heare,  and 
shall  not  vnderstonde  ;  and  with  youre 
eyes  ye  shall  se,  and  shall  not  perccave ; 

15  For  this  peoples  hert  ys  wexed 
grosse,    and    their    eares   were    dull    of 


M 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

and  hyra  eagan  beclysdon,  de-lses  hig 
aefre  mid  eagum  geseoii,  and  mid  earum 
geliyron,  and  mid  lieortan  ongyton,  and 
sin  gecyrrede,  and  ic  hig  gebsele. 

16  SoJ)lice  eadige  synt  eowi'e  eagan 
fordam  de  hig  geseo]),  and  eowre  earan 
fordam  de  hig  gehjrn]>. 

17  Sojjlice  on  eornust  ic  eow  secge, 
dset  manega  Avitegan  and  rihtwise  gewil- 
nudon  da  \>mg  to  geseonne  de  ge  geseojj, 
and  hig  ne  gesawon,  and  gehyran  da  [jing 
de  ge  gehyra]?,  and  hig  ne  gehyrdon. 

18  Gehyre  ge  sojjlice  dses  sawendan 
bigspell. 

19  tE'Ic  dsera  de  Godes  ward  gehyrjj, 
and  ne  ongyt,  donne  cym|5  deoful,  and 
bereafa})  dset  on  hys  lieortan  asawen  is ; 
daet  is  se  de  wid  done  weg  asawen  is. 


20  Sojjlice  se  de  ofer  done  stan  asawen 
is,  dis  is  se  de  dset  Godes  wurd  gehfr\>, 
and  hraedlice  d«t  mid  blisse  onfehji. 

21  Sojjlice  hyt  nsefj)  done  wyrtnim  on 
him,  ac  is  hwilwendlic.  Gewordenre  ge- 
drefednesse  and  ehtnesse  for  dam  Avurde, 
hraedlice  hig  beoj)  ge-untreowsode. 

22  S5}ilice  djet  de  asaweia  is  on  j^ornum, 
dset  is  se  de  diet  wurd  gehyr};,  and  donne 
eornfuUness  disse  worulde,  and  leasung 
dissa  woruld-welena  for)?rysmia))  dset 
wurd,  and  hit  is  butan  weastme  ge- 
worden. 

23  S5})lice  dset  de  asawen  wses  on  dset 
gode  land,  dtet  is  se  de  dset  wurd  ge- 
hyrjj, and  ongyt,  and  done  weastm 
bring]?.  And  donne  dejj  sum  hund- 
fealdne,  sum  sixti-fealdne,  sum  Jjritti- 
fealdue. 

24  He  rehte  him  dt  oder  bigspel,  and 
dus  cw£e]>,  Heofena  rice  is  geworden  dam 
men  gelic,  de  seow  g5d  ssed  on  his 
secyre. 

25  Sojjlice,  da  da  men  slepon,  da  com 
his  feonda  sum,  and  ofer-seow  hit  mid 
coccele  on  middan  dam  hwcete,  and 
ferde  danon. 

26  S5]3lice  da  seo  wyi't  weox,  and  done 


XIII.  1 6-26.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389.     ■ 

eris,  and  thei  han  closid  her  ee5en,  that 
sum  tvme  thei  see  with  ee;on,  and  with 
eris  heeren,  and  vndirstonden  in  herte, 
and  thei  ben  to  gidre  turned,  and  I  heele 
hem. 

16  Forsothe  joure  ee^en  that  seen  ben 
blessid,  and  50ure  eris  that  heeren, 

1 7  Foi-sothe  I  saye  trewthe  to  50U,  for 
many  prophctis  and  iuste  men  coueit- 
iden  to  see  thoo  thingus  that  5ec  seen, 
and  thei  saien  nat,  and  to  heeren  thoo 
thingis  that  5ee  heeren,  and  thei  herden 
nat. 

1 8  Therfore  heere  je  the  parable  of  the 
sowynge  man. 

T  9  Eche  that  heerith  the  word  of  rewme, 
and  vudirstondith  nat,  the  jTiel  spirit 
Cometh,  and  rauyschith  that  that  is 
sowyn  in  his  herte  ;  this  is  that  is  sowen 
besidis  the  weye. 

20  Sothely  he  that  is  sowen  on  the 
stoon,  this  it  is,  that  heerith  the  word  of 
God,  and  anoon  with  ioye  takith  it. 

2  T  Forsothe  he  hath  nat  roote  in  hym 
self,  but  it  is  temporal.^  Forsothe  tribu- 
lacioun  and  persecucioune  maad  for  the 
word,  anoon  he  is  sclaundrid. 

22  Bot  he  that  is  sowen  in  tliornys,  is 
this  that  herith  the  word,  and  the  bysy- 
nesse  of  this  world,  and  the  falsnessis  of 
ritchessis  stranglitli  the  word,  and  it  is 
maad  with  outen  fru}i;. 

23  Bot  he  that  is  sowen  in  to  good 
lond,  is  this  that  herith  the  word,  and 

•vndirstondith,  and  bryngthe  forth  fruyt. 
And  sothely  sume  makith  an  hundre- 
fold,  treuly  another  sixtyfold,  forsothe 
another  thrittifold. 

24  Another  parable  Jhesus  putte  forth 
to  hem,  seyinge,  The  kjTigdam  of  heuenes 
is  maad  liche  to  a  man,  that  sew  good 
seed  in  his  feeld. 

25  But,  when  men  slepten,  his  enmye 
came,  and  sew  aboue  derneP  in  the 
midil  of  whete,  and  wente  awey. 

26  Sothely   when    the    herbe    hadde 


TYXDALE,  1526. 


65 


herynge,  and  their  eyes  have  they  closed, 
lest  they  shulde  se  with  their  eyes, 
and  heare  with  their  eares,  and  shuld 
vnderstonde  with  their  hcrtes,  and  shulde 
tournc,  that  Y  myght  heale  them. 

16  But  blessed  are  youre  eyes  for  they 
se,  and  youre  eares  for  they  heare. 

1 7  Verely  Y  say  vnto  you,  that  many 
prophetes  and  perfaicte  men  have  desired 
to  se  tho  thinges  which  ye  se,  and  have 
not  sene  them,  and  to  heare  tho  thinges 
which  ye  heare,  and  have  not  herde 
them. 

18  Heare  ye  therfore  the  similitude  off 
the  sower. 

1 9  When  a  man  heareth  the  worde  of 
the  kingdom,  and  vnderstondeth  it  not, 
there  cometh  the  evyll  man,  and  catcheth 
awaye  that  which  was  sowne  in  hys  hert ; 
and  thys  is  he  which  was  sowne  by  the 
waye  syde. 

20  But  he  that  was  sowne  in  the  stony 
grunde,  ys  he,  which  heareth  the  worde 
of  God,  and  anon  with  ioye  receaveth  itt. 

2 1  Yet  hath  he  no  rottes  in  him  selfe, 
and  therefore  he  dureth  but  a  season. 
For  as  sone  as  tribulation  or  persecucion 
aryseth  because  of  the  worde,  by  and  by 
he  falleth. 

22  He  that  was  sowne  amonge  thornes, 
ys  he  that  heareth  the  worde  off  God, 
but  the  care  otf  this  worlde,  and  the 
dissaytfulnes  off  ryches  choke  the  worde, 
and  so  ys  he  made  vnfrutfull. 

23  He  which  is  sowne  in  the  good 
grounde,  ys  he  that  heareth  the  worde, 
and  vnderstondeth  it,  which  also  bereth 
frute.  And  bringeth  forth,  some  an 
hundred  folde,  some  fyfty  folde,  and 
some  thyrty  folde. 

24  Another  similitude  put  he  forth 
vnto  them,  saynge.  The  kyngdom  off 
heven  ys  lyke  vnto  a  man,  which  sowed 
good  seede  in  his  felde. 

25  Butt,  whyll  men  shlepte,  ther  cam 
his  foo,  and  sowed  tares  amonge  the 
wheate,  and  went  his  waye. 

26  When  the  blade  was  spronge  vp,  and 

F 


66 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

weastm  brohte,  da   aeteowde  se   coccel 
hine. 

27  Da  eodon  dses  hlafovdes  }-eoAvas, 
and  cw^don,  Hlaford,  hu  ne  seow  c!u 
g5d  stCd  on  dinum  secere  1  hwanon  hsefde 
he  coccel 1 

28  Da  cwsejj  he,  Dset  dyde  unhold- 
mann.  Da  cwciedon  da  J^eowas,  Wylt  du 
we  gaj),  and  gaderia))  hig  1 

29  Da  cwse|)  he,  Nese,  de-lses  ge  done 
hwitte  a'\\airtwalion  donne  ge  done  coc- 
cel gaderiaj>. 

30  Lsetaj)  segder  weaxau  od  lip-timan ; 
and  on  dam  rip-timan  ic  secge  dam  rlp- 
erum,  GadriaJ)  serest  done  coccel,  and 
bindaj)  sceaf-mselum  to  forbajrnenne,  and 
gadriafi  done  hweete  into  minum  berne. 

31  He  rehte  him  da  gyt  oder  bigspel, 
dus  cwedende,  Heofena  rice  is  geworden 
gelic  senepes  come,  dset  seow  se  man  on 
hys  secre. 

32  Da?t  is  ealra  sseda  Isest,  s6))lice  don- 
ne hit  wyxjj,  hit  is  ealra  wyrta  msest, 
and  hit  wyr])  treow ;  swa  d;vt  heofnan 
fuhlas  cumajj,  and  eardia])  on  his  boguni. 

33  He  sprsec  to  him  oder  bigspel,  and 
dus  cw0e|),  Heofena  rice  is  gelic  dam 
beorman,  done  daet  wif  onfeng,  and  be- 
hydde  on  jsrim  gemetum  melwes,  od  he 
waes  call  ahafen. 

34  Ealle  das  J)ing  se  Hjelend  spraec 
mid  bigspellum  to  dam  weredum,  and 
nan  jiing  ne  sprsec  he  butan  bigspel- 
lum, 

35  Dset  wsere  gefylled  daes  witegan 
cwyde,  Ic  atyne  mlnne  mu|)  mid  big- 
spellum ;  ic  bodige  digelnesse  fram  mid- 
dan-eardes  sesetednesse. 


36  He  forlet  da  da  maenegeo,  and  com 
to  his  inne ;  and  da  genealsehton  to  him 
his  leoruing-cnihtas,  and  cwtedon,  Arece 
us  dfet  bigspell  dses  hwsetes  and  daes 
cocceles. 


XIII.  27-36.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

gi-owid,  and  maail  fruyt,  thanne  the 
dcrneU  apperideu. 

27  Forsothe  the  seruauntis  of  the  hus- 
boudeinan  coinyng^e  ni5,  seidon  to  hyin, 
Lord,  whor  thou  hast  nat  sowen  <;ood 
seed  in  thi  feeld  ?  whcr  of  than  hath  it 
deruel  1^ 

2S  And  he  seith  to  hem,  The  man 
enmye  hath  don  this  thing.  Trewly  the 
seruauntis  seiden  to  him,  Wolt  thou  we 
go,  and  gedreu  hem  ] 

29  And  he  saith,  Nay,  lest  perauenture 
3e  gedrynge  dernels^  draw  vp  by  the 
roote  togidre  with  hem  and  the  whete. 

30  Suffre  5e  hem  bothe  wexe  til  to 
rype  corne  ;  and  in  tyrae  of  rype  corn  I 
shal  seie  to  reperis,  First  gedre  5ee  to 
gedre  dernels,^  and  byndeth  hem  to 
gidre  in  knytohis^  for  to  be  brent,  but 
gedere  je  whete  in  to  my  berne. 

31  An  other  parable  Jhesus  putte  forth 
to  hem,  seiynge.  The  kyngdam  of  heu- 
enes  is  like  to  a  corn  of  seneuey,  the 
whiche  a  man  takynge  sewe  in  his  feeld. 

32  The  whiche  trewly  is  leest  of  alle 
seedis,  but  when  it  hath  wexen,  it  is 
most  of  alle  wortis,  and  is  maad  a  tree  ; 
so  tliat  briddis  of  the  eyre  cummen,  and 
dwelleu  in  bowis'''  therof. 

33  An  other  parable  Jhesus  spac  to 
hem,  The  kyngdam  of  heuenes  is  lie  to 
soure  dow3,  the  whiche  taken,  a  wom- 
man  hidde  in  three  mesuris  of  meele,  til 
it  were  al  sowrdowid. 

34  Jhesus  spac  alle  these  thingis  in 
parablis  to  the  cunipanyes  of  peple,  and 
he  spac  nat  to  hem  with  outeu  parablis, 

35  That  it  shulde  be  fulfillid,  that  thing 
that  is  seid  Ijy  the  prophcte,  seyinge,  I 
shal  opyn  my  mouth  in  parablis  ;  I  shal 
bolke  out^  hid  thingus  fro  makyng  of 
the  world. 

36  Thanne  the  cumpanyes  laft,  he  came 
into  an  hous  ;  and  his  disciplis  camen 
ni5  to  hym,  seiynge,  Expoune  to  vs  the 
parable  of  deruclis^  of  the  feeld. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


67 


had  brought  forth  frute,  then  appered 
the  tares  also. 

27  The  servauntes  cam  to  the  house- 
holder, and  sayde  vnto  him,  Syr,  sowed- 
est  not  thou  good  seed  in  thy  closse  ? 
from  whence  then  hath  it  tares  1 

28  He  sayde  to  tliem,  The  envious  man 
hath  done  this.  Then  the  servauntes 
sayde  vnto  hym,  Wylt  thou  then  that  we 
go,  and  gader  it  1 

29  And  he  sayde,  Nay,  lest  whyll  ye 
go  aboute  to  wede  out  the  tares  ye 
plucke  vppe  also  with  them  the  wheate 
by  the  rottes. 

30  Let  bothe  growe  to  gether  tyll 
harvest  come  ;  and  in  time  of  harvest  I 
wyll  saye  vnto  my  repers,  Gadther  ye 
fyrst  the  tares,  and  bynd  them  in  sheves 
to  be  brent,  but  gadther  the  wheete  in 
to  my  barne. 

31  Another  parable  he  putt  forthe  vnto 
them,  saynge,  The  kyngedom  of  heven 
ys  lyke  vnto  a  grayne  of  mustard  seede, 
whych  a  man  taketh  and  soweth  in  his 
felde. 

3  2  Whych  ys  the  leest  of  all  seedes,  but 
when  it  is  growne,  it  is  the  greatest 
amonge  yerbes,  and  is  a  tree ;  so  that 
the  bryddes  of  the  aier  come,  and  bylde 
in  te  brauuches  of  it. 

33  Anothere  similitude  sayde  he  to 
them.  The  kyngdome  of  heven  ys  lyke 
vnto  leven,  which  a  woman  toke,  and 
hyd  in  iij  peckes  off'  meele,  tyll  all  was 
levended. 

34  All  these  thynges  spake  Jesus  vnto 
the  people  by  similitudes,  and  withoute 
similitudes  spake  he  nothinge  to  them, 

35  To  fulfyll,  that  which  was  spoken  by 
the  pi-ophct,  sayinge,  I  wyll  open  my 
mouth  in  similitudes ;  and  wyll  speake 
forth  thinges  whych  have  bene  kepte 
secrete  from  the  begynnynge  off  the 
worlde. 

36  Then  sent  Jesus  the  people  awaye, 
and  cam  to  housse  ;  and  hys  disciples 
cam  vnto  him,  saynge.  Declare  vnto  vs 
the  similitude  of  the  tares  off"  the  felde. 

1  F  2 


«p 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

37  Da  andswarude  he  him,  Se  de  seow 
dset  g5de  ssed  se  is  maunes  sunu  ; 

38  S6|?Hce  se  fecyr  is  des  middan. 
geard  ;  dset  gode  seed,  diet  synt  dies 
heofoiilican  rices  beam,  se  coccel  synt 
s5)ilice  da  manfullan  beam  ; 

39  Se  unholda-man  se  de  done  coccel 
seow  dset  is  deoful  3  s6|)lice  dtet  rip  is 
worulde  endung,  da  riperas  synt  englas. 

40  Eornustlice  swa  swa  se  coccel  by)) 
gegaderud,  and  mid  fyre  forbserned,  swa 
byjj  on  worulde  endunge. 

41  Mannes  sunu  sent  his  englas,  and 
hi  gadriaj)  of  his  rice  ealle  gedrefednesse, 
and  da  de  unrihtwisnesse  wyrcea)) ; 

42  And  asendaj)  hig  on  fyres  ofen,  disr 
by])  wop  and  tojja  gristbitung. 

43  Donne  scina))  da  rihtwisan  swa  swa 
sunne,  on  hyra  feeder  rice.  [Gehyre,  se 
de  earan  to  gehyranne  hsefj?.'''] 

44  ■''Heofona  rice  is  gelic  gehyddum 
gold- horde  on  dam  secere,  done  behyt 
se  man  de  hine  f  int ;  and  for  his  blysse 
gse)),  and  sylj)  eall  dset  he  ah,  and  gebigj) 
done  fecer. 

45  Eft  is  heofena  rice  gelic  dam  mang- 
ere,  de  sohte  dset  gode  meregrot ; 

46  Da  he  fiinde  dset  an  deorwyrde 
meregrot,  da  code  he,  and  sealde  eall 
dset  he  ahte,  and  bohte  dset  meregrot. 

47  Eft  is  heofena  rice  gelic  asendum 
nette  on  da  sse,  and  of  selcum  fisccynne 
gadrigendum  ; 

48  Da  hi  da  dset  nett  upp-atugon,  and 
sseton  be  dam  strande,  da  gecm-on  hig 
da  g5dan  on  hyra  fatu,  da  yflan  hig 
awurpon  ut. 

49  Swa  by})  on  disse  worulde  endunge. 
Da  englas  fara|),  and  asyndriaj)  da  yfelan 
of  dsera  godra  midlene. 

50  And  aworpa])  hig  on  dses  fyres  ofen; 
dser  by]?  wop  and  t6])a  gristbitung. 

51  Ongyte  ge  ealle  das  ]>mg  1  Da 
cwaedon  hig,  Witodlice  we  hit  ongyta]). 


XIII.  37-51]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

37  The  wliichc  answerynge  saith,  He 
that  sowitli  good  seed  is  inannes  sone ; 

38  Sotliely  the  feld  is  the  world  ;  bot 
the  good  seed,  these  ben  sonys  of  the 
kyngdam,  dcrnels,^  forsothe  these  ben 
yuel  sonys ; 

39  But  the  eumye  that  sowcth  hem  is  the 
feend ;  but  the  ripe  corn  is  the  eendyng  of 
the  workl,  sothely  tlie  repers  ben  angelis. 

40  Therfore  as  dernels  ben  gedrid  to 
gidre,  and  bi'ent  in  fijr,  so  it  shal  be  in 
the  eendyng  of  the  world. 

41  Manues  sone  shal  sende  his  angels, 
and  thei  shulden  gedre  of  his  rewme 
alle  sclauudris,  and  hem  that  don  wick- 
idnesse  ; 

42  And  thei  shulen  sende  hem  into  the 
chymney  of  fijr,  there  shal  be  weepynge 
and  betynge  togidre  of  teeth. 

43  Thanne  iust  men  shulen  shyine  as 
the  sunne,  in  the  rewme  of  her  fadir. 
He  that  hath  eris  of  heerynge,  heere  he. 

44  The  kyngdame  of  heuenes  is  hjk  to 
tresour  hid  in  a  feeld,  the  whiche  a  man 
that  fyudith,  hidith  ;  and  for  ioye  of  it 
he  goth,  and  sellith  alle  thingis  that 
hath,  and  bieth  the  ilk  feeld. 

45  Eftsones  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes 
is  lie  to  a  man  mai'chaunt,  seekyng  good 
margar}-tis  ; 

46  Sothely  00  preciouse  margarite 
founden,  he  wente,  and  solde  alle  thingis 
that  he  hadde,  and  bou3te  it. 

47  Eft  the  kingdam  of  heuenes  is  lie 
to  a  nette  sent  in  to  the  see,  and  of  alle 
kynd  of  fish  is  gedrynge  ; 

48  The  whiche  whan  it  was  fulfiUid, 
men  ledynge  out,  and  sittynge  bysidis 
the  brynke,  eheesiden  the  good  into  her 
vessels,  but  thei  senten  out  the  yuel. 

49  So  it  shal  be  in  the  eending  of  the 
world.  Angelis  shulen  gon  out,  and 
shulen  departe  yuel  men  fro  the  mydil 
of  iuste  men. 

50  And  thei  shulen  sende  hem  into  the 
chymney  of  fijr  ;  there  shall  be  weep- 
ynge and  betynge  togidre  of  teeth. 

51  Han  5ee  vnderstonden  alle  these 
thingis  ?  Thei  seien  to  hym,  3he. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


fiO 


37  Then  answered  he  and  sayde  to 
them,  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed,  ys 
the  Sonne  of  man  ; 

38  The  felde  ys  the  worlde  ;  the  chil- 
dren oft  the  kyngdom  are  the  good  seed, 
the  evyll  mans  children  are  the  tares ; 

39  But  the  enemy  which  soweth  them 
is  the  devill  ;  the  harvest  is  the  end  of 
the  world,  and  the  repers  be  the  angels. 

40  For  even  as  the  tares  are  gaddrcd, 
and  brent  in  the  fyre,  so  shall  it  be  in 
the  ende  off"  this  worlde. 

41  The  Sonne  off"  man  shall  send  forth 
his  angels,  and  they  shall  gadther  out 
off"  his  kyngdom  all  thinges  that  do 
hurte,  and  all  them  which  do  iniquite  ; 

42  And  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnes 
of  fyre,  there  shalbe  waylynge  and 
gnasshyng  off"teth. 

43  Then  shall  the  iuste  men  shyne  as 
bryght  as  the  sun,  in  the  kyngdom  of 
their  father.  Wosoever  hath  eares  to 
heare,  let  him  heare. 

44  Agayne  the  kyngdom  off"  heven  is 
lyke  vnto  treasure  hidde  in  the  felde, 
the  which  a  man  founde,  and  hidde  it ; 
and  ffbr  ioy  there  of  goeth,  and  selleth 
all  that  he  hath,  and  byeth  that  felde. 

45  Agayne  the  kyngdom  off"  heven  is 
lyke  vnto  a  marchauut,  sekynge  after 
good  pearles ; 

46  Which  when  he  had  founde  one 
precious  pearle,  wentt,  and  solde  all  that 
he  had,  and  bought  it. 

47  Agayne  the  kyngdome  off"  heven  is 
lyke  vnto  a  neet  cast  in  to  the  see,  that 
gadereth  off"  all  kyndes  of  fysshes  ; 

48  Which  when  it  is  full,  men  drawe 
to  londe,  and  sitt,  and  gadre  the  good 
in  to  their  vessels,  and  caste  the  bad 
awaye. 

49  So  shall  it  be  at  the  ende  of  the 
worlde.  The  angels  shall  come,  and 
sever  the  bad  from  the  good. 

50  And  shall  east  them  into  a  furnes  of 
fyre  ;  there  shalbe  waylinge  and  gnassh- 
ynge  of  teth. 

51  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Have  ye 
vnderstonde  all  these  thyn\jes?  They 
sayde,  Ye,  Syr. 


70 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

52  Da  SEede  he  him,  Fordam  is  selc 
gelgered  bocere  on  heofenan  rice  gelic 
dara  hiredes  ealdre,  de  foi'jj-bringj)  of  his 
gold-horde  niwe  ))ing  and  ealde. 

53  And  hit  waes  geworden,  da  se  Hsel- 
end  ge-endode  das  bigspel,  da  ferde  he 
danone. 

54  And  da  he  com  to  his  earde,  he 
laerde  hig  on  hjra  gesamnungum,  swil 
dset  hig  wundrodon,  and  cweedon,  Hwan- 
on  ys  djsum  des  wisdom  and  dis  meegen  ? 

55  Witodlice  des  is  smij)es  sunu  ;  hu  ne 
hatte  hys  modor  Maria?  and  hys  br5dru, 
lacob,  and  Joseph,  and  Simon,  and 
ludas 1 

56  And  hu  ne  synt  ealle  hys  swustra 
mid  us  1  Hwanon  synt  dysum  ealle  das 
Jjing? 

57  And  hig  waeron  ge-untrywsode  on 
him.  Da  s6j)lice  ssede  se  Hselend  him, 
Nys  nan  witega  butan  wurj^scype,  buton 
on  hys  eai-de,  and  on  hys  huse. 

58  And  he  ne  worhte  dser  manega 
msegena,  for  hyra  ungeleafulnysse. 


Chap.  XIY.  i  On  dsere  tide  gehyrde 
Herodes  se  feorj^an  dseles  rica  daes  Hsel- 
endes  hlisan ; 

2  And  da  seede  he  his  cnihtum,  Des  is 
lohannes  se  FuUuhtere  de  ic  beheafd- 
ode,  he  aras  of  deajje,  and  fordan  synd 
dels  wundru  gefremode  on  him. 

3  Sojilice  Herodes  nam  lohannem,  and 
geband  hyne,  and  sette  on  cwertern  for 
dam  wife  Herodiaden  Philippes  hys 
broder. 

4  lohannes  him  s?ede,  Nys  de  alyfed 
hi  to  wife  to  hsebbenne. 

5  And  da  he  hyne  ofslean  wolde,  he 
adred  him  dset  folc ;  fordam  de  hig 
hsefdon  hyne  for  senne  witegan. 

6  Da  on  Herodes  gebyi-d-d?ege,  tumb- 
ude  dsere  Herodiadiscean  dohtur  befor- 
an  him,  and  hit  licode  Herode. 

7  Da  behet  he  mi<I  n)?e  byre  to  syllenne, 
swa  hwset  swa  heo  hyne  bfede. 


XIII.  j2.-X[V.  7.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

52  He  seith  to  hem,  Therfore  eucry 
wryter  tan5t  in  the  kyni,'dain  of  houenes, 
is  lie  to  an  husbonde  man,  that  hryngith 
forth  of  his  tresour  newe  thingis  ami 
olcle. 

53  And  it  is  don,  whanne  Jhesus  hadde 
eenilid  these  ])arables,  he  passide  fi*o 
thennis. 

54  And  he,  cummynge  in  to  his  cun- 
tree.  tau5t  hem  in  her  synagogis,  so  that 
thei  wondriden.  and  seiden,  Wherof  to 
hym  tliis  wisdam  and  vertues  i 

55  ^Vllel•  is  nnt  this  the  sone  of  a  smyth?''' 
Wher  his  modir  be  nat  seid  Marie  1  and 
his  brethren,  Jamys,  and  Joseph,  and 
Sjnnount,  and  Judas'? 

56  And  his  sistris,  wher  thei  alle  ben 
nat  at  vs  ?  Therfore  wherof  to  hym  alle 
these  thingis "! 

57  And  so  thei  weren  sclaundrid  in 
hym.  Forsothe  Jhesus  seide  to  hem, 
A  ])rophete  is  nat  with  outen  wirshipe, 
no  but  in  his  owne  cuntree,  and  in  his 
owne  hous. 

58  An:l  he  dide  nat  there  manye  ver- 
tues. for  the  vnbyleue  of  hem. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


71 


Chap.  XIY.     i  In  that  tyme  Eroude 
tetrarclia'"  herde  the  fame  of  Jhesu  ; 

2  And  seide  to  his  children,  This  is 
Jon  F)ai)ti.st,  he  hath  risen  fro  dead,  and 
therfore  vertues  worcheu  in  hym. 

3  Foi-sothe  Eroude  helde  Joon,  and 
bounde  hym,  and  putte  him  in  to  pri- 
soun  for  Erodias,  the  wif  of  his  brother. 

4  For  Joon  saide  to  hym.  It  is  nat 
leful  to  thee  for  to  haue  hir. 

5  And  he  willjTige  to  siea  hym,  drede 
the  peple  ;  for  thei  hadden  liym  as  a 
propliete. 

6  Forsothe  in  the  day  of  Eroudis 
birthe,  the  doujter  of  Erodias  leepte  in 
the  mydil.  and  pleside  to  Eroude. 

7  Wherfore  with  an  00th  he  byhijte 
for  to  3eue  to  hir,  what  euer  thinge  she 
hadde  axid  of  hym. 


52  Then  sayde  he  vnto  them,  Therfore 
every  scrybc  which  is  coninge  vnto  the 
kyngdom  of  heven,  is  lyke  an  housholder, 
which  bryngeth  forth  out  of  hys  treasure 
thyngcs  bothe  newe  and  olde. 

53  And  hyt  cam  to  jjasse,  when  Jesus 
had  fynnesshed  these  similitudes,  that 
he  departed  thence. 

54  And  cam  into  his  awne  countre,  and 
taught  in  there  synagogges,  in  so  moche 
that  they  were  astunyed,  and  saide, 
Whence  cam  all  thys  wysdon  and  power 
vnto  him  1 

55  Is  not  thys  the  carju'ntcrs  sonne? 
Is  not  hys  mother  called  Mary  '?  and  hys 
brethren  be  called,  James,  and  Joses, 
and  Symon,  and  Judas  1 

56  And  ai"e  not  hys  systers  all  here 
with  vs?  Whence  hath  he  all  these 
thynges  1 

57  And  they  wer  hurte  by  him.  Then 
Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  There  is  no  pro- 
phet with  out  honoure,  save  in  hys  awne 
countre,  and  amonge  his  awne  kynne. 

58  And  he  dyd  not  many  myracles 
there,  for  there  vnbelefes  sake. 


Chap.  XIV.     i  In  that  tyme  Herod 
the  tetrarcha  herde  off"  the  fame  of  Jesu  ; 

2  And  sayde  vnto  his  servauntes,  This 
is  Jhou  Baptist,  he  is  risen  agayne  from 
deeth,  and  therfore  hys  power  ys  so 
greate. 

3  For  Herod  toke  Jhon,  and  bounde 
hym,  and  put  hym  in  preson  ffor  Hero- 
dias  sake,  hys  brother  Phips  wyfe. 

4  For  Jhon  sayde  vnto  hym,  Hit  ys 
not  lawfull  for  the  to  have  her. 

5  And  when  he  wold  have  put  hym  to 
deeth,  he  feared  the  people ;  because 
they  counted  hym  as  a  prophet. 

6  When  Herodcs  birth  daye  was  come, 
the  doughter  oft'  Herodias  daunscd  be- 
fore them,  and  pleased  Herod. 

7  Wherfor  he  promysed  with  an  oth 
that  he  wolde  geve  her,  whatsoever  she 
wolde  axe. 


72 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  gg^-     [St.  Matt. 

8  Da  ewse]>  heo,  fram  hyre  meder  ge- 
myngod,  Syle  me  oil  anum  disce  lohan- 
nes  heafod  daes  FuUuhteres. 

9  Da  wses  se  cyning  ge-unret,  for  dam 
a^e,  and  fordam  de  him  sseton  mid/  .    . 


10  And  he  asende  da,  and  beheafdode 
lohannem  on  dam  cwerterne. 

1 1  And  man  brohte  da  his  heafod  on 
anum  disce,  and  sealde  dam  msedene, 
and  dset  mseden  hyre  meder. 

12  And  da  genealsehton  his  leoming- 
cnihtas  and  namon  hys  h'chamau,  and 
bebyrgdon  hyne ;  and  comon  and  cyd- 
don  hyt  dam  Hjelende. 

]  3  Da  se  Hcelend  dset  gehyrde,  da 
ferde  he  danon  on-sundron  on  anum 
scype.  And  da  da  gangendan  msnigeo 
daet  gehyrdon,  hig  fyligdon  him  of  dam 
burgum. 

14  And  da  he  danon  ferde,  he  geseh 
mycele  mjenigu,  and  he  him  gemyltsode, 
and  gehselde  da  untruman. 

15  S6])Kce  da  hyt  waes  sefen  geworden, 
him  to  genealsehton  hys  leorning-cnihtas, 
and  him  to  cwcedon,  Deos  stow  y^  weste, 
and  tima  ys  for}>-agan ;  forlset  das  nifen- 
egeo,  dset  hi  faron  into  das  bui-ga,  and 
him  mete  bicgean. 

1 6  Da  c\vse]>  se  Hselend  to  him,  NabbaJ> 
hi  neode  to  farenne  ;  sylle  ge  him  etan. 

17  Da  andswarodun  hig,  We  nabbaj) 
her,  biiton  fif  hlufas  and  twegen  fixas. 

18  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend,  Bringaj?  me 
hider  da. 

1 9  And  da  he  het  da  menegu  ofer  dset 
gsers  hi  sittan,  and  he  nam  da  fif  hLifas 
and  twegen  fixas,  and  beseah  on  done 
heofon,  and  bletsiende,  brsec  da  hlafas, 
and  seakle  his  leorning-cnihtum ;  and 
hi  dam  folce. 

20  And  hi  ?eton  ealle,  and  waeron  ge- 
fyllede.  And  hi  namon  da  Itifa,  twelf 
•wylian  fulle  dsera  gebrytsena. 

21  S6j)h"ce  dsera  eteudra  getcel  wses  fif 
piisenda  wera,  butan  wifum  and  cildum.''' 

22  And  da  sona  het   se  Hselend  his 


XIV.  8-22.]   ^YYCLIFFE,  1389. 

8  And  she  bifore  monesticU  of  hir 
modir,  seith,  5oue  thou  to  me  hidir  the 
hcd  of  Joon  Baptist  iu  a  dische. 

9  And  the  kyng  was  sovowful,  but  for 
the  00th,  and  for  hem  that  seeten  to 
gidre  at  the  mete,  he  comaundide  to  be 
jouen. 

10  And  he  sente,  and  bihedide  Joon  in 
the  prisoun. 

1 1  And  his  liced  is  brou5t  to  iu  a 
dische,  and  it  is  5ouen  to  the  whenche, 
and  she  bare  it  to  Iiir  modir. 

12  And  his  disciplis  cunimynge  to 
token  his  body,  and  biryedcn  it ;  and 
thei  cumraynge  tolden  to  Jhcsu. 

13  The  whiche  thing  when  Jhesus 
hadde  herd,  he  went  fro  thennus  in  to  a 
boot,  in  to  desert  place  besidis.  And 
whenne  the  cunipanyes  of  peple  haddeu 
herd,  thei  folowideu  hym  and  on  the 
feet  fifo  citees. 

14  And  Jhesus,  goynge  out,  saw  a 
greet  nmltitude  of  peple,  and  hadde 
rewthe  of  hem,  and  heelide  the  sike  men 
of  hem. 

15  Sothely  the  euenynge  maad,  his 
disciplis  cameu  ni3  to  him,  seiynge.  The 
place  is  desert,  and  the  hour  hath  now 
passid  ;  leeue  thou  the  cumpanyes  of 
peple,  that  thei,  goynge  iu  to  castels, 
bigge  meetis  to  hem. 

16  Forsothe  Jhesus  seide  to  hem,  Thei 
han  nat  neede  to  go ;  3eue  ^c  to  hem 
for  to  ete. 

17  Thei  answeriden,  We  han  nat  here, 
no  but  Hue  looues  and  two  fishis. 

18  The  wliiche  seith  to  hem,  Brynge 
3ee  hem  hidir  to  me. 

1  9  And  when  he  hadde  comaundid  the 
cumpanye  for  to  sitte  to  mete  on  hay, 
fyue  looues  and  two  fishis  taken,  he  by- 
holdynge  in  to  heuen,  blesside,  and  brak, 
and  5aue  to  his  disciplis  ;  sothely  the 
disciplis  jaueu  to  the  cumpanyes. 

20  And  alle  eeten,  and  wcren  fulfillid. 
And  thei  token  the  relifis  of  broken 
gobetis,  twelue  cofyns  ful. 

2 1  Forsothe  the  noumbre  of  men  etynge 
was  fyue  thousand  of  men,  out  taken 
wemnien  and  litel  children. 

22  And  anon  Jhesus  conipellide'''  the 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


73 


8  And  she  beinge  informed  of  her  mo- 
ther before,  sayde,  Geve  me  here  Jhon 
Baptistes  hceil  iu  a  platter. 

9  And  the  kyuge  sorowed,  neverthe- 
lesse  for  his  othes  sake,  and  for  their 
sakes  which  sate  also  att  the  table,  he 
conuiunded  yt  to  be  geveu  her. 

10  And  scut,  and  behcdded  Jhon  in 
the  preson. 

11  And  his  heed  was  brought  in  a 
platter,  and  geven  to  the  damsell,  and 
she  brought  it  to  her  mother. 

12  And  his  disciples  cam  and  toke  vp 
his  body,  and  buryed  it ;  and  went  and 
tolde  Jesus. 

1 3  When  Jesus  had  herde  that,  he  de- 
parted thence  by  shippe,  into  a  desert 
place  out  of  the  way.  And  when  the 
people  had  herde  therof.  they  folowed 
him  afote  out  of  there  cites. 

14  And  Jesus  went  forth,  and  sawe 
moche  people,  and  his  herte  dyde  melte 
vppon  them,  and  he  healed  oft"  them 
those  that  were  sicke. 

1 5  When  even  was  come,  his  disciples 
cam  to  him,  saynge.  This  ys  a  deserte 
place,  and  the  daye  is  spent ;  let  the 
people  departe,  that  they  maye  go  in, to 
the  tounes,  and  bey  them  vytaylles. 

16  But  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them.  They 
have  no  neade  to  go  awaye ;  geve  ye 
them  to  eate. 

17  Then  sayde  they  vnto  him.  We 
have  here  but  .v.  loves  and  two  fysshes. 

18  He  saide,  Bringe  them  hydther  to 
me. 

19  And  he  eomaunded  the  people  to 
syt  downe  on  the  grasse,  and  toke  the 
.V.  loves  and  the  .ij.  iysshcs,  and  loked 
vp  to  heven,  and  blessed,  and  brake, 
and  gave  the  loves  to  his  disciples  3  and 
the  disciples  gave  them  to  the  people. 

20  And  they  all  ate,  and  wer  suffised. 
And  they  gadered  vp  of  the  gobbetes 
thatt  remained,  xij  baskctes  full. 

2  J  They  that  ate  were  in  numbre  about 
V.  M.  men,  besyde  wemen  and  children. 

22  And  strayght  way  Jesus  made  his 


74 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

leorning-cnihtas  on  scyp  astlgan,  and 
toforan  him  faran  ofer  done  niujjan,  od 
diset  he  da  menegu  forlete. 

23  And  dl  he  hig  forlseten  hsefde,  he 
eode  on  done  munt,  and  hyne  dser  ana 
gebjed.  Sojjl'ce  dit  hyt  sefen  wtes,  he 
wses  ana  dsev. 

24  Witodl;ce  wses  dset  scyp  of  dam 
y|jum  totorfod,  fordam  de  hyt  wses 
Strang  wind. 

25  Da  com  se  Hselend  embe  done  feor]?- 
an  han-cred  to  him,  ofer  da  sse  gang- 
ende. 

26  Da  hi  gesawon  dset,  hi  wurdon  ge- 
drefede  ;  and  for  dam  age  clypodon,  and 
cwsedon  dus,  Soj'h'ce  hyt  ys  scinlac. 

27  Da  sprpec  se  Hseleud,  and  cwse]?, 
Habba}i  geleafan,  ic  hyt  eom ;  nellen  ge 
eow  ondrsedan. 

28  Da  andswarode  him  Petrus  and 
cwfB)?,  Drihten,  gyf  dii  hyt  eart,  hat  me 
cuman  to  de  ofer  das  wseteru. 

29  Da  c\voe|>  he,  Cum  to  me.  Da  eode 
Petrus  of  dam  scype,  ofer  daet  vvreter 
d;vt  he  to  dam  Hselende  come. 

30  Da  he  geseah  done  strangan  wind, 
he  him  oudred ;  da  he  wear)?  gedofen, 
he  cwtej),  Drihten,  gedo  me  hLiIne. 

3  I  And  d  I  hrsedhce''' 

he  gefengc  hyne,  and 

dus  cwsejj,  L:'i  lytles  geleafan,  hwi  twyn- 
edest  dii  1 

32  And  da  hi  waeron  on  dam  scype, 
geswac  se  wind. 

33  So})lice  da,  de  on  dam  scype  wseron, 
comon,  and  to  him  gebeedon,  and  dus 
cweedon,  Sol>lice,  dii  eart  Godes  sunu. 

34  And  dl  hig  ofer-segelodon,  hi  comon 
on  dfet  land  Genesareth. 

35  And  da  dset  folc  hyne  gecneow,  hi 
sendon  geond  call  dajt  land  ;  and  broht- 
on  to  him  ealle  untrume. 

36  And  hyne  bsedon,  dset  hig  hura- 
}>inga  his  reafes  fused  set-hrlnon  ;  and 
swa  hwvlce  his  sethrinon  wurdon  hale. 


XIV.  23-36.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

disciplis  for  to  go  vp  in  to  a  boot,  and 
go  biforc  hyni  ouer  the  sec,  til  that  he 
lefte  the  cumiianyes. 

23  And  the  cunipanyes  left,  he  stei5ide 
V})  in  to  an  hill  aloone  for  to  preye. 
Sothely  the  euenyng  maad,  he  was  there 
aloone. 

24  Sothely  the  boot  in  the  mydil  see 
was  throwen  with  wawis,  forsothc  the 
wynd  was  contrarie. 

25  But  in  the  fourthe  wakyug  of  the 
ni5t.,  he  came  to  hem  walkynge  aboue 
the  see. 

26  And  thei,  seeynge  hym  walkynge 
aboue  the  see,  wcren  distouvblid,  sey- 
inge,  For  it  is  a  fautum  ;  and  for  drede 
thei  cryeden. 

27  And  anoon  Jhcsus  spac  to  hem, 
sayino-o.  Haue  je  trust,  I  am  ;  nyl  ^e 
drecde 

28  Sothely  Petre  answcrynge  seide, 
Lord.  5if  thou  art,  comaunde  me  to  cume 
to  thee  vpon  the  watris. 

29  And  he  seith,  Cume  thou.  And 
Petre  goynge  doun  fro  the  bote,  walkide 
on  the  wateris  for  to  cume  to  Jhesu. 

30  Trewly  he,  seeynge  a  strong  wynde, 
wa.';  afcrde  ;  and  whan  he  bygan  for  to 
be  drcuchid,  he  ci-yede,  seyinge,  Lord, 
make  me  saaf. 

31  And  anoon  .Jhesus,  holdynge  forth 
the  bond,  cau5te  hym,  and  seith  to  hym. 
Thou  of  litil  feitli,  whi  hast  thou  doutid  ^ 

32  And  whenne  he  hadde  stied  vp  in 
to  the  boot,  the  wynde  cesside. 

33  Sothely  thei,  that  wcren  in  the 
boot  camen,  and  worshipiden  hym,  sey- 
inge, Vcryly.  thou  art  Goddis  sone. 

34  And  whenne  he  had  passide  ouer 
the  see,  thei  camen  in  to  the  lond  of 
Genesar. 

35  And  whenne  men  of  that  place 
liadden  knowen  hym,  thei  senten  into 
al  that  cuntree  ;  and  tl)ei  offriden  to 
Iiym  al  hanynge  yuel. 

36  And  thei  preyiden  hym,  that  thei 
shulilcn  touche  ether  the  hem  of  the 
clothing  of  hym  ;  and  who  euer  touch- 
iden  l)en  maad  .saaf. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


76 


dcsciples  enter  into  a  shippe,  and  to  goo 
over  before  him,  whill  he  sent  the  peple 
a  way. 

23  And  as  sone  as  he  had  sent  the 
peple  a  way,  he  went  vp  into  a  moun- 
tayne  alone  to  praye.  And  when  nyght 
was  come,  he  was  there  hym  silf  alone. 

24  And  the  shipjje  was  in  the  middes 
of  the  see,  and  was  toost  with  waves,  for 
it  was  a  contrary  wynde. 

25  In  the  fourthe  watche  of  the  night, 
Jesus  cam  vnto  them  walkynge  on  the 
see. 

26  And  when  hys  disciples  sawe  him 
walkynge  on  the  see,  they  were  amased, 
sayinge.  It  is  some  spirite  ;  and  cryed 
out  for  feare. 

27  And  streyght  waye  Jesus  spake 
vnto  them,  saynge.  Be  of  good  cheare, 
it  is  Y  ;  be  not  a  frayed. 

28  Peter  answered  and  sayde.  Master, 
and  thou  be  he,  bidde  me  come  vnto 
the  on  the  Avater. 

29  And  he  sayde,  Come.  And  when 
Peter  was  come  doune  out  of  the  shyp])e, 
he  walked  on  the  water  to  go  to  Jesus. 

30  But,  when  he  sawe  a  myghty  winde, 
he  was  afrayed  ;  and  as  he  began  to 
synke,  he  cryed,  sayinge,  Master,  save 
me. 

31  And  immediatly  Jesus  stretched 
forth  his  honde,  and  caught  him,  and 
saide  to  hym,  O  thou  of  lytell  fayth, 
wherfore  diddest  thou  dout  1 

32  And  as  soone  as  they  were  come  in 
to  the  shippe,  the  winde  ceassed. 

33  Then  they,  that  were  in  the  shyppe, 
cam,  and  worshyi)ped  him,  sayinge.  Of  a 
trutli,  thou  arte  the  sonne  off  God. 

34  And  when  they  were  come  over, 
they  went  in  to  the  londe  of  Genazareth . 

35  And  when  the  men  of  that  place 
had  knowledge  of  him,  they  sent  out  in 
to  all  that  countrc  rounde  about ;  and 
brought  vnto  him  all  that  were  sicke. 

36  And  besought  him,  that  they  myght 
touche  the  border  of  hys  vesture  only  ; 
and  as  many  as  touched  hytt  were  made 
safe. 


76 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  XV.''"  i  Da  comon  to  him  fram 
Hierusalem  da  boceras  and  Faiiseisce, 
and  cwsedon, 

2  Hw  forgyma]?  dine  leorning-cnibtas 
ure  yldrena  lage  1  ne  jjweaj?  hi  hyra 
handa,  donne  hig  mete  )?icgea)j. 

3  Da  andsworode  he  him  and  [cwsej?,^] 
Hwi  forgyme  ge  Godes  bebod  for  eowre 
lage  ? 

4  Witodlice  God  cwpbjj,  Wurjja  dinne 
feeder  and  modoi*,  and  se  de  wyrig|)  hys 
feeder  and  modor,  swelte  se  dea|)e. 

5  Sojjlice  ge  cweda)>,  Swa  hwylc  swa 
seg}?  hys  feeder  and  meder,  Swa  hwylc 
lac  swa  of  me  is,  frema)?  de  ; 

6  And  ne  weorJ)iaJ)  feeder  and  modor ; 
and  ge  for  naht  dydon  Godes  bebod  for 
eowre  lage. 

7  La  licceteras,  wel  be  eow  Avitegode 
Isaias,  se  witega,  da  he  cwfe|j, 

8  Dis  folc  me  mid  welerum  weoi])a}>,'''. . 
....  and  hyra  heorte  is  feorr  fram  me  ; 


9  Butan  intingan  hig  me  wurj  ia}),  and 
Isera)?  manna  lara. 

10  And  he  da,  dam  menegum  togeedere 
geclypedum,  dus  cweej^,  Gehyra)?,  and 
ongyta|5. 

1 1  Ne  besmit  done  mann,  dtet  on  hys 
muj>  gsejj ;  ac  hyne  besmit,  deet  of  hys 
mu|)e  gse}?. 

T  2  Da  genealsehton  hys  leorning-cniht- 
as  and  cwaedon.  Wast  dii,  deet  da  Far- 
iseiscean  synt  gedrefede,  disum  wurde 
gehyredum  1 

13  Da  andswarode  he  him,  JE'lc  plant- 
ung,  de  min  heofenlica  feeder  ne  plant- 
ode,  by)>  awurtwalod. 

14  Lgeta]?  hi  ;  hig  synt  blinde,  and 
blindra  latteowas.  Se  blinda  gyf  he 
blindne  leet,  hig  feallaj?  begen  on  eenne 
pytt. 

15  Da  andswarode  him  Petrus"'' .  .  ., 
A'rece  us  dis  bigspell. 


XV.  I-I5.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Chap.  XV.  1  Thanne  senilis  and 
Pharisees  camen  ni5  to  liyin  fio  Jerusa- 
lem, seyinge, 

2  Win  tlii  disciplis  ouerpasscu''^  the 
trailiciouns^  ot"  elder  men  ]  for  thei 
washeu  uat  hondis,  whenne  thei  eten 
breed. 

3  Sothely  he  answerynge  scith  to  hem, 
And  whi  and  30  brekcn  the  maunde- 
ment  of  God  for  joure  tradicioun  1 

4  For  whi  God  seide,  Honoure  thi  fiulir 
and  thi  modir,  and  he  that  cursith  fadir 
or  modir,  dye  he  by  deth. 

5  But  56  seyn,  Who  euere  shal  saye  to 
fadir  or  modir,  What  euere  5ifte  is  of 
me,  it  shal  jirofite  to  thee  ; 

6  And  he  hath  not  worshipid  his  fadir 
or  modir  ;  and  je  han  made  the  maunde- 
ment  of  God  voide^  for  joure  tradicioun. 

7  Ipocritis,  Ysay,  the  prophete,  pro- 
pheciede  wel  of  50U,  seyinge, 

8  This  peple  honoureth  me  with  lippis, 
forsothe  her  herte  is  fer  fro  me ; 


9  Trewly  thei  worshipen  me  with  outen 
cause,  techynge  the  doctrines  and 
mauudements  of  men. 

10  And  the  cumpanyes  of  peple  clepid 
to  gidre  to  hym,  he  seide  to  hem,  Heere 
je,  and  vnderstonde. 

11  Nat  that  thing  that  entrith  in  to 
the  mouth,  defoulith  a  man ;  but  that 
thing  that  cummeth  forth  fro  the  mouth, 
defoulith  a  man. 

12  Thanne  his  disciplis  cummynge  ni3 
seiden  to  hym,  Wost  thou,  that,  this 
word  herd,  Pharisees  ben  sclaundrid  ? 

13  And  he  answerynge  scith,  Euery 
plantynge,  the  whiclie  my  fadir  of  heuen 
hath  nat  plantid,  shal  be  drawen  vp  by 
the  roote. 

1 4  Suffre  36  hem  ;  thei  ben  blynde, 
and  lederis  of  blynde  men.  Sothely  3if 
a  blynd  man  3eue  ledynge  to  a  blynd 
man,  bothe  fallen  doun  in  to  the  diche. 

15  Forsothe  Petre  answerynge  saide  to 
hym,  Expoun  to  vs  this  parable. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


77 


Chap.  XV.  i  Then  cam  to  Jesus 
scrybcs  and  Phariscs  from  Jerusalem, 
sayinge, 

2  Why  do  thy  disciples  transgresse  the 
tradicions  of  the  seniours  1  for  they 
wesshe  not  there  hondes,  when  they  eate 
breed. 

3  He  answered  and  saydc  vnto  them, 
Why  do  ye  also  transgresse  the  com- 
maundment  of  God  thorowe  youre  tra- 
dicions ? 

4  For  God  commaunded,  sayinge,  Hon- 
oure thy  father  and  nioder,  and  he  that 
speaketh  evyll  ayeynst  hys  father  or 
mother,  shall  suffer  deeth. 

5  But  ye  sale,  Every  man  shall  saie  to 
his  father  or  mother,  Whatsoever  thjoig 
I  offer,  that  same  doeth  profyt  the  ; 

6  And  so  shal  he  not  honoure  hys 
father  and  mother ;  and  thus  have  ye 
made  that  the  commaundment  of  God  is 
with  out  effecte  through  youre  tradicions. 

7  Yypocrites,  wel  prophesied  off  you, 
Esay,  sayinge, 

8  This  people  draweth  nie  vnto  me 
wath  there  mouthes,  and  honoureth  me 
with  their  lippes,  yet  their  hert  is  farre 
from  me ; 

9  But  in  vaine  thei  worshippe  me, 
teachinge  docti'ine  which  is  nothing  but 
mens  precepts, 

10  And  he  called  the  people  vnto  him, 
and  saide  to  them,  Heare,  and  vnder- 
stonde. 

1 1  That  which  goeth  in  to  the  mougth, 
defyleth  not  a  man  ;  but  that  which 
commeth  out  of  the  mougth,  defyleth 
the  man. 

12  Then  cam  his  disciples  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Perceavest  thou,  howe  that 
the  Pharyses  are  offended,  hearinge  thys 
saynge 1 

13  He  answered  and  sayde,  All  plantes, 
which  my  hevenly  fatlier  hath  nott 
planted,  shalbe  plucked  vppe  by  the 
rotes. 

1 4  Lett  them  alone  ;  they  be  the  blynde 
ledders  of  the  blynde.  If  the  blynde 
leede  the  blinde,  boothe  shall  fall  in  to 
the  dyche. 

15  Then  answered  Peter  and  sayd  to 
him.  Declare  vnto  vs  thys  parable. 


78 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

16  Da  andsvvarode  he  him,  And  synt 
ge  gyt  butan  andgyte  1 

17  Ne  ongyte  ge,  dset  eall  djet  on  done 
mu);  gsej;,  gsej)  on  da  wambe,  and  by])  on 
for))gang  asend  1 

18  Sojplice  da  |)ing  de  of  dam  muj^e 
ga]),  cumat^  of  deere  heortan,  and  da 
besmita))  done  mann. 

19  Of  diiere  heortan  cuma))  yfle  gejjanc- 
as,  mann-slyhtas,  unriht-hsemedu,  for- 
ligru,  stala,''"  lease  gewitnyssa,  tallice 
word. 

20  Dis  synt  da  j^ing  de  done  maun 
besmitajj ;  ne  besmit  done  mann^  deah 
he  un])\vogenum  handum  ete.^ 

21  And  da  fei'de  se  Hfelend  danon,  on 
Tyrisce  and  Sidonisce  endas. 

2  2  And  efne  !  da  of  dam  Chananeiscum 
gemserum  clypode  sum  wif  and  cwse]), 
Drihten,  Dauides  sunu,  gemiltsa  me ; 
mm  dohtor  ys  yfle  mid  deofle  gedreht. 


23  Da  ne  ge-andswarode  he  hyre.  Da 
genealseliton  hys  leorning-cnihtas  and 
him  to  cwsedon^  Forlset  hig,  fordam  heo 
clypaj)  sefter  us. 

24  Da  andswarode  he,  Ne  eom  ic  asend, 
buton  to  dam  sceapun  de  forwurdon  of 
Israhela  huse. 

2  1^  Da  com  heo,  and  hig  to  him  gebsed, 
and  dus  cw8e|),  Diihten,  gefylst  me. 

26  Da  cwse))  he,  Nys  hit  na  god  dset 
man  nime  bearna  hlaf,  and  hundum 
worpe. 

27  Da  cwsej)  heo,  Drihten,  d?et  ys 
s6\> ;  witodhce  da  hwelpas  eta)?  of  dam 
crumum,  de  of  hyra  hlaforda  beodum 
feallaj>. 

28  Da  andswarode  Drihten  hyi-e,  Eala! 
dii  wif,  my  eel  ys  din  geleafa  ;  gewurde 
de,  ealswa  du  Avylle.  And  da  of  dsere 
tide  wees  hyre  dohtor  hal  geworden. 

29  Da  se  Hgelend  danon  ferde,  eft  he 
com  wid  da  Galileiscean  sae.  And  astah 
on  done  munt,  and  dter  s£et. 

30  Da  genealsehton  him  to  mycele 
menegu,    mid   him    hsebbende    manega 


XV.  i6-3o.]     WYCLIFIE,  1389. 

16  Ami  he  sciilc,  lit  ami  50  ben  with- 
out vmlei-stomlyiiif  I 

17  Whei*  50  vmlerstomle  nat,  that  al 
thing  that  cntrith  in  to  the  mouth,  goth 
in  to  the  wonibe,  and  is  sent  out  in  to 
the  goyng  awe}'  1 

18  Rut  tho  thingis  that  cummen  forth 
fro  the  nioutli.  gou  out  of  the  herte,  and 
tho  thiiigus  defoulen  a  man. 

1 9  For  of  the  herte  gon  out  yuel 
thoujtis,  mansleayngis,  auouti'ies,  forni- 
caciouns,  theftis,  fals  witncssis,  blas- 
femyes. 

20  Tliese  thingis  it  ben  that  defoulen 
a  man  ;  sothely  for  to  ete  with  homlis 
vnwashen,  defouleth  not  a  man. 

21  And  Jhesus  gon  out  fro  thennys, 
wente  into  parties  of  Tyre  and  Sidon. 

3  2  And  loo  !  a  womman  of  Canane 
gon  out  of  the  costis,  cryede,  seyinge  to 
hym,  Lord,  the  son  of  Dauid,  haue 
mercye  on  me ;  my  doujter  is  yuel  tra- 
ueilid  of  a  deuyl. 

23  The  whiche  answerid  nat  to  hir  o 
word.  And  his  disciplis  cummynge  to 
preyeden  hym,  seyinge,  Lceue  thou  hire, 
for  she  crieth  after  vs. 

24  Forsothe  he  answerynge  seith,  I  am 
nat  scut,  no  but  to  the  sheep  of  the  hous 
of  Yracl  that  perishiden. 

25  Bot  she  came,  and  wirshipide  hym, 
seyinge,  Lord,  help  me. 

26  The  whiche  answerynge  seith,  It  is 
nat  good  for  to  take  the  breed  of  sonys, 
and  sende  to  houndis. 

27  And  she  seide,  ^he,  Lord  ;  forwhi 
and  the  litel  whelpis  eten  of  the  crum- 
rays,  that  fallen  douu  fro  the  bord  of 
her  lordis. 

28  Thanne  Jhesus  answeringe  seith  to 
hir,  0  !  thou  womman,  thi  feith  is  grete  ; 
be  it  don  to  thee,  as  thou  wolt.  And 
hir  dou3ter  was  heelid  fro  that  hour. 

29  And  whenne  Jhesus  hadde  pa.sside 
thenncs,  he  came  bisidis  the  see  of  Gali- 
lee. And  he  steiynge  in  to  an  hyl,  sat 
there. 

30  And  many  cumpanycs  camen  ni5  to 
hym,  hauynge  with   hem  doumbe  men 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


7J> 


16  Then  sayde  Jesus,  Arc  ye  yett  with 
outen  vmlerstondinge  ? 

17  Perceave  ye  not,  that  whatsoever 
goetli  in  at  the  mouth,  desceudeth  doune 
in  to  the  bely,  and  ys  east  out  in  to  the 
draught  1 

18  Butt  those  thingcs  which  procede 
out  of  the  mought,  come  from  the  herte, 
and  tliey  dyffylc  a  man. 

19  For  out  of  the  herte  come  evyll 
thoughtcs,  murder,  brcakyng  of  wed- 
locke,  whordom,  thecfte,  falce  witnes- 
beryngo,  blasphemy. 

20  These  are  the  thiuges  which  defyle 
a  man ;  but  to  eate  with  vnwesshen 
hondes,  defyleth  nott  a  man. 

21  And  Jesus  went  thence,  and  de- 
parted in  to  the  costes  of  Tire  and  Sidon. 

22  And  beholde  !  a  woman  wliicli  was 
a  (yananyte  cam  out  of  the  same  coostes, 
and  cryed  vnto  him,  saynge,  Have  mercy 
on  me,  Lorde,  the  sonne  off  Dauid  ;  my 
doughter  is  pytiously  wxcd  with  a 
devyll. 

23  And  he  gave  her  never  a  wordc  to 
answer.  Then  cam  to  him  his  disciples 
and  besought  him,  sayingc,  Sende  her 
awaye,  for  she  foloeth  vs  cryinge. 

24  He  answered  and  sayde,  I  am  not 
sent,  but  vnto  the  loost  shepe  of  the 
housse  of  Israhel. 

25  Then  she  cam,  and  worshypped 
him,  sayingc,  Master,  sucker  me. 

26  He  answered  and  saide.  It  is  not 
good  to  take  the  childrens  breed,  and  to 
cast  it  to  wheljies. 

27  She  answered  and  saide,  It  is 
truthe  ;  neverthe  lesse  the  whclppes  eate 
of  the  crommes,  which  fall  from  there 
masters  table. 

28  Then  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
her,  O !  woman,  greate  ys  thy  fayth ; 
be  hit  to  the,  even  as  thou  desyrest. 
And  her  doughter  was  made  whole  even 
at  that  same  tyme. 

29  Then  Jesus  went  awaye  from  thence, 
and  cam  nye  vnto  the  see  of  Galyle. 
And  went  vppe  in  to  a  mountayne,  and 
sat  doune  there. 

30  And  moche  people  cam  vnto  hym, 
havinge  with  them  halt,  blinde,  domne, 


80 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Matt. 

healte  and  blinde,  and  wanhale,  and 
manega  odre  ;  and  aledon  to  hys  fotum, 
and  he  gehselde  da, 

31  Swa  daet  da  msenegu  wundredon, 
geseonde  dumbe  sprecende,  healte  gang- 
ende,  blinde  geseonde ;  and  hig  msers- 
odon  Israhela  God.+ 

32  Da  cw£e|)  se  Hselend,  togsedere  ge- 
clypedum  his  leorning-cnihtum,  Disss 
menegu  ic  gemiltsige,  fordam  hig  ))iy 
dagas  mid  me  wunodon,  and  hig  nabb- 
a]>  hwset  hig  eton ;  and  ic  hig  nelle 
fsestende  forleetan,  de-lses  hig  on  wege 
geteorian. 

33  Da  cwsedon  hys  leorning-cnihtas, 
Hwar  nime  we  swa  fela  hlafa  on  dis 
westene,  daet  we  gefyllan  swa  mycele 
maenegu  1 

34  Da  cwse]>  he,  Hu  fela  hlafa  hagbbe 
ge  ?  Da  cwEedon  hig,  Seofon,  and  feawa 
fixa. 

35  And  he  behead  da  daet  sec  menegu 
saete  ofer  daere  eorjjan. 

36  And  he  nam  da  da  seofon  hlafas, 
and  da  fixas,  and  braec,  and  sealde  hys 
leorning-cnihtum  ;  and  hig  sealdon  dam 
folce. 

37  And  hig  aeton  ealle,  and  waeron 
gefyllede,  and  daet  tolafe  waes  of  dam  ge- 
brote,  hig  namon  seofon  wilian  fuUe. 

38  Witodlice  da  daer  aeton  waeron  feo- 
wer  J>usend  manna,  butan  cildum  and 
wifum. 

39  And  he  forlet  da  da  menegu,  and 
eode  on  scyp,  and  com  on  da  endas 
Magedon. 


Chap.  XVI."''  i  And  da  genealaehton 
him  to  Farisei  and  Saducei  and  hyne 
costodon,  and  baedon  da;t  he  him  sum 
tacen  of  heofone  aetywde. 

2  Da  andswarode  he  him  and  cwaej>, 
On  aefen  ge  cweda)?,  To  morgen  hyt  by}? 
smylte  weder,  des  heofon  ys  read  ; 

3  And  on  morgen  ge  cweda)?,  To  daeg 


XV.  3 1  --XVI.  3.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

and  cntkid,  feble  and  blyndc,  and  many 
othir ;  and  castiden  hem  doun  at  his 
feet.     And  he  holide  hem, 

31  So  tliat  the  eunipanyes  -wondriden, 
seeynge  dounibe  men  spekynge,  and 
crokid  goynge,  blynd  men  seeynge  ;  and 
thei  niagnyfieden  God  of  Yrael. 

32  Sothely  Jhesns,  his  dlsciphs  gedercd 
to  gider,  seide,  I  haue  rewthe  of  the 
cunipany  of  peple,  for  now  the  thridde 
day  thei  dwellen  still  with  me,  and  thei 
ban  not  thing  whichc  thei  shnlen  cte  ; 
and  Y  wole  nat  lecue  hem  fastynge,  lest 
thei  fallen  in  the  we3e. 

33  And  the  disciplis  seyen  to  hym, 
Therforc  wherof  so  many  loouys  to  vs 
in  desert,  that  we  fulfille  so  grete  a 
cumpanye  of  peple  ? 

34  And  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Hou 
many  loouys  ban  5ee  1  And  thei  seiden, 
Seuene,  and  a  few  smalle  fishis. 

35  And  he  comaundide  to  the  cunipany, 
that  thei  shulde  sitt  to  the  mete  vpon 
the  erthe. 

36  And  be  lakjTige  seuen  looues,  and 
fishis,  and  do}"nge  thonk}-ngis,  brak,  and 
jaue  to  his  disciplis  ;  and  disciplis  5auen 
to  the  peple. 

37  And  alle  etcn,  and  weren  fulfilHd, 
and  thei  token  that  that  was  ouer  of 
rel}'ues,  seuene  lepis  fulle. 

38  Forsothe  thei  that  eten  weren  foure 
thousand  of  men,  with  outen  litil  cbil- 
di-en  and  wemnien. 

39  And,  the  cumpanye  of  peple  laft, 
be  styede  vp  in  to  a  boot,  and  cam  into 
the  coostis  of  Magedan. 


TYNDALE,  ir;26. 


81 


CuAP.  XVI.  I  And  Pharisees  and 
Saduccis  temptynge  him  camen  ni3  to 
hym,  and  preiden  hym  for  to  shewe  to 
hem  a  tokene  fro  beucne. 

2  And  he  answerynge  seith  to  hem, 
The  eeuen}Tige  maad,  ^c  seien.  It  shal 
be  cleer,  for  the  heuene  is  lijk  to  reed ; 

3  And  the  morwe,  To  day  tempest,  for 


maymod,  and  other  many ;  and  cast 
them  dounc  at  Jesus  fete.  And  he  healed 
them, 

31  In  so  mochc  that  the  people  won- 
dred,  to  se  the  domne  speake,  the  maym- 
ed  Avhole,  the  halt  to  go,  and  the  blinde 
to  se  ;  and  they  glorifyed  the  God  of 
Israhcl. 

32  Jhesus  called  his  disciples  to  him, 
and  saide,  I  have  compassion  on  the 
people,  because  they  have  contynued 
with  me  nowe  iij  dayes,  and  have  110- 
thinge  to  catc  ;  and  I  wyll  not  let  them 
departe  fostinge,  leste  they  perisshc  in 
the  waye. 

33  And  his  disciples  sayd  vnto  him, 
Whence  shuld  we  get  so  moche  breed  in 
the  Avyldernes,  as  shulde  suffyse  so  greate 
a  multitude  ] 

34  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Howe 
many  loves  have  ye  1  And  they  seyde, 
Seven,  and  a  feawe  fysshes. 

35  And  he  commaunded  the  people,  to 
syt  doune  on  the  grounde. 

36  And  toke  the  seven  loves,  and  the 
fysshes,  and  gave  thankes,  and  brake 
them,  and  gave  to  hys  disciples  ;  and 
his  disciples  gave  them  to  the  people. 

3  7  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  suffysed, 
and  they  toke  vppe  of  the  broken  meate 
that  was  lefte,  vij  basketes  full. 

38  They  that  ate  were  iiij  M.  men,  be- 
syde  wemen  and  chyldren. 

39  And  he  sent  awaye  the  people,  and 
toke  shyppe,  and  cam  in  to  the  parties 
of  Mairdala. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  Then  cam  to  hym  the 
Pharises  with  the  Saduces  also  and  dyd 
tempte  hym,  desyringe  that  he  wold 
shewe  them  some  signe  from  hcven. 

2  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Att  even,  ye  saye.  We  shall  have  fayre 
wedder,  and  that  because  the  skye  ys 
reed  ; 

3  In  the  mornlnge  ye  saye,  To  daye 

G 


82 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

hyt  by)>  hi-eoh  weder,  Cteos  lyft  scin]> 
unwederlice.  Nu  cunne  ge  tocnawan 
heofones  hiw,  witodlice  ge  ne  magon 
witan  dsera  tida  tacnu. 

4  Seo  yfele  cneoxyss  and  unrylit-haem- 
ende  tacen  sec}>  ;  and  hyre  ne  hj]> 
geseald,  buton  lonas  tacen,  dtes  witegan. 
And,  Lim  forlsetenum,  he  ferde. 

5  And  da  his  leorning-cnihtas  comon 
ofer  done  mu|)au,  hig  forgeton  dset  hig 
hlafas  namon. 

6  And  da  saede  he,  Gyma]?,  and  warn- 
ia)j  fram  dam  beorman  Fariseorum  and 
Saduceorum. 

7  Da  ])ohton  hig  betvrux  him,  and 
cwsedon,  Nclmon  we  hlafas  mid  us  ? 

8  Da  se  Hcelend  wiste  hyra  gej'ancas, 
he  cwjfi]?  to  him,  Hwfet  j^ence  ge  betwux 
eow  lytles  geleafan,  dtet  ge  hlafas  nabb- 
ajj] 

9  Ne  understande  ge  gyt,  ne  ge  ne 
gejjenceaj?  da;ra  fif  hltifa  and  fif  }>usend 
manna,  and  hii  fela  Avyligena  ge  namon  1 

10  Ne  dsera  seofon  hlafa  and  feower 
pusend  manna,  and  liu  fela  ^yligena  ge 
namon  1 

1 1  Hwi  ne  ongyte  ge  gyt,  dtet  ic  ne 
saede  be  hliife,  Warnia))  fram  dam  beorm- 
an Fariseorum  and  Saduceorum  1 

12  Da  ongeton  hig,  dtet  he  ne  sjede, 
warniajj  fram  hlafa  beorman,  ac  fram 
lare  Fariseorum  and  Saduceorum.i" 

1 3  "Witodlice  da  com  se  Haelend  on  da 
dselas  Cesarean  Philippi,  and  ahsode  hys 
leorning-cnihtas,  Hwaene  secgea]?  menn 
dset  sy  mannes  sunu  ] 

14  Da  cwsedon  hig,  Sume  lohannem 
done  FuUubtere  ;  sume  Heliam  ;  sume 
Hieremiam,  odde  an  dasra  witegcna  J 

15  Da  ssede  he,  Hwset  secge  ge  dtet  ic 
si? 

16  Da  andswarode  himPetrus,  Du  eart 
daes  lyfigendes  Godes  sunu. 

17  Da  andswarode  him   se   Hselend, 


XVI.  4-1 7-]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

licuen  shyneth  heuy.'''  Therfore  -^c  lian 
knowe  to  deme  wisely  the  face  of  lioucn, 
but  jO  uiowcu  uot  witc  the  tokeiiys  of 
tymes. 

4  The  yuel  gcncracioun  and  avowtrcr 
sckith  a  tokiie ;  and  a  tokenc  shal  nat 
be  50uen  to  it,  no  but  the  tokne  of 
Jonas,  the  prophetc.  And,  hem  forsaken, 
he  wente  awey. 

5  And  whenne  his  disciplis  canicu  ouer 
the  sec,  thei  foi^aten  for  to  take  loouys. 

6  The  whiche  scide  to  hem,  Beholde  56, 
and  beth  war  of  the  sourdow}  of  Phari- 
sees and  Saducecs. 

7  And  thei  thou5ten  aniongc  hem,  sci- 
yngc,  For  we  han  nat  taken  loouys. 

S  Forsothc  Jhesus  witynge  seide  to 
hem,  What  thenken  56  amonge  50U  of 
litil  feith,  for  50  han  nat  loouys  1 

9  5it  50  vndirstonden  nat,  nether  han 
niynde  of  fyuc  loouys  in  to  fyue  thou- 
sand of  men,  and  hou  many  cofyns  50 
token  1 

10  Trewly  nether  of  seuen  loouys  in  to 
four  thousand  of  men,  and  hou  many 
Icpis  ;cc  token  ? 

1 1  Whi  vndirstonden  50  nat,  for  I  seide 
nat  to  50U  of  breed,  Be  56  war  of  sour- 
dow5  of  Pharisees  and  of  Saducecs  ? 

12  Thanne  thei  vnderstoden,  that  he 
seide  nat  to  be  war  of  sourdow3  of 
loouys,  bote  of  the  techynge  of  Pharisees 
and  JSaducees. 

13  Sothely  Jhesus  came  in  to  the 
parties  of  Cesarie  of  Philiji,  and  axide 
his  disciplis,  seyinge,  AVliom  seyn  men 
to  ben  maunes  sone  1 

14  And  thei  seiden,  Summe  Joon  Bap- 
tist ;  other  forsothc  Hely ;  but  other 
Jeremye,  or  oon  of  the  proi)hetis. 

15  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Sothely  whom 
seicn  56  mc  to  be  1 

1 6  Symou  Petre  answerynge  seide, Thou 
art  Crist,  the  sone  of  God  lyuynge. 

17  Forsothc  Jhesus  answerynge  seide 


TYNDALE,  1K26. 


83 


shalbc  foulc  wcddcr,  and  that  because 
tiie  skyc  ys  troubbclous  and  reed.  O  ye 
y])oerytes,  ye  can  diseorne  the  fassiou 
of  the  skyc,  and  can  ye  not  disccrnc  the 
sygncs  of  the  tymcs  l 

4  The  frowarde  nacion  and  advontrous 
sckcth  a  sygnc ;  there  shall  nonuthcr 
sygne  be  gevcn  vnto  them,  but  the  sygne 
off  the  prophet  Jonas.  ISo  leftc  he  them, 
and  departed. 

5  And  when  his  disciples  were  come  to 
the  other  side  of  the  water,  they  had 
forgotten  to  take  breed  with  them. 

6  Then  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them,  Take 
hedc,  and  beware  of  the  leven  of  the 
Pharises  and  of  the  8aduccs. 

7  They  thought  a  mongc  them  selves, 
sayingc,  We  have  brought  no  breed  with 
vs. 

8  When  Jesus  vnderstodc  that,  he  sa5'd 
vnto  them,  O  ye  of  lytell  fayth,  why 
are  youre  mindes  cumbi'cd  because  ye 
have  brought  no  breed  1 

9  Do  yc  not  yet  perceave,  nether  re- 
member those  V  lovesse  when  there  were 
v  ^I.  men,  and  howe  many  baskettes  toko 
ye  vp  ? 

10  Nether  the  vij  loves  Avlien  there 
were  iv  ]\I.  and  howe  many  baskettes 
toke  ye  vppe  1 

1 1  Why  perceave  ye  not  then,  that  Y 
spake  not  vnto  you  of  breed  when  I 
sayde,  Beware  ofi"  the  Icveu  of  the  Pha- 
rises and  of  the  Saduces  ? 

12  Then  vnderstodc  they,  howe  that 
he  bad  not  them  beware  of  the  leven  of 
breed,  butt  of  the  doctryne  of  the  Pha- 
rises and  of  the  iSaduccs. 

13  When  Jesus  cam  in  to  the  coostcs 
of  the  cite  which  is  called  Ccsarea  Phi- 
lippi,  he  axed  hys  disciples,  sayinge, 
Whom  do  men  sayc  that  I  the  sonnc  of 
man  am  1 

14  They  saide,  Some  saye  that  thou 
arte  Jhon  Baptist ;  some  Helyas  ;  somp 
Jeremias,  or  won  of  the  prophetes. 

15  He  seyde  vnto  them,  But  whom 
saye  ye  that  I  am  1 

16  Symon  Peter  answered  and  sayde, 
Thou  arte  Crist,  the  sonne  of  the  livynge 
God. 

17  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  to 

G  2 


84 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON-,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Eadig  eart  ctu,  Simon  culfran  beam ; 
fordam  hit  cte  ne  ouwreali  flsesc  ue  bl5d, 
ac  min  feeder  de  on  lieofenum  ys. 

18  And  Ic  secge  de,  dast  dii  eart  Petrus, 
and  ofer  disne  stan  ic  timbrige  mine 
cyi'icean,  and  helle  gatu  ne  magon  ongen 
da. 

1 9  And  de  ic  sylle  heofona  rices  c^gia ; 
and  swa  liwajt  swa  du  ofer  eor|3an  ge- 
bindst,  da;t  by))  on  lieofonum  gebunden  ; 
and  swa  hwa?t  swa  du  unbindst  ofer 
eorjjan,  dset  by]j  unbunden  on  heofonum. 

20  Ba  bebead  se  Hselend  bys  leorning- 
cnihtum,  dxt  big  nanum  menn  ne  saedon, 
dset  he  wsere  Hselend  Crist. 

21  Syddan  he  ongan  swutelian  hys 
leorning-cnihtum,  dfet  he  wolde  faran  to 
Hierusalem,  and  fela  J)inga  J^olian  fram 
yldrum,  and  boeerum,  and  eaklor-man- 
num  dsera  sacerda ;  and  beon  ofslegen, 
and  dy  j^ryddan  dsege  arisan. 

22  And  da  genam  Petrus  hyne  on-sun- 
dron,  and  cw<b]>  to  him,  Drihteu,  ne 
ge^vnrde  dset. 

23  Da  beseah  he  hyne,  and  cw?e])  to 
Petre,  Gang  bseftan  me,  Satanas  ;  wider- 
rsede  du  eart  me ;  fordam  du  nast  da 
J)ing  de  synd  Godes,  ac  da  de  synt 
manna.''" 

24  Da  ssede  se  Hselend  hys  leorning- 
cnihtum,  Gyf  hwa  Avylle  fyligean  me, 
widsace  hyne  sylfne,  and  nyme  hys  rode, 
and  me  fylige  ; 

25  S5j)Hce  se  de  wyle  hys  sawle  hale 
gedon,  he  hig  forsijil}) ;  and  se  de  wyle 
big  for  me  forspyllan,  se  hig  fint. 

26  Hwast  fremaj)  senegum  menn,  deah 
he  ealne  middan-eard  gestryne,  gyf  he 
hys  sawle  forwyrd  J^olaJ)  1  odde  hwylc 
gewrixl  sylj?  se  mann  for  hys  sawle  1 

27  Witodlice  mannes  sunn  ys  to  cum- 
enne  on  liys  feeder  wuldre,  mid  hys 
englum,  and  donne  agylt  ceghwylcum  be 
hys  agenum  weorce.''" 

28  Sojilice  ic  secge  eow,  sume  synt  her 
standende,  de  deajj  ne  oubyrigea]?,  ser 


XVI.  iS-28.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

to  liym,  Blcssid  art  thou,  Symon  Bar- 
iona  ;^  for  flesh  and  hlood  shcwidc  iiat 
to  tlicc,  but  my  fadh-  that  is  in  heucucs. 

18  And  Y  soye  to  thcc,  for  thou  art 
Petre,  and  vpon  this  stoon  I  slial  bildc 
my  cliurche,  and  the  5atis  of  hcUe  shulcn 
uat  han  mi5t'''  a5eins  it. 

19  And  to  thee  I  shal  5cue  the  kcics 
of  the  kyngdam  of  hcucnos  ;  and  what 
euer  thou  shalt  bynde  vpon  crthe,  shal 
be  bounden  and  in  heuencs ;  and  what 
euer  thou  shalt  vnbynde  vpon  ei'the,  shal 
be  vnbounden  and  in  heuenes. 

20  Thanne  he  comaundide  to  his  dis- 
ciplis,  that  thei  shulden  scie  to  no  man, 
tliat  he  was  Crist. 

2 1  Fro  tliat  tyme  Jhesus  bygan  for  to 
shewe  to  his  discii)lis,  that  it  byhouith 
hym  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  and  suifre 
many  thingus  of  the  eldris,.  and  scribis, 
and  princis  of  prcstis  ;  and  be  sleyn,  and 
the  thridde  day  ryse  vp  a5ein. 

22  And  Petre,  takynge  hym  to,  began 
for  to  blame  hym,  scyinge,  Fer  be  it  fro 
thee,  Lord ;  this  thing  shal  not  be  to 
thee. 

23  The  whiche,  turnyd,  seide  to  Petre, 
Sathanas,  go  after  rne;  thou  art  sclaundre 
to  mc  ;  for  thou  sauerist  nat^  tho  thingis 
that  ben  of  God,  but  tho  thingis  that 
ben  of  men. 

24  Thanne  Jhesus  seide  to  his  disciplis, 
5if  eny  man  wole  cunie  after  me,  denye 
he  hym  self,  and  take  his  crosse,  and 
sue  mc ; 

25  For  he  that  wole  make  his  soule 
saaf/  shal  lose  it ;  forsothe  he  that  shal 
Icse  his  soule ^  for  me,  shal  fynde  it. 

26  Sothely  what  pi'ofitith  it  to  a  man, 
^if  he  Wynne  al  the  Avorld,  trewly  he 
buffre  ])eyrynge  of  his  soulc  1  or  what 
chaungyngc  shal  a  man  3eue  for  his 
soule  1 

27  For  mannes  sonc  is  to  come  in 
glorie  of  his  fadir,  with  his  angelis,  and 
thanne  he  shal  3elde  to  euery  man  aftir 
his  workis. 

28  Treuly  I  seie  to  50U,  there  ben 
summe    of    men   stondynge    heer,   the 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


85 


him,  Ilappy  arte  thou,  Simon  the  sonne 
of  Jonas  ;  for  Heshe  and  bloud  have 
nott  opened  vnto  the  that,  butt  my  father 
which  is  in  heven. 

18  And  I  saye  also  vnto  the,  that  thou 
rrtc  Petei",  and  apon  this  roocke  I  W3II 
bylde  my  congregacion,  and  the  gates 
off  hell  shall  nott  ])revayle  a  geynst  it. 

1 9  And  I  wyll  geve  vnto  the  the  kcyes 
of  the  kyngdom  of  heven  ;  and  whatso- 
ever thou  bynde.st  vp[)on  crth,  yt  shall  be 
bounde  in  heven ;  and  whatsoever  thou 
lowsest  on  erthe,  yt  shalbe  lowsed  in 
heven. 

20  Then  he  charged  his  disciples,  that 
they  shulde  tell  no  man,  that  he  was 
Jesus  Christ. 

2 1  From  that  tyme  foi'th  Jesus  began 
to  shewe  vnto  hys  disciples,  howe  tliat 
he  must  go  vnto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer 
many  thinges  of  the  seniores,  and  of  the 
hye  prestes,  and  of  the  scribes ;  and 
must  be  killed,  and  ryse  agayne  the 
thirde  daye. 

22  Peter  toke  him  a  side,  and  began 
to  rebuke  hym,  sayinge,  Master,  faver 
thy  sylfe ;  this  shall  not  come  vnto  the. 

23  Then  tourned  he  aboute,  and  sayde 
vnto  Peter.  Go  after  me,  Satan;  thou 
off"endest  me  ;  because  thou  pereeavest 
nott  godly  thyngcs,  but  worldly  thinges. 

24  Jesus  then  sayde  to  hys  disciples, 
Yf  eny  man  wyll  folowc  me,  leet  hym 
forsayke  hym  sylfe,  and  take  hys  crosse, 
and  folowe  me ; 

25  For  who  soever  wyll  save  hys  lyfe, 
shall  loose  yt ;  and  whosoever  shall  loose 
hys  lyfe  for  my  sake,  shall  fynde  yt. 

26  Whatt  shall  hit  proffet  a  man,  yf  he 
.shulde  wyn  all  the  whoolc  worlde,  so  he 
loose  hys  owne  soule  1  or  els  what  shall 
a  man  geve  to  redeme  hys  soule  agayne 
with  all? 

27  For  the  sonne  off"  man  shall  come 
in  the  glory  of  hys  father,  with  hys 
angels,  and  then  shall  he  rewarde  cvei-y 
man  accordinge  to  hys  dedes. 

28  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  some  there 
be   a   monge   them   that    here  stonde, 


86 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.   [St.  Matt. 

hig  geseon  mannes  sunu  cumendne  on 
hys  fseder  rice. 


Chap.  XVII.  i  And  sefter  six  dagum 
nam  se  Hselend  Petrum,  and  lacobum, 
and  lohannem,  hys  brodor,  and  Isedde 
hig  on-sundron  on  senne  heahne  munt, 

2  And  he  wses  gehiwod  beforan  him. 
And  his  ansyn  scean  swa  swa  snnne  ; 
and  hys  reaf  wseron  swa  hwlte  swa 
snaw. 

3  And  efne !  da  sety  wde  Moyses  and 
Helias,  mid  him  sprecende. 

4  Da  cwpejj  Petrus  to  him,  Drihten,  god 
ys  us  her  to  beonne.  Gyf  du  Avylt,  uton 
wyrcean  her  J)reo  eardung-st5wa  3  de 
tine,  Moyse  ane,  and  HeL'e  ane. 

5  Him  da  gyt  sprecendum,  and  sojjlice  ! 
da  beorht  wolcn  liig  ofersccan  ;  and  da 
efne !  com  stefn  of  dam  wolcne,  and  cwpej). 
Her  ys  min  leofa  sunu,  on  dam  me  wel- 
gelfca))  ;  gehyra}'  hyne. 

6  And  da  liig  dis  gehyrdon  hys  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas,  hig  feollon  on  hyr-a  ansyne, 
and  hym  swyde  ondredon. 

7  He  genealsehte  da,  and  hig  jet-hran, 
and  him  to  cwiej',  ArisaJ),  and  ne  on- 
drsedaj)  eow. 

8  Da  hig  hyra  eagan  vipp-ahofon,  ne 
gesawon  hig  nsenne,  bilton  done  Heelend 
sylfne. 

9  And  da  hig  of  dam  munte  eodon,  se 
Hselend  hym  behead,  and  dus  cwsel?, 
Nanum  menn  ne  secgean  ge  dis,  ser 
mannes  sunu  of  deajie  arise.''' 

10  And  da  axodon  hy.s  Icorning-cnihtas 
hyne,  Hwa3t  secgeaj'  da  boceras,  dast  ge- 
byrige  serest  cuman  Heliam  1 

11  Da  andswarode  he  hym,  Witodlice 
Helias  ys  toweard,  and  lie  ge-edniwa]) 
ealle  j^ing. 

12  S5}iHce  ic  eow  secge,  dret  Helias 
com,  and  hig  hyne  ne  gecneowon,  ac  hig 
dydon  ymbe  hyne,  swa  hwa?t  swa  hig 
woldon  ;  and  swa  ys  mannes  sunu  eac 
fram  him  to  Jirowigenne. 


XVII.  I-I2.]    WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

whiche  sluil  nat  taaste  detli,  til  tliei 
seen  inaimys  soue  cuiumyuge  in  his 
kyngdum. 


CnAP.  XVII.  I  And  after  sexc 
claycs  Jhesus  toke  Petre,  and  Jamys, 
and  Joon,  his  brother,  and  ledde  hem 
asydis  in  to  an  hi3  liill, 

2  And  was  transfigured'''  hiforc  hem. 
And  his  face  schoon  as  the  sunnc ;  for- 
sothe  his  clothis  were  maad  white  as 
snow. 

3  And  lo  !  Moyses  and  Helye  apperiden 
to  hem,  spekynge  with  hym. 

4  Sothely  Petre  answerynge  seid  to 
Jhesu,  Lord,  it  is  good  vs  to  be  here. 
5if  thou  wolt,  make  we  here  three  taber- 
naclis  ;  to  thee  oon^  to  Moyscs  oon,  and 
con  to  Helie. 

5  5it  hym  spekynge,  loo  !  a  li5ty  cloude 
shadewid  hem  ;  and  loo  !  a  vois  of  the 
cloude,  seyinge,  This  is  my  derwortli 
sone,  in  whom  I  haue  wel  pleside  to 
me  ;  hccre  56  hym. 

6  And  the  disciplis,  heerynge,  fellen 
douu  in  to  her  facis,  and  dredden  gretely. 

7  iVnd  Jhesus  came  ni5,  and  touchide 
hem,  and  seide  to  hem,  Tiis  vp,  nyl  ^e 
dreede. 

8  Fursothe  thei,  rysynge  vp  her  ei5en, 
sawen  no  man,  no  but  Jliesus  aloon. 

9  And,  hem  cummynge  doun  fro  the 
mounteyn,  Jhesus  comaundide  hem, 
seyinge.  Sale  je  to  no  man  the  visioun, 
til  maunes  sone  ryse  a3eiu  fro  dead. 

10  And  his  disciplis  axiden  hym,  sey- 
inge, ^VIlat  therfore  seyn  scribis,  that  it 
behoueth  liely  first  come  ? 

1 1  And  he  answerynge  seith  to  hem, 
Forsothe  Hely  is  to  come,  and  he  shal 
restore  alle  thingis. 

1 2  Treuly  Y  seye  to  50U,  that  Hely  is 
now  comen,  and  thei  knewen  hym  nat, 
but  thei  diden  in  hym,  what  euere  thingis 
thei  wolden  ;  so  and  mannys  sone  is  to 
suffre  of  hem. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  S7 

whych  shall  nott  taste  of  dceth,  tyll 
they  shall  have  sene  the  sonue  of  nuiii 
come  in  hys  kyngdome. 


Chap.  XVII.  i  And  affer  vj  daycs 
Jhesus  toke  Peter,  and  James,  and  Jhon, 
hys  brother,  and  brought  them  vppe 
into  an  hye  mountaync  out  of  the  waye, 

2  And  was  transfygured  before  them. 
And  hys  face  dyd  shyne  as  the  sun  ;  and 
hys  clothes  were  as  whyte  as  the  light. 

3  And  beholde  !  there  appered  vnto 
them  Moses  and  Helyas,  talkinge  with 
him. 

4  Then  answered  Peter  and  sayde  to 
Jesus,  Master,  here  is  good  beinge  for 
vs.  YfF  thou  wylt,  leet  vs  make  here  iij 
tabernacles ;  won  for  the,  and  won  for 
Moses,  and  won  for  Helyas. 

5  Whyll  he  yet  spake,  beholde  !  a  bright 
cloude  shadowed  them  ;  and  lo  !  a  voice 
out  of  the  cloude  sayde.  This  is  my  dcare 
Sonne,  in  whon  I  delite  ;  heare  hym. 

6  And  when  the  disciples  herdc  that, 
they  fell  flatt  on  there  faces,  and  were 
soore  afrayed. 

7  And  Jesus  cam,  and  touched  them, 
and  sayde,  Aiyse,  and  be  not  a  frayed. 

8  Then  lyfte  they  vppe  their  eyes,  and 
sawe  no  man,  but  Jesus  only. 

9  And  as  they  cam  doune  from  the 
mountaync,  he  charged  them,  sayinge, 
Se  that  ye  shewc  th3's  vysion  to  no  man, 
tyll  the  Sonne  of  man  be  rysen  agcyne 
from  deeth. 

10  And  hys  disciples  axed  off  him, 
sayinge,  Why  then  sayc  the  scribes,  that 
Hclias  muste  fyrst  come  1 

1 1  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto  them, 
Hclias  shall  fyrst  come,  and  restore  all 
thyngcs. 

12  And  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  Hclias 
ys  come  alredy,  and  they  knewe  hym 
nott,  butt  have  done  vnto  him,  whatso- 
ever they  lusted  ;  in  lyke  wyse  shall  also 
the  souuc  of  man  sufiie  of  them. 


88 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  gg^.  [St.  Matt. 

13  Da  ongeton  hys  leormng-cnihtas, 
dset  he  hyt  ssede  be  lolianne  clam  FuU- 
ulitere.'*' 

14  And  da  he  com  to  dtere  menegu, 
him  to  geuealsehte  sum  mann,  gebigedum 
cueowum  toforan  him,  and  cweejj, 

15  Drihten,  gemiltsaminumsuna,  ford- 
am  de  he  ys  fylle-seoc,  and  yfel  );ola)),  oft 
he  fyl]j  on  fyr,  and  gel5mlice  on  waiter. 

16  And  ic  brohte  hyne  to  dinum  leorn- 
ing-cnihtum,  and  hig  ne  mihton  hyne 
fvehselau. 

o 

17  Dii  andswarode  he  him,  Eala  ge 
ungeleaflfulle  and  pwyre  cneores ;  hii  lange 
beo  ic  mid  eow  1  liil  lange  forbere  ic 
eow  1  Ei'inga])  hyne  to  me  hider. 

18  And  da  ])reade  se  H^lend  hyne,  and 
se  deofol  hyne  forlet ;  and  se  cnapa  wa3S 
of  dpere  tide  geheeled.    • 

19  Da  genealcchton  hysleorning-cnihtas 
him  to,  and  him  to  cw^don  diglice,  Hwi 
ne  myhte  we  hyne  ut-adrifan  1 

20  Da  cvse]?  he,  For  hyra  ungeleafful- 
nesse.  Soj'lice  on  eornost  ic  eow  secge, 
gyf  ge  hsefdon  geleafan,  swa  senepes 
corn,  and  ge  cwsedon  to  dissum  munte. 
Far  heonone,  donne  ferde  he  ;  and  eow 
ne  by)?  senig  jjing  unmihtelic; 


2 1  So})lice  dis  cynn  ne  by]?  ut-adryfen, 
buton  jjurh  gebed  and  fsesten. 

22  Da  hig  wunedon  on  Galilea,  da 
cwis]>  se  Htelend,  Mannes  sunn  ys  to 
sylleune  on  manna  handa  ; 

23  And  hig  ofslea|)  hyne,  and  he  anst 
on  dam  })riddan  dsege.  Da  wurdon  hig 
Jiearle  ge-um-otsode. 

24  And  da  he  com  to  Cafarnaimi,  da 
genealEehton  to  Petre,  da  dtet  gafol  nam- 
on,  and  dus  cwsedon,  Eower  lareow  ne 
gylt  he  gafol  ? 

25  Da  cw^e]?  he,  Gyse  he  de|).  -And 
da  he  cor:i  into  dam  huse,  da  cwte])  se 
Hselend,  Hwset  jjincf)  de,  Symon  1  JEt 
hwam  nimajj  cyningas  gafol  odde  toll  ? 
of  hyra  bearnum,  hw£eder  de  of  frem- 
edum  1 

26  Da  cwse])  he,   Of  fremedum.     Da 


Wll.  13-26.]     WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

13  Thannc  illsciplis  vmlirstoilen,  that 
of  Joon  Ba2>tist  he  haddc  seid  to  hem. 

14  And  Avhannc  he  cam  to  the  cum- 
panye  of  pei)le,  a  man  cam  to  hym, 
foldid  on    knees   byfore   hym,   seymnc, 

15  Lord,  haue  mercy  on  my  sone ;  for 
he  is  hmatyke,  and  sutfrith  yucl,  for  why 
oft  tymys  he  fallith  in  to  the  fijr,  and 
oft  tymys  in  to  water. 

16  And  I  oftride  hym  to  thi  disciplis, 
and  thci  niyjten  nat  hele  hym. 

17  Jhesus  answer3-nge  sclth,  A  !  thou 
gencracioun  vnbyleeful,'''  and  weiward ; 
hou  longe  shal  I  be  with  50U 1  hou 
longe  shal  I  suffre  50U 1  Brynge  jce  hym 
bidir  to  me. 

18  And  Jhesus  bhxmyde  hym,  and  the 
deuel  wcnte  out  fro  hym  ;  and  the  child 
is  helid  fro  that  houre. 

19  Thanue  disciplis  camen  ni3  to  Jhesu 
priuyly,  and  scideu  to  hym,  Whi  mi5tc 
nat  we  casten  hym  out '? 

20  Jliesus  seith  to  hem,  For  5oure 
^•nl)ylcue.  Treuly  I  seie  to  50U,  5if  50 
shulen  haue  feith,  as  a  corn  of  scneuey, 
50  shulen  seie  to  this  hill,  Passe  thou 
hennus,  and  it  slial  passe;  and  no  thing 
shal  be  impossible  to  30U  j 


21  Forsothe  this  kynde  is  nat  cast  out, 
no  but  by  preyinge  and  fastynge. 

22  Treuly,  hem  lyuynge  togidi'e  in 
Galilee,  Jhesus  seide  to  hem,  Mannes 
sone  is  to  be  bitraied  in  to  the  hondis 
of  men ; 

23  And  thei  shulen  slea  hym,  and  the 
thridde  day  he  slml  ryse  a5ein.  And 
thei  ben  maad  ful  sory. 

24  And  wliannc  he  came  to  Caphai-- 
naum,  thei  that  token  tribut,  camen  to 
Petre,  and  seiden  to  hym,  5oure  maister 
payeth  nat  tribute  ] 

25  And  he  seith,  ^he.  And  whenne 
he  had  entrid  in  to  an  house,  Jhesus 
came  biforc  hym,  seyinge,  Symount, 
what  semeth  to  thee  1  Of  whiclic  taken 
tlie  kyngis  of  crthe  tribut?'^  of  her  owne 
sonys,  ether  of  alyenys  ]  ^ 

26  And   he   seide,    Of  other   mennus 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


89 


13  Then  hys  disciples  perceavcd,  that 
he  spake  vnto  them  of  Jhon  Baptist. 

14  And  when  they  were  come  to  the 
people,  thcr  cam  to  hym  a  certaync 
man,  and  knelcd  doune  to  hym,  saynge, 

15  INlaster,  have  mercy  on  my  somie  ; 
ffor  he  is  franticke,  and  ys  sore  vexed, 
and  oft  tymes  falleth  into  the  fyre,  and 
oft  into  the  water. 

1 6  And  I  brought  him  to  thy  disciples, 
and  they  coulde  not  hcale  him. 

1 7  Jesus  answered  and  sayde,  0 ! 
gencracion  faythlcs,  and  crokcd  ;  howc 
longe  shall  I  be  with  you  1  how  longe 
shall  Y  suffre  you  1  Bryng  him  bidder 
to  me. 

18  And  Jhesus  rebuked  the  devyll,  and 
he  cam  out ;  and  the  child  was  healed 
even  that  same  houre. 

19  Then  came  hys  disciples  secretly, 
and  sayde.  Why  could  not  we  cast  him 
out? 

20  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them,  Because  off 
youre  vnbelfe.  For  I  saye  veryly  vnto 
you,  yff  ye  had  fiiythe,  as  a  grayne  off 
musterd  seed,  ye  shuld  saye  vnto  this 
mountayne,  Eemeve  hence  to  yonder 
place,  and  he  shulde  remeve ;  nether 
shuld  eny  thynge  be  vnpossyblc  for  you 
to  do ; 

21  But  this  kynde  goeth  not  oute, 
butt  by  pryer  and  fastynge. 

22  Whill  they  passed  the  tyme  in 
Galile,  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Tlic 
Sonne  off  man  shalbe  betrayed  into  the 
hondcs  off  men  ; 

23  And  they  shall  kill  hym,  and  the 
thyrd  daye  he  shall  ryse  agayne.  And 
they  sorowed  greatly. 

24  When  they  were  come  to  Caper- 
naum, they  that  were  wont  to  gadre 
poll  money,  cam  to  Peter,  and  sayde, 
Doth  youre  master  paye  tribute  1 

25  He  sayd.  Ye.  And  when  he  was 
come  into  the  housse,  Jesus  spake  fyrst 
to  hym,  sayng,  What  thynkest  thou  Si- 
mon ?  Of  whomc  do  the  kyngos  off  the 
erth  take  tribute,  or  poll  money?  of 
their  chyldren,  or  of  straungcrs  ? 

26  Peter  sayde  vnto  hyme,  Of  straungers. 


90 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  gg^.     [St.  Matt. 

cw3e]>   he,    Eornostlice    da    beam    synt 
frige. 

27  Deah-twsedere  clfet  we  lii  ne  ge- 
uurotsigeon,  gang  to  cJsere  sse,  and  wurp 
dmne  angel  lit,  and  nim  done  serestan 
fisc ;  and,  hys  mujj  ge-opena,  dii  fintst 
Eenne  wecg  on  him ;  nim  done,  and  syle 
for  me  and  for  de. 


Chap.  XVIII.t  i  On  dsere  tide  ge- 
nealsehton  hys  leorning-cnihtas  to  dam 
Hselende,  and  cwsedon,  Hwa,  wenst  du, 
ys  yidra  on  heofena  rice  1 

2  And  da  clypode  se  Hselend  seune 
lytling,  and  gesette  on  hyra  midlen  ; 

3  And  cwsej5,  Soj^lice  ic  secge  eow, 
buton  ge  been  gecyrrede,  and  geword- 
ene  swa  swa  lytlingas,  ne  ga  ge  on  heof- 
ena rice. 

4  Swa  hwylc  swa  hjTie  ge-eadmet  swa 
des  lytling,  se  ys  mara  on  heofena  rice. 

5  And  swa  hwylc  swa  anne  dilicne 
lytling  on  minum  naman  onfeh]?,  se  on- 
feh})  me. 

6  Soj^lice  se  de  beswic]?  senne  of  dyssum 
lytlingum,  de  on  me  gelyfafi,  betere  him 
ys  dset  an  cwyrn-stan  si  to  hys  s-wj^ran 
gecnytt,  and  si  besenced  on  sses  griind. 


7  "Wa  dysum  middan-gearde,  ])urh  swic- 
domas ;  need  ys,  dset  swycdomas  cumou ; 
deah-hw£edere  wa  dam  menn  de  swyc- 
d5m  J)urh  hyne  cym]j. 

8  Gyf  din  hand  odde  din  fot  de  swica]i, 
aceorf  hyne  of,  and  awurp  fram  de. 
Betere  de  ys  dtet  dii  ga  wanhal,  odde 
healt,  to  life,  donne  du  hfebbe  twa  handa 
and  twegen  fet  and  sy  on  ece  fyr  asend. 


9  And  gyf  din  eage  de  swica];,  aliola 
hyt  ut,  and  awurp  hyt  fram  de.  Betere 
de  ys  mid  anum  eage  on  life  to  ganne, 
donne  du  si  mid  twam  asend  on  helle 
fyr. 


XYTI.  27.-XVIIL  9-]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

sonys.     Jlicsus  sciilc  to  liyni,  Thcrforc 
sonys  ben  free. 

27  Forsotlic  that  we  sclaiindrc  iiat 
lieni,  go  tlioii  to  the  see,  ami  senile  an 
huke,  anil  take  the  ilke  fishe  that  lirst 
eumnieth  vp  ;  and,  his  mouth  openyil, 
thou  shalt  fynde  stater ;'''  thou  takyng 
it,  jeue  to  hem  iov  me  and  for  thee. 


TYXDALE,  1526. 


91 


Chap.  XVIII.  i  In  that  hour  tlie 
disciplis  cameu  ni3  to  Jhesus,  seiynge, 
AVho,  j^essist  thou,  is  move  in  the  kyng- 
dam  of  heuencs  ? 

2  Anil  Jhesus,  elepyni^e  to  a  litil  child, 
putte  hyni  in  the  mydil  of  hem  ; 

3  And  seide,  I  seie  ti'ewthe  to  50U,  no 
but  5if  yC  shulen  be  tuvnyd,  and  maad 
as  litil  children,  5e  shulen  nat  entreu 
in  to  the  k}Tigdam  of  heuencs. 

4  Therfore  who  cuere  shal  meeke 
Innn  as  this  litil  child,  he  is  more  in 
the  kyugdam  of  heuenes. 

5  And  he  that  resceyueth  oon  sichc 
litil  in  my  name,  resceyueth  me. 

6  Forsothe  avIio  shal  sclaundi'e  oon  of 
these  smale  leste,  that  byleeuen  in  me, 
it  spedith  to  hym  that  a  myln  stoon 
of  assis  be  hanged  in  his  neeke,  and 
be  drenchid  in  to  the  dcpncsse  of  the 
see. 

7  "Woo  to  the  world,  for  sclaundris ; 
treuly  it  is  neede,  that  sclaundris  come  ; 
nethelcs  woo  to  the  ilk  man  by  whom  a 
sclaundre  cometh. 

8  Forsothe  5if  thin  bond  or.  thi  foot 
sclaundre  thee,  kitt  it  of,  and  kast  awey 
fro  thee.  It  is  good  to  thee  to  entre  in 
to  lyf  feble,  other  evoked,  than  hauyngc 
two  hondis  or  two  feet  to  be  sent  in  to 
euerlastynge  fijr. 

9  And  3if  thin  eije  sclaundre  thee, 
puUe  it  out,  and  cast  awey  fro  thee.  It 
is  good  to  thee  with  oon  eije  to  entre 
in  to  lyf,  than  hauynge  two  ei5en  to  be 
seute  in  to  tijr  of  hclle. 


Then  sayd  Jesus  vnto  hym  aganc,  Then 
arc  the  chyldven  fvc. 

27  Neverthelesse  lest  we  shuldc  of- 
fonde  them,  goo  to  the  see,  and  cast  in 
thync  angle,  and  take  the  fysshc  that 
fyrst  cometh  vp;  and,  when  thou  iiasfc 
opened  his  moutlie,  thou  sh.alt  fynde  a 
pcce  of  twelve  pens ;  that  take  and  paye 
for  me  and  the. 


Chap.  XVIII.  i  The  same  tyme  the 
disciples  cam  vnto  Jesus,  sayng,  A\'lio  is 
the  greatest  in  the  kyngdom  off  heven  ? 

2  Jesus  called  a  cliylde  vnto  hym,  and 
set  hym  in  the  middes  of  thini ; 

3  And  sayd,  Ycrely  I  say  \nto  you, 
except  ye  tourne,  and  become  as  chil- 
dren, ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kyngdom 
off  heven. 

4  Whosoever  therfore  shall  submit  him 
silfe  as  this  chylde,  he  is  the  greatest  in 
the  kyngdoni  of  heven. 

.5  And  Avhosoever  reccavcth  suche  a 
chylde  in  my  name,  receaveth  me. 

6  But  whosoever  offend  Avon  of  these 
lytell  Avous,  Avhich  belevc  in  me,  yt  Avere 
better  for  hym  that  a  millstone  Avcro 
hanged  aboute  his  necke,  and  that  he 
Avere  drouned  in  the  depth  of  the  see. 

7  Wo  be  vnto  the  Avorld,  because  of 
eA-ill  occasions ;  hit  is  necessary,  that 
CA-yll  occasions  be  geven  ;  nevertliclesse 
woo  be  to  that  man  by  whom  CA^yll 
occasion  eommeth. 

8  Wherefore  jff  thy  hondc  or  thy  fote 
geve  the  an  occasion  of  evyll,  cut  hym 
of,  and  cast  hym  from  the.  Hit  is 
bcttcv  fov  the  to  enter  into  lyfe  halt,  or 
maymcd,  rather  then  thou  shulde-ste 
havynge  tAVo  hondes  ov  two  fete  be  cast 
into  everlastyng  fyve. 

9  And  yf  also  thyne  eye  offende  the, 
plucke  him  oute,  and  caste  hym  fvom 
the.  It  is  better  for  the  to  enter  into 
lyfe  with  one  eye,  then  havyng  tAVO  eyes 
to  be  cast  into  hell  fyre. 


92 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXO^,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

10  Warniaj),  dset  ge  ne  oferhogian  Eeiine 
of  dysum  lytlingum  die  gelyfaj)  on  me.''' . 


1 1  So[)lice  mannes  sunu  com  to  gelisel- 
anne  cJtet  for\vear]j. 

1 2  Hwset  ys  eow  ge])ulit  1  Gyf  hwylc 
mann  hsefjj  bund  sceapa,  and  him  losa}? 
an  of  dam,  liu  ne  forlset  lie  da  nigon  and 
hmid  nigontig  on  dam  muntiim,  and 
g8e))  and  sec})  dset  an  de  forwcar})  1 

13  And  gyf  hyt  gelimpj)  d»efc  he  hyt 
fint,  so})lice  ic  eow  secge,  dtet  he  swydor 
gehlissaj)  for  dam  auum  donne  ofer  da 
nigon  and  hund  nigontig  de  na  ne  los- 
edon. 

14  Swa  nys  willa  bef5ran  eowrnm 
fgeder  de  on  heofenum  ys,  daet  an  for- 
wm-de  of  disum  lytlingum.''' 

15  SoJ^lice  gyf  din  brodor  synga))  Avid 
de,  ga,  and  styr  him,  betwux  de  and  him 
sylfum ;  gyf  he  de  gehyr]),  dii  gestajjel- 
ast  diune  brodor. 

16  Gyf  he  de  ne  gehyr]),  nim  donne 
gyt  renne  odde  twegen  to  de,  dset  eelc 
word  stande  on  twegra  odde  jjreora 
gewittnysse. 

17  Gyf  he  hig  ne  gehyrjj,  ssege  hyt 
geferrsedene.  Gyf  he  hig  ne  gehyrjj, 
si  he  de  swa  swa  hseden  and  manfull. 

18  S6]jlice  ic  secge  eow,  swa  hwylce 
swa  ge  gebinda})  ofer  eorjjan,  da  beo|> 
gebundene  on  heofonum  ;  and  swa  hwyl- 
ce swa  ge  ofer  eorjjan  unbinda]),  da  beoJ> 
on  heofonum  unbiindene. 

19  Eft  ic  eow  secge,  gyf  twegen  of 
eow  geJ)W3eria])  ofer  eorj^an,  be  jelcum 
|)inge  de  hig  bidda}),  hit  gewurj?  him  of 
minum  feeder  de  on  heofonum  ys. 

20  Dfer  twegen  odde  ]>ry  synt  on  min- 
um naman  gegaderode,  da^r  ic  eom  on 
hyra  midlene. 

21  Da  genealsehte  Petrus  to  him,  and 
cwse]),  Drihten,  gyf  min  brodor  synga}) 
wid  me,  mot  ic  him  forgyfuni  Od  seofon 
sidas  1 


XVIII.  IO-2I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

10  Se  56,  tbat  5c  tUspisc  nat  0011  of 
these  litile.  Trewly  I  seie  to  5011,  that 
the  anjxelis  of  licni  in  heuenes  seen  euei-- 
morc  the  face  of  my  fatlir  that  is  in 
heuenes. 

1 1  Forsothc  mannys  sonc  cainc  for  to 
sauc  tliat  thing  that  perishide. 

12  What  semeth  to  50U  ?  5'f  ther 
wercn  to  summan  an  hundrid  sheep, 
and  oon  of  hem  shall  erre,  wher  he  shal 
nat  leeue  nynty  and  nyne  in  desert, 
and  shal  go  for  to  seeke  that  that 
crride  1 

13  And  if  it  befixUe  that  he  fyndc  it, 
tvcwly  I  seie  to  5011,  for  he  shal  ioye 
theron  more  than  of  nynty  and  nyue 
that  erriden  nat. 

14  So  it  is  nat  will  before  youre  fadir 
that  is  iu  heuenes,  that  oon  of  these  litil 
perishe. 

15  Forsoth  5if  thi  brotlier  shal  synne 
in  thee,  go  thou,  and  reproue  hym,""" 
bitwixe  thee  and  hym  aloone  ;  5if  he 
shal  hecre  thee,  thou  hast  wonnen  thi 
broth  ei". 

16  Trewly  5if  he  shal  nat  heere  thee, 
take  with  thee  oon  or  two,  that  euery 
word  stonde  in  the  mouthe  of  two  or 
three  witnessis. 

17  That  jif  he  shal  nat  heere  hem, 
seie  tliou  to  the  chirche.  Forsothe  3if 
he  shal  not  heere  the  chirche,  be  hee  to 
thee  as  an  hethen  and  a  puplicane. 

18  I  seie  to  50U  trewli,  what  euere 
thingis  5ee  shulen  bynde  vpon  erthe, 
tho  shulen  be  bounden  and  in  heuenes ; 
and  what  euere  thingis  jee  shulen  vn- 
bynde  ^'pon  erthe,  tho  shulen  be  vn- 
boundcn  and  in  heuenes. 

19  Eftsoone  I  seie  to  50U,  that  jif  two 
of  ;ou  shulen  consente  on  the  erthe,  of 
euery  thinge  whatcuer  thci  shulen  axe, 
it  shal  be  don  to  hem  of  my  fadir  that 
is  in  heuenes. 

20  For  where  two  or  three  shulen  be 
gedi-id  in  my  name,  ther  I  am  in  the 
midil  of  hem. 

21  Thanne  Petre,  cummynge  nij  to 
hym,  seide,  Lord,  hou  ofte  shal  my 
Ijrother  synne  in  me,  and  I  shal  for3eue 
hym  1     Whether  to  seuen  tymes? 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


93 


10  Se,  that  ye  despise  not  won  of  tlicse 
litcU  wons.  For  I  sayc  vnto  you,  thatt 
in  hevcn  their  angels  behold  the  face  of 
my  fader  which  ys  in  hcven. 

1 1  Ye  and  the  soune  of  man  is  come 
to  save  that  which  is  lost. 

1 2  How  thynke  ye  1  Yf  a  man  had  an 
houdrcil  shepe,  and  one  of  them  shuld 
goo  astray,  will  he  not  leve  nynty  and 
nyne  in  the  mountains,  and  go  and  sckc 
that  won  which  is  gone  astray  1 

13  If  it  happen  that  he  fynd  him, 
veryly  I  say  vnto  you,  he  rcioyseth 
more  of  that  shepe  then  of  the  nynty 
and  nyne  which  went  not  astray. 

14  Even  so  hit  is  nott  the  wyll  of  youre 
father  in  hcucn,  that  won  off  this  lytell 
wons  shulde  perishe. 

15  Moreover  yf  thy  brother  trespas 
ayenst  the,  go,  and  tell  hym  his  faute, 
betwene  hym  and  the  alone  ;  yf  he 
heare  the,  thou  hast  wone  thy  brother. 

1 6  But  yf  he  heare  the  not,  then  take 
with  the  won  or  two,  that  in  the  mouth 
of  two  or  thre  witnesses  all  sainges  maye 
stonde. 

1 7  Yf  he  heare  not  them,  tell  hit  vnto 
the  congregacion.  Yf  he  heare  not  the 
congregacion,  take  him  as  an  hethen 
man  and  as  a  publican. 

18  Verely  I  say  vnto  you,  whatsoever 
ye  bynde  on  erth,  shalbe  bounde  in 
heven ;  and  whatsoever  ye  lose  on  erth, 
shalbe  losed  in  heven. 


1 9  Agayn  I  say  vnto  you,  that  if  two 
off  you  shall  agre  in  erth,  in  eny  maner 
thinge  whatsoever  they  shall  dcsyre,  hit 
shalbe  geven  them  of  my  fader  which  is 
in  hevcn. 

20  For  where  two  or  thre  are  gadered 
togeddcr  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the 
myddcs  off  them. 

2  1  Then  cam  Pctcl  to  hym,  and 
sayde,  Master,  howe  ofte  shall  my  brother 
trespas  ageynst  me,  and  I  shall  foryevc 
hym  1  Shall  I  forgcvc  hyni  seven  tymesi 


94 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

22  Da  cwre)?  se  Hselend,  Ne  secge  ic 
fJe,  od  scofon  sidas ;  ac  od  seofon  liund 
seofontigon  sidon.''' 

23  F  ordain  ys  heofena  rice  anlic  dam 
cyninge,  de  hys  Jseowas  geradegode. 

24  And  da  lie  dtet  gerad  sette,  Lini 
wses  an  brolit,  se  him  sceolde  tyn  juisend 
punda. 

25  And  da  he  ntefde  hwanon  he  liyt 
agulde,  hyne  het  hys  hklford  gesylLan, 
and  hys  wif,  and  hys  cikl,  and  eall  dset 
he  ahte 

26  Da  astrchte  se  ))eow  hyne,  and  cwte);, 
Hlaford,  geliafa  ge}>yld  on  me,  and  ic 
hyt  de  eall  agylde. 

27  Da  gemiltsode  se  hlaford  him,  and 
forgeaf  him  done  gylt. 

28  Da  se  Jjeowa  iit-eode,  he  gemette 
hys  efen-Jjeowan,  se  him  sceolde  an  hund 
penega ;  and  he  nam  hyne  da,  and  for- 
jjrysmede  hyne,  and  cwsejj,  Agyf  dajt  du 
me  scealt. 

29  And  da  astrehte  hys  efen-};eowa 
hyne  and  bsed  hyne,  and  dus  cwseji, 
Gejjyldega,  and  ic  hyt  de  eall  iigyfe. 

30  He  da  nolde ;  ac  ferde,  and  wearp 
hyne  on  cweartern,  od  dtet  he  him  eall 
agefe. 

31  Da  gesawon  hj^s  efen-)jeowas  (Xset, 
da  wurdon  hig  swyde  ge-unrotsode. 
And  comon,  and  ssedon  hyra  hlaforde 
ealle  da  dsede. 


32  Da  clypode  hys  hlaford  hyne,  and 
cwse})  to  him,  Eala  du  ly}n-a  ))eowa, 
eallne  dinne  gylt  ic  de  forgeaf,  fordam 
de  du  me  bsede. 

33  Hu  ne  gehyrede  de  gemiltsian 
dinum  efen-Jjeowan,  swa  swa  ic  de 
gemiltsode  1 

34  Da  wses  se  hlaford  yrre,  and  sealde 
hyne  dam  -s^atuerum,  od  da^t  he  eall 
agulde. 

35  Swa  de)>  min  se  heofonlica  feeder, 
gyf  ge  of  eoAvrum  heortum  eowrum 
brodrum  ne  forgyfa|». 


XVIII.  22-35.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

22  JIicsus  scith  to  hym,  T  scie  nat  to 
thee,  til  seuen  sithis ;  but  to  seueuty 
S3-tlii.s  seucne  sitliis. 

23  Thcrfore  the  kingdom  of  hcucnes 
is  lickcned  to  a  man  kyiijjj,  that  wolde 
putte  resouu  with  his  scniauntis. 

24  And  whaunc  he  began  for  to  putte 
rosoun,  con  was  oftVid  to  hyni,  that 
ow5te  to  hyni  ten  thousand  talentis. 

25  Trew]y  wlianne  he  hadde  nat  whcr- 
of  to  5elde,  liis  lord  comaundide  hyni  to 
be  sold,  and  his  wif,  and  sonys,  and  alle 
thingis  that  he  hadde,  and  to  be  payed. 

26  Foi-sothe  the  ilk  seruaunt,  fallynge 
doun,  preide  hym,  seyiuge,  Haue  pa- 
cience  in  me,  and  alle  thingis  I  shal 
5eelde  to  thee. 

27  Sothely  the  lord  of  that  seruaunt 
hauynge  mercy,  leete  hym,^  and  for5aue 
to  hym  the  dette. 

28  Trcwly  thilk  seruaunt  gon  out, 
fonde  oon  of  his  euen  seruauntis,  that 
0U5te  hym  an  hundrid  pens  ;  and  he, 
holdynge  hym,  stranglide  hym,  seyinge, 
3eld  that  thou  owist. 

29  And  his  euen  seruaunt  preiede  hym, 
se}-inge,  Haue  pacience  in  me,  and  alle 
thingis  I  shal  quyte  to  thee. 

30  Forsothe  he  wolde  nat ;  but  wente, 
and  sent  hym  in  to  pryson,  til  that  he 
paide  al  the  dette. 

3  J  Sothely  his  euen  seruauntis,  seejnige 
the  thingis  that  wei-en  don,  gretely 
baddcn  sorowe.  And  thei  camcn,  and 
tolden  to  her  lord  alle  the  thingis  that 
weren  don. 

32  Thanne  his  lord  clepide  hym,  and 
seide  to  hym,  Wepvard  seruaunt,  I 
for5af  to  thee  al  the  dette,  for  thou 
preidist  me. 

33  Thei'fore  wher  it  behouede  nat 
and  thee  to  haue  mercy  on  thi  euen 
seruaunt,  as  I  hadde  mercy  of  thee  1 

34  And  his  lord  wroth,  tok  hym  to 
tourmciiturs,  til  that  he  paiede  al  the 
dette. 

35  So  and  my  fadir  of  heuen  shal  do 
to  50U,  jif  5e  for5eue  nat  euery  man  to 
liis  brother,  of  joure  hertis. 


TYND  ALE,  1,326. 


95 


22  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  I  saye  nott 
vnto  the,  seven  tymes ;  but  seventy 
tymes  seven  tymcs. 

23  Therefore  is  the  kyngdom  off  heven 
lykcned  vnto  a  certayne  kynge,  which 
wolde  take  a  countos  of  his  servauntes. 

24  And  when  he  had  ])egune  to  recken, 
won  was  browghte  vnto  hym,  whiche 
ought  hym  ten  thousande  talenttes. 

25  But  when  he  had  nought  to  paye, 
the  lord  commaundcd  him  to  be  sohle, 
and  his  wyfe,  and  his  children,  and  all 
that  he  had,  and  payment  to  be  made. 

26  The  scrvaunt  fell  doune,  and  be- 
sought hym,  sainge,  Syr,  yeve  me  re- 
spytCj  and  I  vyll  paye  bit  every  whit. 

27  Then  had  the  lorde  pitie  on  the 
servaunt,  and  lowsed  hym,  and  forgave 
hym  the  dett. 

2S  The  same  servaunt  went  out,  and 
founde  wone  off  his  felowes,  which  ought 
hym  an  hundred  pence ;  and  leyed 
hondes  on  hym,  and  tokc  hym  by  the 
tliroote,  sainge,  Paye  that  thou  owest. 

29  And  his  felowe  fell  doune  and 
besought  hym,  sayuge,  Have  pacience 
with  me,  and  I  wyll  paye  the  all. 

30  And  he  woUde  not ;  but  went,  and 
cast  hym  into  prcson,  tyll  he  shulde 
paye  the  dett. 

31  When  his  other  felowes  sawe  what 
was  done,  they  were  very  sory.  And 
cam,  and  tolde  vnto  there  lorde  all  that 
had  happened. 

32  Then  the  lorde  called  him,  and 
sayde  vnto  hym,  O  cvyll  servaunt,  Y 
forgave  the  all  that  dett,  because  thou 
praydest  me. 

33  Was  it  not  mete  also  that  thou 
shuldest  have  had  compassion  on  thy 
folow,  even  as  Y  had  pitie  on  the? 

34  And  his  lorde  was  wrooth,  and 
delyvered  hym  to  the  ioylers,  tyll  he 
shulde  paye  all  that  was  due  to  hym. 

35  So  lyke  wysc  shall  youre  hevenly 
liithcr  do  vnto  you,  yf  ye  wyll  not  forgeve 
with  youre  hcrttcs,  cache  won  to  his 
brother  there  treaspases. 


£6 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Chap.  XIX.  i  And  da  se  Heel  end 
ge-endode  das  sprseca,  he  ferde  fram 
Galilea,  and  com  on  ludeisce  endas 
begeondan  lordanen. 

2  And  liym  fyligdon  mycele  ma?negu, 
and  be  big  gebeelde  dser. 

3  Da  genealeebton  bim  to  Farisa^i,  byne 
costnigende,  and  cwsedon,  Is  alyfed  een- 
egum  menn  bys  wif  to  forleetenne,  for 
senegum  })inge  1 

4  Da  andswarode  be  bim,  ISTe  rccdde 
ge,  se  de  on  fruman  worbte,  be  Avorbte 
Wtiep-mann  and  wif-mann  1 

5  And  cwfejj,  Fordam  se  mann  forlaett 
feeder  and  modor,  and  byne  to  bys 
wife  gejjeot;  and  beo})  twegen  on  anum 
flcESce. 

6  Witodiice  ne  synt  big  twegen,  ac  an 
flgesc.  Ne  getwseme  nan  mann  da  de 
God  gesomnode. 

7  Da  cwgedon  big,  Hm  bet  Moyses, 
syllan  hiw-gedales  boc,  and  big  for- 
Iseton  ? 

8  Da  cwfejj  be,  Moyses,  for  cower  be- 
ortan  beardnesse,  lyfcle  cow  cower  Avif  to 
forlEetenne  3  s6j)lice  nees  byt  on  frymj^e 
swa. 

9  Sojjlice  ic  seege  cow,  swa  bwa  swa 
forlsett  bys  wif,  buton  for  forligere,  and 
oder  feta|>,  se  unrybt-bEvmj)  :  and  se  de 
forlsetene  sefter  bim  nym];,  se  unribt- 
hcemjj. 

10  Da  cwEedon  bys  leoi'ning-cnibtas, 
Gyf  byt  swa  ys  dam  menn  mid  bys  wife, 
ne  fremajj  nanum  menn  to  Avifienne. 

1 1  Da  cwsej)  be,  Ne  underfo]?  ealle 
menn  dis  word ;  ac  dam  de  byt  geseald 

12  S6))Iice  synd  bebstnode,  de  of  byra 
m5dor  innodum  cuma]? ;  and  eft  synd 
belistnode,  [da  men  de  man  bebstna]?, 
and  cff*"  synd  bebstnode,]  de  big  sylfe 
bebstnodon,  for  bcofcna  rice.  IJnder- 
nyme  se,  de  undernymau  msege. 

13  Da  waeron  bim  gebrobte  lytlingas 
to,  dset  be  bys  band  on  big  asette,  and 


XIX.  1-1,-5.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

CuAP.  XIX.  I  Ami  it  is  don,  whennc 
Jhcsus  hiulile  oeiuliilc  these  wordis,  he 
passidc  fro  Galilee,  and  came  in  to  the 
eendis  of  Judee  oucr  Jordan. 

2  And  nianye  cumpauyos  of  men  sucdon 
hyni,  and  lie  hclidc  horn  there. 

3  And  Pharisees  camen  ni3  to  hyni, 
temjitynge  hyni,  and  seyinge,  AVher  it 
be  leeful  for  a  man  for  to  leeue^  his 
Avijf,  of  what  eiier  eause? 

4  The  whiehc  answerynge  seith  to 
hem,  Han  nat  5CC  rad,  for  he  that  made 
men  at  the  bygynnynge,  male  and  female 
he  made  hem  ? 

5  And  he  seide,  For  this  thing  a  man 
shal  Icene  fadir  and  modir,  and  he  shal 
clene^  to  his  wif ;  and  thei  shulen  be 
two  in  00  flesh. 

6  And  so  thei  ben  nat  now  two,  bot 
oo  flesh.  Therfore  a  man  departe  nat 
that  thing  that  God  enioynyde.''" 

7  Thei  seycn  to  hym,  What  thanne 
comaundide  !Moyses,  to  5eue  a  litil  boke 
of  forsakynge,  and  to  leeue  off? 

8  And  he  seith  to  hem,  For  Moyses, 
at  the  hardnesse  of  5oure  herte,  snffride 
50U  forsake  50ure  Avyues  ;  forsothe  at 
the  begynnyng  it  was  nat  so. 

9  Trcwly  I  seie  to  50U,  that  who  euer 
lecueth  his  wif,  no  but  for  fornicacioun, 
and  wcddith  an  other,  doth  a  vowtrie ; 
and  he  that  weddith  the  forsaken  wife, 
doth  avowtrie. 

10  His  disciplis  seien  to  hym,  5if  the 
cause  of  a  man  with  a  wijf  is  so,  it 
speedith  nat  to  wedde. 

1 1  The  whiche  seith  to  hem,  Nat  alle 
men  taken  this  word  ;  but  to  which  it 
is  50uen. 

12  Sothely  there  ben  geldyngis,  the 
whiche  ben  thus  born  of  the  modris 
woml)e  ;  and  there  ben  geldyngis,  that 
ben  maad  of  men,  and  there  ben  geld- 
yngis, that  ban  geldid  hem  self,  for  the 
kyngdam  of  heuenes.  He  that  may 
take,  take  he. 

13  Thanne  litil  children  wercn  offrid 
\]}  to  hym,  that  he  shuldc  puttc  liondis 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


07 


Chap.  XIX.  i  And  it  folowed,  when 
Jesus  had  f^-nysslied  those  sayinges,  he 
gat  hym  from  Gallic,  and  cam  in  to  tlie 
coostes  oft"  lewry  bcj'ondc  Jordan. 

2  And  mochc  i)e()ple  folowed  hym,  and 
he  healed  them  theare. 

3  Then  cam  vnto  hym  the  Pharises,  to 
tempte  hym,  and  sayde  to  hym,  Ys  hit 
lawfuU  for  a  man  to  put  a  wayc  his 
wyfe,  for  all  maimer  off  causes  ? 

4  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Have  ye  not  redde,  howe  that  he  which 
made  man  at  the  begynnynge,  made 
them  man  and  woman  ] 

5  And  saide.  For  thys  thinge  shall  a 
man  leve  father  and  mother,  and  cleve 
vnto  his  wyfe ;  and  they  twane  shall)0 
won  flcsse. 

6  AVherfore  no  we  are  they  not  twayne, 
but  won  fleshe.  Let  not  man  therefore 
put  asunder  that  which  God  hath  cujj- 
pled  to  gedder. 

7  Then  sayde  they  to  hym,  Why  did 
Closes  commaunde,  to  geve  vnto  her  a 
testimoniall  of  divorsement,  and  to  put 
her  a  waye  1 

8  He  saide  vnto  them,  Moses,  because 
of  the  hardnes  of  youre  hertes,  suffi'ed 
you  to  put  awaye  youre  wyfes ;  but 
from  the  begynnynge  hit  was  nott  so. 

9  I  saye  therefore  vnto  you,  whosoever 
putteth  awaye  his  wyfe,  except  hit  be 
for  fornicacion,  and  marycth  another, 
breaked  wedlocke  ;  and  whosoever  mari- 
eth  her  which  is  divorsed,  doetli  commyt 
advoutry. 

10  Then  spake  his  disciples  to  hym, 
YfF  the  matter  be  so  betwene  man  and 
wyfe,  then  is  it  not  good  to  mary. 

1 1  He  sayde  vnto  them.  All  men  can 
not  awaye  with  that  saynge ;  but  they 
to  whom  it  is  gevcn. 

12  There  are  chaste,  which  were  so 
borne  out  of  the  mothers  belly  ;  and 
there  are  chaste,  which  be  made  of  men, 
and  there  be  chaste,  which  have  made 
them  selves  chaste,  for  the  kyngdom  off 
hevens  sake.  He  that  can  take  it,  lett 
hym  take  it. 

13  Then  were  brought  to  hym  yongo 
chyldren,  that  he  shulde  put  his  houdes 


98 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

hig  gebletsode.     Da  Jjreadon  liys  leorn- 
ing-cnibtas  hig. 

14  Da.  cwoej?  se  Hselend,  Lseta])  cla 
lytlingas,  and  nelle  ge  hig  forbeodan 
cuman  to  me  ;  swylcra  ys  heofena  vice. 

15  And  da  hehimhys  handa  on-asette, 
da  ferde  he  danon. 

16  And  da  genealsebte  him  an  man  to, 
and  cwseji.  La  g5da  lareow,  hwa^t  g5de3 
do  ic,  dfet  ic  ece  lif  haibbe  1 

17  Da  cwpe])  he,  Hwast  axast  du  me  be 
gode  1  A'n  God  ys  god.  S6|?lice  gyf  dii 
\ry\t  on  lif  becuman,  heald  da  beboda. 


18  Da  c^yse]>  he,  Hwylce  1  Da  cwre)?  se 
Hfelend,  Ne  do  dii  manu-slyht,  ne  do 
du  unryht-bEemed,  ne  stel  du,  ne  sege 
du  lease  gewittnysse ; 

19  Wurjja  dinne  fa?der  and  modor,  and 
lufa  dinne  nehstan  swii  de  sylfne. 

20  Da  cwsejj  se  geonga,  Eall  dis  ic 
geheold,  hwa;t  ys  me  gyt  wana  1 

21  Da  cwa3]j  se  H^elend,  Gyf  du  wylt 
beon  fullfremed,  ga,  and  becvp  eall  da?t 
du  ahst,  and  syle  hyt  jjearfum,  antl 
doune  hasfst  du  gold-hord  on  heofone ; 
and  cum,  and  folga  me. 

22  Da  se  geonga  mann  gehyrde  dis 
word,  dii  code  he  aweg  uni-5t,  s6})lice  he 
hsefde  mycele  sehta. 

23  Witodlice  se  Hcclend  cwse])  to  hys 
leorning-cnihtura,  Soj^lice  ic  eow  secge, 
dset  earfo|)lice  se  welega  gse])  on  Godes 
rice. 

24  And  eft  ic  eow  secge,  dret  eadelicre 
by}>  dam  olfende  to  gaune  ))urh  needle 
eage,  donne  se  welega  on  heofona  rice 
ga.        ^ 

25  Da  hys  Icorning-cnihtas  dis  gehvfd- 
on,  hig  wundrodun,  and  cwsedon,  Hwa 
mseg  dis  gchealdan  ] 

26  Da  cwa?])  se  Heelcnd,  L^neadelic  da^t 
ys  mid  mannum ;  ac  ealle  ymg  synt  mid 
Gode  eadelice.''" 


XIX.  14-26.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

to  hem,  and  preie.     Sotbely  his  disciplis 
bhimeden  hem. 

1 4  But  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Siiffre  50 
litil  chiKh'c  Clime  to  me,  and  nyl  50  for- 
bede  hem  for  to  come  to  me ;  for  of 
siche  is  the  kynj;-dam  of  heuenes. 

15  And  whenne  lie  hadde  puttc  to  hem 
houdis,  he  wente  tliennus. 

1 6  And  loo  !  oon,  cummyngc  to,  seith 
to  hym,  Good  maistcr,  what  of  good 
thing  shal  I  do,  that  I  haue  euerlastynge 

lyf? 

1 7  The  which  seith  to  hym,  What  axist 
thou  me  of  good  thing  1  Tliere  is  00 
good  God.  For  5if  thou  wolt  eutre  in 
to  lif,  kepe  the  comaundemeutis. 

18  He  seith  to  lij-m,  "Whiche  ?  Trewly 
Jliesus  seide,  Thou  shalt  nat  do  man 
slea}-nge,  thou  shalt  nat  do  avowtrie, 
thou  shalt  nat  do  thefte,  thou  shalt  nat 
scye  fals  wituessinge ; 

19  Worshipe  thi  fadir  and  thi  modir, 
and  thou  shalt  looue  thi  nei5bore  as  thi 
self. 

20  The  5ung  man  seith  to  hym,  I  haue 
kepte  alle  these  thiugis  fro  my  5outhe, 
what  5it  failith  to  me  1 

■21  Jhesus  seith  to  hym,  3if  thou  wolt 
be  pcrfit,  go,  and  selle  alle  thingus  that 
thou  liast,  and  5eue  to  pore  men,  and 
thou  shalt  haue  tresour  in  heuene  ;  and 
cum,  sue  thou  me. 

22  Forsothc  whenne  the  5ung  man 
hadde  herde  these  wordis,  he  wente  awey 
sorwful,  for  he  was  hauynge  many  pos- 
sessiouns, 

23  Forsothe  Jhesus  seide  to  his  dis- 
ciplis, 1  seie  to  50U  trcwthe,  for  a  riche 
man  of  hard  shal  entre  in  to  the  kyng- 
dam  of  heuenes. 

24  And  eftsone  I  seie  to  50U,  it  is 
li3ter'''  a  camel  for  to  passe  thorw3  a 
nedelis  ei3e,  than  a  riclie  man  to  entre 
into  the  kyngdam  of  heuenes. 

25  Trculy  these  wordis  herd,  the  dis- 
ciplis wondridcu  gretely,  seyinge,  "Who 
theifore  may  be  saaf  ? 

26  Forsothe  Jhesus  behoklynge  seide 
to  hem,  Anentis  men  this  thing  is  im- 
possible ;  but  anentis  God  alio  thiugis 
ben  possible. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


00 


on  them,  and  praye.     And  his  disciples 
rebuked  them. 

14  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Suflfre  the 
chyldren,  and  forbid  them  not  to  come 
to  me ;  ffbr  vnto  suche  belongeth  the 
kiugdome  off  hevcn. 

15  And  when  he  had  put  his  hondcs 
on  them,  he  departed  thence. 

16  And  bcholdo!  Avon  cam,  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Good  master,  what  good 
thinge  shall  I  do,  that  1  maye  have 
eternal  lyfe? 

17  He  sayde  vnto  him,  Why  callcst 
thou  me  good  1  There  is  none  good  but 
won,  and  that  is  God.  But  and  thou  wilt 
entre  in  to  lyfe,  kepe  the  commaund- 
mentes. 

1 8  He  sayde.  Which  1  And  Jesus  sayde, 
Thou  shalt  not  kyll,  thou  shalt  not  breake 
wedloocke,  thou  shalt  not  steale,  thou 
shalt  nott  beare  fulce  witucs ; 

1 9  Honoure  thy  father  and  mother,  and 
thou  shalt  love  thyne  neghbour  as  thy 
sylfe. 

20  The  yonge  man  sayde  vnto  him,  I 
have  observed  all  these  thinges  from  my 
youth,  what  have  Y  more  to  do  1 

2 1  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him,  Y"f  thou  ^vj^It 
be  perfecte,  goo,  and  sell  that  thou  liast, 
and  geve  it  to  the  povre,  and  thou  shalt 
have  treasure  in  heveu ;  and  come,  and 
folowe  me. 

22  When  the  yonge  man  herde  that 
sayinge,  he  went  a  waye  morninge,  for 
he  had  greate  possessions. 

23  Jesus  sayde  then  vnto  his  disciples, 
Vercly  I  save  vnto  you,  a  ryche  man 
shall  with  difiiculte  enter  into  the  kyng- 
dome  of  hevcn. 

24  And  moreover  I  sayc  vnto  you,  it 
is  easier  for  a  camell  to  go  through  the 
eye  of  a  nedle,  then  for  a  rj'che  man  to 
enter  into  the  kingdomc  of  heven. 

25  When  his  disciples  herde  that,  they 
were  excedingly  amased,  sayinge,  Who 
then  can  be  saved  1 

26  Jesus  behelde  them  and  saide  vnto 
them.  With  men  this  is  vn])ossyble  ;  but 
with  God  all  thinges  are  possyble. 

H  2 


100 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

27  Da  andswarocle  Petrus  and  cwpej), 
Nu !  we  forleton  ealle  \>mg,  and  folgod- 
on  de  ;  hwset  byj>  us  to  mede  ? 

28  Da  cwsej)  se  Heelend,  So);  ic  eow 
secge,  ctset  ge  de  me  folgodon,  on  edcen- 
ninge  donne  mannes  suuii  sitt  on  hys 
mfegen-|)rymme,  dfet  ge  sittaf)  ofer  twelf 
setl,  demende  twelf  inseg]>si  Israhel. 


29  And  sele  de  forlcet,  for  minum  naman, 
hys  hus,  odde  liys  gebrodru,  odde  swus- 
tra.  odde  feeder,  odde  modor,  odde  wif, 
odde  beam,  odde  land,  be  hund-fealdon 
he  onfeh))  lean,  and  haefj)  ece  lif. 

30  S5|)lice  manega  fyrmeste  beo)?  ytem- 
este,  and  ytemeste  fyrmeste. 


Chap.  XX.'''  i  S6)ilice  heofona  rice  ys 
gelic  dam  hiredes  ealdre,  de  on  serne 
mergen  ilt-eode,  ahyrian  wyrhtau  ou 
hys  win-geard. 

2  Gewordenre  gecwydrsedene  dam 
wyrhtum,  he  sealde  gelcon  senne  penig 
Avid  hys  dseges  weorce,  he  asende  hig  on 
hys  win-geard. 

3  And  da  he  ut-eode  embe  undern-tide, 
he  geseah  odre  on  strsete  idele  standan. 

4  Da  cw0ej>  he,  Ga  ge  on  muine  win- 
geai'd,  and  ic  sylle  eow  dset  riht  by|>. 
And  hig  da  ferdon. 

5  Eft  he  ut-eode  embe  da  sixtan,  and 
nigojjan  tide,  and  dyde  dam  swa  gelice. 

6  Da  embe  da  endlyftan  tide  he  ut- 
eode,  and  fiinde  odre  standende  ;  and  da 
saede  he,  Hwi  stande  ge  her  ealne  deeg 
idele  ? 

7  Da  cwsedon  hig,  Fordam  de  us  nan 
man  ne  hyrode.  Da  cwse})  he,  And  ga 
ire  on  minue  win-o-eard. 


8  Sc'jjlice  da  hyt  waes  sefen  geworden, 
da.  saede  se  win-geardes  hiaford  hys  ge- 
refan,  Clypa  da  wyrhtan,  and  agyf  hym 


XIX.  27.-XX.  8.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

27  Thanne  Petre  answerynge  seiile  to 
hym,  Loo  !  we  ban  forsaken  allc  thingis, 
aiul  we  ban  sued  thee ;  what  theiforc 
shal  be  to  us  1 

28  Jbcsus  forsotbe  seide  to  bcni,  Trewly 
Y  seye  to  50U,  tliat  5c  that  bau  forsaken 
alio  tbingis,  and  sued  me,  in  roncnera- 
ciouu^  wbenne  mannes  sone  sball  sitte 
in  tbe  scte  of  bis  mageste,  and  ;c  sbulen 
sitt  on  twebie  sctis,^  demyngc  tbe  twelue 
kynredis  of  Yracl. 

29  And  euery  man  that  sbal  forsake 
bous,  or  bretberen,  or  sistren,  or  fodir, 
or  modir,  or  Avif,  or  sonys,  or  feeblis, 
for  my  name,  be  sbal  take  an  bundrid 
fokl,  and  sbal  wclde  euere  lastynge  lyf. 

30  Forsotbe  many  sbulen  be,  tbe  firste 
tbe  laste,  and  tbe  laste  tbe  fii'ste. 


TYNDALE,  1526, 


101 


Chap.  XX.  i  Tbe  kyngdam  of  be- 
uenes  is  lie  to  an  busbond  man,  tbat 
wcnte  out  first  erly,'''  to  byre  workemen 
in  to  bis  vyne  5erd. 

2  Forsotbe  tbe  couenaunt  maad  witb 
workmen,  of  a  peny  for  tbe  day,  be 
seute  bem  in  to  bis  ryne  jerd. 

3  And  be,  gon  out  about  tbe  tbridde 
bour,  say  other  stondynge  ydil  in  tbe 
cbcpyng. 

4  And  be  seide  to  hem,  Go  and  5ee  in 
to  my  vyne  jerd,  and  that  tbat  shal  be 
ri5tful,  I  shal  3eue  to  30U.  Sotbeli  thei 
wenten  forth. 

5  Forsotbe  eftsoone  be  wente  out  aboute 
tbe  sixte  bour,  and  the  nynethe,  and 
dide  on  licbe  manere. 

6  But  aboute  tbe  eJleuentbe  boure  be 
wente  out,  and  foond  other  stondynge ; 
and  be  seide  to  bem,  "What  stonden  50 
her  ydil  al  day  ] 

7  Thei  seien  to  hym.  For  no  man  bath 
hirid  us.  He  seith  to  hem.  Go  and  50  in 
to  my  vyne  5erd. 


8  Forsotbe  wbenne  euenynge  was  maad, 
the  lord  of  the  vyne  jerd  seith  to  his 
procuratour,  Clepe  tbe   workmen,  and 


27  Then  answered  Peter  and  saidc  to 
him,  r>eholde !  we  have  forsaken  all, 
and  have  folowed  tbe ;  what  shall  we 
have  ther  fore  ? 

28  Jesus  saydc  vnto  them,  Verely  I 
saye  to  you,  thatt  ye  which  have  folowed 
me,  in  the  scconde  gencracion  when  the 
Sonne  off  man  sbal  syt  in  tbe  seate  of 
bis  maiestc,  sball  syt  also  vppon  xij 
seatcs,  and  iudge  the  xij  ti"ybes  off 
Israbel. 

29  And  whosoever  forsaketh  housse, 
or  brethren,  or  systcrs,  other  father,  or 
mother,  or  wyfe,  or  children,  or  lyvelod. 
for  my  names  sake,  tbe  same  sball  re- 
ceave  an  hundred  folde,  and  shall  inheret 
everlastynge  lyfe. 

30  i\Iany  tbat  are  fyrste  shalbe  laste, 
and  tbe  laste  shalbe  ftyrste. 


Chap.  XX.     i  For  tbe  kyngdom  off 

beven  ys  lyke  vnto  an  boussbolder,  which 
went  out  erly  in  the  morninge,  to  byre 
labourers  into  bys  \ynyarde. 

2  And  be  agreede  with  tbe  labourers, 
for  a  peny  a  daye,.  and  sent  them  into 
bis  vyuyarde. 

3  And  be  went  out  about  the  thyrde 
boure,  and  saAve  other  stondyng  ydell  in 
the  market  place. 

4  And  sayd  vnto  them.  Go  ye  also  into 
my  vynyarde,  and  whatsoever  is  right,  I 
will  geve  you.  And  they  went  there 
way. 

5  Agayne  be  went  out  about  tbe  syxte, 
and  uynthe  boure,  and  dyd  lyke  wyse. 

6  And  be  went  out  aboute  tbe  eleventhe 
boure,  and  founde  other  stondynge  ydell ; 
and  sayde  vnto  them,  Why  stonde  ye 
here  all  tbe  daye  ydell  ? 

7  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Because  no 
man  bath  byred  vs.  He  sayde  to  them, 
Goo  ye  alsoo  into  my  vynyarde,  and 
whatsoever  shalbe  rijjht,  tbat  shall  ye 
rcceave. 

8  When  even  was  come,  tbe  lorde  of 
the  vyneyarde  sayde  vnto  bys  steward, 
Call  the  labourers,  and  geve  them  their 


102  GOTHIC,  360, 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

heora  mede,  Jigynn  fram  dam  ytemestan, 
od  done  fyrmestan. 

9  Eornostlice  da  de'*'  gecomon,  de  embe 
da  endlyftan  tide  comon,  da  onfengon 
big  Eelc  bis  pening. 

10  And  dji  de  deer  merest  comon  wend- 
on,  doet  big  sceoldon  mare  onfon,  da 
onfengon  big  syndi'ige  penegas. 

11  Da  ongunnon  big  murcnian  ongen 
done  biredes  ealdor, 

T2  And  dus  cwsedon,  Das  j'-teraestan 
"worbton  ane  tide,  and  dil  dydest  big 
gelice  us,  de  bseron  byrdena  on  dises 
da?ges  baetan. 

13  Da  cw£e|)  be,  andswarigende  b}Ta 
anum,  Eab'i  du  freond,  ne  do  ic  de 
neenne  teonan ;  bu  ne  come  du  to  me 
to  wyrceanne  wid  anum  peninge  1 

14  Nim  dset  din  ys,  and  gu ;  ic  "s^ylle 
dysum  ytemestum  syllan,  eal  swa  mycel 
swa  de. 

15  Odde  ne  mot  ic  don  dfet  ic  wylle? 
Hwfeder  de  din  cage  manful  ys,  fordam 
de  ic  god  com  ? 

16  Swa  beo})  da  fyrmestan  ytemeste, 
and  da  ytemestan  fyrmeste  ;  s6]?lice  man- 
ega  synt  geclyj^ede,  and  feawa  gecorene.'*' 

17  Da  ferde  se  Htelcnd  to  Hierusalem, 
and  nam  bj'S  leorning-cuibtas  onsundron, 
and  dus  cwje}>. 

18  Nil!  we  fara])  to  Hievusalcm,  and 
mannes  suuu  byj>  geseald  dsera  sacerda 
ealdrum,  and  bocerum  3  and  big  genyd- 
eriajj  byne  to  deajje, 

19  peodum  to  bysmrigenne,  and  to 
swingenne,  and  to  abonne ;  and  dam 
firyddan  dsege  be  Tirist. 

20  Da  com  to  bim  Zebedeis  bearna 
modor  mid  byre  bearuum,  big  ge-ead- 
medende,  and  sum  )nng  fram  bim  bid- 
dende. 

21  Da  cwpej'  be,  Hwset  wylt  cluP  Da 
CAva^Jj  beo,  Sege  dset  das  mine  twegen 
suna  sittan,  au  on  dine  swidran  bealfe, 
and  an  on  dine  wynstrau,  on  dinum 
rice. 

22  Dti  andswarode  bim  se  Haelend, 
Gyt  nyton  bwa?t  gyt  bidda]>.     Mage  gyt 


XX.  9-22.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

;cl(lo  to  liom  lior  liijro,  bygynnyngc  at 
tlie  liistc  til  to  tlic  tirsto. 

9  Thortove  wlicnne  tlici  wcrcn  com- 
iiun,  that  cameu  about  the  cllcucuth 
liour,  and  thei  token  synj^ulor  pens."'" 

10  Trewly  and  the  firste  cunimyngc 
(Icniedon,  that  thei  wcrcn  to  take  more, 
trewly  and  thei  token  echon  by  hyni  silf 
a  peny. 

1 1  And  thei  takyngc  grutchcdcn  a5cins 
the  Imsbond  man, 

12  Seyinge,  These  lastc  didcn  loorche 
oon  our,  and  thou  hast  maad  hem  eucn 
to  vs,  that  hau  boru  the  charge  of  the 
day  and  hete. 

13  And  he  answerynge  to  oon  of  hem, 
seide,  Frend,  I  do  thee  no  wronge ; 
whether  thou  hast  nat  accordid  with  me 
for  a  ]ieny  ? 

14  Take  that  that  is  thine,  and  go  ; 
forsothe  Y  wole  5eue  and  to  this  the 
laste  man,  as  and  to  thee. 

15  Wher  it  is  nat  leful  to  me  for  to  do 
that  that  I  wole  ?  Wher  thin  ei3e  is 
wiekid,  for  I  am  good  % 

16  So  there  shulen  be  the  last  men  the 
firste,  and  the  firste  men  the  lastc  ;  for 
many  ben  clepid,  hot  few  chosun. 

1 7  And  Jhesus,  steyiuge  vp  to  Jerusa- 
lem, toke  his  twelue  disciplis  inpriuytee, 
and  seith  to  hem, 

18  Loo  !  we  gon  vp  to  Jerusalem,  and 
manncs  sone  shal  be  taken  to  princis  of 
prestis,  and  scribis ;  and  thei  shulen 
condempne  hym  by  deth. 

19  And  thei  shulen  bitakc  hym  to 
liethen  men,  for  to  be  scornyd,  and 
scourgid,  and  crucified  ;  and  the  thridde 
day  he  shal  ryse  a5ein. 

20  Thamie  the  modlr  of  the  snnis 
of  Zcbcde  came  ni3  to  hym  with  hire 
sonys,  honourynge,  and  axingc  sume 
thing  of  hym. 

21  The  whiche  seide  to  hii',  "What 
wolt  thou  ]  She  seith  to  hym,  Seie  that 
these  two  my  sonys  sitten,  oon  at  thi 
ri5thalf,  and  oou  at  thi  Icfthalf,  in  thi 
kyngdam. 

22  Forsothe  Jhesus  answerynge  seide, 
5e  wyteu  nat  what  50  axcn.^     Mowcn  56 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


103 


hyre,  begynnyng  at  the  laste  t}  11  thou 
come  to  the  fyrste. 

9  And  they  whiche  Averc  hyred  aboute 
the  clevcnthe  hourc  cam,  and  rcccaved 
every  man  a  pcny. 

10  Then  cam  the  fyrst,  supposyng  that 
they  shulde  reccave  mooare,  ami  they 
like  wyse  receaved  every  man  a  peny. 

1 1  And  when  they  had  receaved  it  they 
grudged  agaynst  the  good  man  of  the 
housse, 

12  Sayng,  These  laste  have  wroght 
but  one  lioure,  and  thou  hast  made  them 
cquall  vnto  vs,  which  have  born  the 
burthen  and  heet  of  the  daye. 

13  He  answered  to  one  of  them,  saynge, 
Frende,  I  do  the  no  wronnge ;  dyddcste 
thou  not  agre  withe  me  for  a  penny  ? 

14  Take  that  which  is  thy  duty,  and 
goo  thy  waye ;  I  will  geve  vnto  this 
last,  as  moche  as  to  the. 

15  Ys  yt  not  lawfull  ffor  me  to  do  as 
me  listeth  with  myne  awne  ?    Ys  thyne  ■ 
eye  evyll,  because  I  am  good  1 

16  Soo  the  laste  shalbc  fyrste,  and  the 
fyrste  slialbe  lastc  ;  for  many  are  called, 
and  feawe  be  chosen. 

17  And  Jesus  ascended  to  Jerusalem, 
and  toke  the  xij  disciples  aparte  in  the 
way,  and  sayde  to  them, 

1 8  Loo !  we  goo  vp  to  Jerusalem, 
and  the  sonne  off  man  shalbe  betrayed 
vnto  the  chef  prestes,  and  vnto  the 
scrybes  ;  and  they  shall  condemne  hym 
to  dceth. 

1 9  And  shall  delivrc  hym  to  the  gen- 
tils,  to  be  mocked,  to  be  scourged,  and 
to  be  crucified ;  and  the  third  day  he 
.shall  ryse  agayne. 

20  Then  cam  to  hym  the  mother  oflf 
Zebedes  children  with  her  sonnes  woi*- 
shippynge  him,  and  dcsyrynge  a  cer- 
tayne  thynge  off  hym. 

2 1  He  sayde  vnto  her,  "What  wylt  thou 
have  ?  She  sayde  vnto  hym,  Graunte 
that  these  my  two  sonnes  maye  sitt,  one 
on  thy  right  hond,  and  the  other  on  thy 
lifte  hondc,  in  thy  kyngdom. 

22  Jesus  answered  and  sayd,  Ye  wot 
not   wliatt   ye   axe.       Are   ye    able   to 


04 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

drincan  done  calic  cle  ic  to  drincenne 
lisebhe  1^ J)a  cwsedon  hig,  Wyt 


23  Da  cw3e]5  he,  Witodlice  gyt  minne 
calic  drinca]) ;  ...  to  sittanne  on  niiue 
SAvydran  healfe  odde  on  -vvynsti-an,  nys 
me  inc  to  syllanne  ;  ac  dam  de  Lyt  fram 
minuni  fseder  gegeanvod  ys. 


24  And  da  da  tyn  leorning-cnihtas 
gebulgon  wid  da  twegen  gebrodru. 

25  Da  clypode  se  Heelend  hi  to  him, 
and  cwse]>,  Wite  ge,  dast  ealdor-menn 
wealdaj)  hyra  Jjcoda,  and  da  de  synt 
yldran,  habba)>  auweald  on  him. 

2  6  ISTe  hj\>  swa  betweox  eow ;  ac  swa 
hwylc  swa  wyle  betweox  eow  beon  yldra, 
sy  he  eower  jjen  ; 

27  And  se  de  wyle  betweox  eow  beon 
fyrmest,  sy  he  eower  \>eoyv. 

28  Swii  mannes  sunu  ne  com  dset  him 
man  ]?enode,  ac  dset  he  jjenode,  and 
sealde  his  sawle  lif  to  alysednesse  for 
manegum.''' 

29'''  And  da  hig  ferdon  fram  Hiericho, 
him  fyligde  mycel  menegu. 

30  And  da  sseton  twegen  blinde  wid 
done  weg,  and  gehyrdon  da;t  se  Ha^lend 
ferde ;  and  da  clypodon  hig  to  him,  and 
cwsedon,  Drihten,  gemiltsa  unc,  Dauides 
sunu. 

31  Da  bead  seo  menegu  him,  dret  hig 
siiwodou ;  da  clypodon  hig  dses  de  ma, 
Drihten,  gemiltsa  unc,  Dauides  sunu. 


32  Da  stod  se  Haelend,  and  cl^'pode 
hig  to  him,  and  cwte]?,  Hwtet  wylle  gyt 
dset  ic  inc  do  ? 

33  Da  cwsedon  hig,  Drihten,  dset  uncre 
eagan  sm  ge-oponede. 

34  Da  gemiltsode  he  him,  and  hyra 
eagan  set-hran ;  and  hig  sona  gesawon, 
and  fyligdon  him. 


Chap.  XXI. ''■  i  And  da  he  genealaehte 
Hierusalem,  and   com   to  Bethfage,  to 


XX.  23.-XXI.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
drjuke  the  cuppe  that  I  am  to  drynkc  1 

Thci  scicn  to  hyni,  Wo  mowon. 

23  He  seith  to  hem,  Forsothc  50  shal 
tliynke  my  cuppe  ;  but  to  sitte  at  the 
ri5tlialf  or  at  lefthalf,  it  is  nut  myn  to 
jeuc  to  50U  ;  but  to  whiche  it  is  made 
redv  of  iiiv  fudir. 


24  And  the  ton  herynge  hadden  indig- 
naciuun  of  the  two  l)retheren. 

25  Sothely  Jhesus  clepide  hem  to  hym, 
and  seith,  5e  witen,  for  princis  of  heithen 
men  ben  lordis  of  hem,  and  thei  that 
ben  more,  hawnten  power  in  to  hem; 

26  It  shal  nat  be  so  among  50U ;  bot 
who  euere  wole  be  maad  more  among 
50U,  be  he  50ure  mynystre  ; 

27  And  who  euere  amonge  50U  wole 
be  tirste,  he  shal  Ije  50ure  seruaunt. 

28  As  mannes  sone  eame  nat  for  to  be 
serued,  but  for  to  serue,  and  for  to  3eue 
his  soule^  redempcioun  for  many. 

29  And  hem  goynge  out  of  Jerico, 
manye  cumpanyes  of  peple  sueden  hym. 

30  And  loo  !  two  blynd  men  sittynge 
besidis  the  weye,  herden  that  Jhesus 
passide  ;  and  thei  crieden,  seyinge.  Lord, 
the  sone  of  Dauyth,  haue  mercy  on  vs. 

31  Forsothe  the  cumpanye  blamyde 
hem,  for  to  be  stille  ;  and  thci  crieden 
more  and  more,  seiynge,  Lord,  the  sone 
of  Dauyth,  haue  mercy  on  vs. 

32  And  Jhesus  stood,  and  clepide  hem, 
and  seith,  What  wole  ^e,  that  I  do  to 
50U? 

33  Thei  seien  to  hym,  Lord,  that  oure 
eijon  l)e  openyd. 

34  Forsothe  Jhesus,  hauynge  mercy  on 
hem,  touchide  her  ei5en  ;  and  unoon  thei 
sayen,  and  sueden  hym. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


105 


Chap.  XXL      i  And  wlianne  Jhesus 
came  ni3  to  Jerusalem,  and  cam  to  Becn- 


drynke  off  the  cuppe  that  Y  shall  drynke 
of,  [and  to  be  ba])tiscd  with  tlic  l)ap- 
tim  that  Y  shalbc  baptised  Avith  .']  They 
answered  to  him.  That  we  are. 

23  He  sayd  vnto  them.  Ye  shall  drynkc 
of  my  cupe,  and  shalbc  bajitiscd  with 
the  baptim  that  Y  shall  be  baptyscd 
with  ;  but  to  syt  on  my  ryght  bond  and 
on  my  lyft  bond,  is  nut  myne  to  yeve ; 
but  to  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of 
my  father. 

24  And  when  the  ten  hcrdc  this  they 
desdaynod  att  the  two  brethren. 

25  But  Jesus  called  them  vnto  h^Tn, 
and  saide,  Ye  knowe,  that  the  lordcs  of 
the  gentyls  have  dominacion  over  them, 
and  they  that  are  great,  exercise  power 
over  them. 

26  It  shall  not  be  so  amonge  you  ;  but 
whosoever  wyll  be  greate  among  you, 
let  hym  be  youre  minister ; 

27  And  whosoever  wilbe  chefe,  let 
him  be  youre  servaunt. 

28  Even  as  the  sonne  off  man  cam  not 
to  be  ministrcd  vnto,  butt  to  minister, 
and  to  geve  his  lyfe  for  the  redempcion 
off  many. 

29  And  as  they  departed  from  Hierico, 
moche  people  folowed  hym. 

30  And  beholde  !  two  blynde  men 
syttinge  by  the  way  syde,  when  they 
herde  that  Jesus  passed  by,  cryed.  say- 
inge.  Master,  the  sonne  off  David,  have 
mercy  on  vs. 

31  And  the  people  relinked  them,  be 
cause  they  shulde  holde  there  peace ; 
but  they  cryed  the  moare,  sayinge.  Have 
mercy  on  vs,  ]\Iastcr,  which  arte  the 
Sonne  off  David. 

32  Then  Jesus  stode  styll,  and  called 
them,  and  sayde,  What  will  ye,  that  \^ 
shall  do  to  you  1 

33  They  said  vnto  hym.  Master,  that 
oure  eyes  mayc  Ijc  opened. 

34  Jesus  pitied  them,  and  touched 
there  eyes  ;  and  immcdiatly  thcire  eyes 
recevcd  syght,  and  they  folowed  hym. 


Chap.  XXI.    i  When  they  drewe  nye 
vnto  Jerusalem,  and  were  come  to  Bet- 


lOG  GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Oliuetes  dune,  cla,  sende  lie  liys  tweg-eu 
leoniing-cnilitas, 

2  And  ssede  liim,  Faraj?  on  diet  castel 
dset  foran  ongean  eow  ys,  and  (.lonne 
sona  finde  gyt  iine  assene  getiggede,  and 
hyre  folan  mid  hyre  ;  untigea])  hig,  and 
laeda)?  to  me. 

3  And  gyf  liwa  eow  eenig  })ing  to  cwy)?, 
secgeaj>,  ctset  Drihten  liiefj?  clyses  ncocle  ; 
and  donne  forlset  lie  eow  hra^dlice. 

4  Eall  dis  wass  geworden,  dset  wEere 
gefylled  dset  ]?m-h  Esaiam  done  witegan 
gecweden  wses, 

5  SecgeaJ)  heahnesse  dehter,  Nii  I  din 
cyning  de  cym)?  to,  gedtefte,  and  rit  up- 
pan  tamre  assene,  and  Lyre  folan. 

6  Da  ferdon  hjs  leorning-cuihtas,  and 
dydon  swa  lie  him  bebead. 

7  And  Iseddon  da  assene  to  him,  and 
hyra  fohan,  and  ledon  hyra  reaf  uppan 
hig,  and  setton  hyne  an  uppan. 

8  Witodlice  dset  folc  strehton  hyra  reaf 
on  done  weg;  sume  heowun  dajra  treowa 
bogas,  and  streowedon'''  on  done  weg. 

9  Dffit  folc  dcet  dar  beforan  ferde,  and 
dset  dar  sefter  ferde,  clypodon,  and  cwced- 
on,  Hal  sy  du  Dauides  sunu ;  sy  ge- 
bletsod  se  de  com  on  Drihtenes  naman ; 
sy  him  hsel  on  hehnessum. 

10  Da  he  ferde  to  lerusalem,  da  wear]) 
eall  seo  burh-waru  onstyred,  and  cweed- 
on,  Hwset  is  des  1 

1 1  Da,  c\vse}>  dset  folc,  Dis  ys  se  Hsel- 
cnd,  witega,  of  Nazareth  on  Galilea. 

12  Da  se  Hselend  into  dam  temple 
code,  he  adraf  lit  ealle  da  de  ceapodon 
innan  dam  temple  ;  and  dara  myuetera 
sceamelas,  and  hyra  setlu,  dara  de  culf- 
ran  sealdon,  he  tobrosc. 

1 3  And  cwsej)  to  him,  Hyt  ys  awriten, 
Min  hus  ys  gebed-hus  ;  witodlice  ge 
worhton  dset  to  Jjcofa  cote. 

14  Da  eodon  to  him  da  blindau  and 
da  healtan,  and  he  hi  gehselde. 

15  Witodlice  da  dara  sacerda  ealdras 


XXI.  2-15.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

fage,  in  the  mount  of  Olyfeet,  thanne 
Jbesus  scnte  his  two  discipHs, 

2  Scyingc  to  hem,  Go  50  in  to  the 
castel  that  is  a5cinus  50U,  and  anon  ^c 
shal  fyndc  a  she  assc  tycd,  and  a  colt 
with  hir ;  vnbynde  50,  and  bryng  to 
me. 

3  And  ;if  eny  man  shal  seie  to  50U  eny 
thingc,  seie  5e,  that  the  Lord  hath  need 
to  hem  ;  and  auoon  he  shal  lecue  hem. 

4  Tvcwly  al  this  Avas  don,  that  that 
thing  tliat  Avas  seid  by  the  prophete 
shulde  be  fulfillid,  scyiuge, 

5  Seie  50  to  the  don^tor  of  Syon,  Loo  ! 
thi  kyng  cometh  to  thee,  hoinly,^  sitt- 
ynge  on  an  asse,  and  a  fole,  the  sone  of 
a  hcest  vndir  500k. 

6  Forsotlic  disciplis,  goynge,  diden  as 
Jhesus  coniaundide  hem. 

7  And  thci  brou5ten  to  a  she  asse,  and 
the  fole,  and  puttiden  her  clothis  on 
hem,  and  maden  hym  sitte  aboue. 

8  Forsothe  ful  muche  cumpanye  strew- 
iden  her  clothis  in  the  Avey ;  sothely 
other  kittiden  braunchis  of  trees^  and 
stroAA'iden  in  the  Aveyc. 

9  But  the  cumpanycs  that  AA'enten  be- 
fore, and  that  sueden,  crieden,  seyinge, 
Osanna'''  to  the  sone  of  Danith  ;  blessid 
is  he  that  cummcth  in  the  nanie  of  the 
Lord  ;  Osanna  in  the  heejist  thingis. 

10  And  AA'hen  he  had  entrid  in  to  Jeru- 
salem, al  the  cite  was  stirid,  seyinge, 
Who  is  this  ? 

1 1  Treuly  the  peplis  sciden.  This  is 
Jhesus,  the  prophete,  of  Nazareth  of 
Galilee. 

12  And  Jhesus  entride  in  to  the  temple 
■of  God,  and  kest  out  of  the  temple  alle 
sellynge  and  byingc  ;  and  he  turnyde 
vpsadoim  the  bordis  of  chaungeris,  and 
the  chaicrs  of  men  sellynge  culueris. 

13  And  he  seith  to  hem.  It  is  writen, 
My  hous  shal  be  clei)id  an  hous  of 
preiere  ;  forsothe  5e  han  made  it  a 
denne  of  thefes. 

14  And  blynde  and  crokid  camcn  ni^ 
to  hym  in  the  temple,  and  he  helide 
hem. 

15  Forsothe  the  priucis  of  prcstis  and 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


107 


phage,  vnto  mounte  Olivetc,  then  sent 
Jesus  two  off  his  disciples, 

2  Sayinge  to  them,  Go  in  to  the  tonne 
that  lyeth  over  agaynste  you,  and  anou 
ye  shall  fyiido  an  asse  bounde,  and  her 
colte  Avith  her ;  lose  them,  and  bringe 
them  vnto  nie. 

3  And  if  eny  man  saye  ought  vnto  you, 
saye  ye,  that  youre  Master  hath  neade 
oft'  them ;  and  streyght  Avaye  he  Avill  let 
them  go. 

4  All  this  Avas  donne,  to  fulfyll  that 
Avhich  Avas  spoken  by  the  prophet,  say- 
inge, 

5  Tell  ye  the  doughter  of  Sion,  Beholde ! 
thykinge  commcth  vnto  the,  meke,  sitt- 
inge  vppon  an  asse,  and  a  colte,  the  foole 
oft'  an  asse  vsed  to  the  yooke. 

6  The  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus 
commauuded  them. 

7  And  brought  the  asse,  and  the  colte, 
and  put  on  then  there  clothes,  and  set 
him  there  on. 

8  Many  of  the  people  sprecd  theire 
garmentes  in  the  Avaie  ;  other  cut  doune 
bi'aunches  from  the  trees,  and  straAved 
them  in  the  Avaye. 

9  Moreover  the  people  that  Avent  be- 
fore, and  they  also  that  cam  aftci-, 
cried,  sayinge,  Iloslanua  to  the  sonne  of 
David;  blessed  be  he  that  commcth  in 
the  name  of  the  Lorde ;  Hosianna  in 
the  hyest. 

10  And  Avhen  he  Avas  come  in  to  Jeni- 
salem,  all  the  cite  Avas  moved,  sayinge. 
Who  ys  this  ? 

IT  And  the  jieople  sayde,  Thys  ys 
Jesus,  the  prophet,  off  Nazareth  a  cite 
of  Galile. 

12  And  Jesus  Avent  in  to  the  temple  of 
God,  and  caste  out  all  them  that  bought 
and  solde  in  the  temple  ;  and  oA^erthrcAV 
the  tables  of  the  mony  chaungers,  and 
the  seates  of  them  that  solde  doves. 

13  And  saide  to  them.  It  is  Avritten, 
Mine  housse  shalbe  called  the  housse  oft" 
prayer ;  butt  ye  have  made  it  a  denn  of 
theves. 

14  And  the  bllnde  and  the  halt  cam 
to  hym  in  the  temple,  and  he  healed 
them. 

15  When  the  chefe  prestes  and  scribes 


lOS 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

and  da  boceras  gesawon  da  wunclru  de 
se  Hselend  worhte,  and  gehyrdon  bii  da 
cild  clypodon  on  dam  temple,  and  cweed- 
on,  Sy  Dauides  sunu  lial,  da  weeron  liig 
yrre, 

1 6  And  cwjedon,  Gehyrst  du  liwset  das 
cwsedaj)  1  Da  cwse]?  he,  Witodlice ;  ne 
rseddon  ge  n^fre,  Dii  fulfi-emedest  lof,  of 
cilda,  and  of  sucendra"*"  mu]je  ? 


17  And  lie  forlet  hi  da,  and  fei'de  of 
dsere  byrig,  to  Bethania ;  and  Iserde  hi 
dar  be  Godes  rice. 

18  On  'morgen,  da  he  eft  to  dsere 
byrig  f5r,  da  hingrede  hyne. 

19  And  he  geseh  an  fic-treow  "wid 
done  weg,  da  code  he  to  him,  and  ne 
fiinde  on  him  buton  da  leaf  ane ;  da 
cwcie)j  he,  Ne  wurde  nsefre  weastm  of 
de  acenned.  Da  s5na  forscranc  dset 
fic-treow. 

20  And  his  leorning-enihtas  wimdrod- 
on,  and  cwsedon,  L5ca  nu  hu  hrsedlice 
dtet  fic-treow  forscranc. 

2 1  Da  andswarode  he  him,  and  cwajjj, 
So|j  ic  eow  secge,  gyf  ge  habba])  geleaf- 
an,  and  ne  t^^'yniaJ),  ne  do  ge  na  dset  an 
be  dam  fic-treowe,  ac  eac  deh  ge  cwedou 
to  disum  munte,  Ahefe  de  upp,  and  feall 
innan  da  sse. 


22  And  ealles  dfes  de  ge  biddajj  ge 
beo|)  ti])a,  gyf  ge  gelyfa}?.''" 

23  Da  he  com  into  dam  temple,  da 

comon  dava  sacerda  ealdras 

him  to,  and  cwsedon.  On  hwylcere  mihte 
"wyrcst  dii  das  Jjing  1  and  hwa  sealde  de 
disne  anweald  1 

24  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  him  and 
cwaej),  And  ic  ahsige  eow  anre  sprsece, 
gyf  ge  me  da  spraece  secgea]?,  donne 
secge  ic  eow,  on  hwylcum  an  weal  de  ic 
das  ])ing  wjTce. 

25  Hwjfider  wses  lohannes  fulluht ; 
de  of  heofonum,  de  of  mannum?  Da 
cwsedon  big  betwux  him,  Gyf  we 
secga})     of    heofone,    donne    c-\\yj)    he. 


XXI.  1 6.-25.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

scribis,  sceynge  the  marucilousc  tliing[is  ' 
that  he  diile,  and  children  cryiiiijc  iu 
the  tein]>le,  and  seiynge,  Osauua  to  the 
sone  of  Dauith,  dedcynedcn, 

16  And  sciden  to  hj-m,  irocrist  thou 
"wliat  these  seven  ]  Sothely  Jhesus  soith 
to  hem,  3he  ;  wher  ;e  lian  nat  rad,  Foi- 
of  the  month  of  ehikh-en^  and  of  souk- 
ynge  mylk,  thou  hast  made  partite 
heryinge  1 

17  And,  hem  forsaken,  he  wente  forth 
out  of  the  citee,  in  to  Betauye ;  and 
there  he  dwclte,  and  tau3te  hem  of  the 
kyngdam  of  God. 

18  Forsothe  on  the  morw,  he,  turn- 
ynge  a5ein  in  to  the  citee,  hungride. 

19  And  he,  seeynge  a  fige  tree  bysidis 
the  weye,  came  to  it,  and  fonde  no 
thing  ther  on  no  but  leeuys  oonly  ;  and 
lie  seith  to  it,  Xeuer  be  fruyt  born  of 
thee,  in  to  with  outen  eeude.  And 
anoon  the  fijge  tree  was  dried  vp, 

20  And  disciplis  seeynge,  wondreden, 
seyinge,  Hou  anon  it  di'iede. 

2 1  Sothely  Jhesus  answerynge,  seith  to 
hem,  Trewly  I  seye  to  50U,  jif  ^e  shulen 
han  feith,  as  a  corn  of  seneuey,  and 
douten  nat,  nat  oonly  56  shulen  do  of 
this  fijge  tree,  bot  and  5if  je  seien  to 
this  hill,  Take  thee,  and  caste  thee  in 
to  the  see,  and  so  it  shal  be  don. 

22  And  alle  thingis  what  eucr  50 
shulen  axe  in  preier  byleuynge,  5ee 
shulen  take. 

23  And  whenne  he  came  in  to  the 
temple,  the  princis  of  prestis  and  eldre 
men  of  the  peple  camen  ni5  to  hym 
techynge,  seyinge.  In  what  power  dost 
thou  these  thingis  ?  and  who  jaf  to  thee 
this  power  1 

.  24  Jhesus  answerynge  seide  to  hem, 
And  I  shal  axe  50U  o  word,  the  wliiche 
3if  5e  shulen  seie  to  me,  and  I  shal 
seie  to  50U,  in  what  power  I  do  these 
thingis. 

•  25  Of  whennes  was  the  baptem  of 
Joon  ;  of  heuene,  or  of  men  1  And  thei 
thou3ten  with  inne  hem  self,  seyinge, 
5if  we  shulen  seie  of  hcucne,  he  shal 


TYNDALE,  15-6.  10:> 

sawe  the  marveylles  thatt  he  dyd,  and 
the  ehyldrcn  cryinge  in  the  temple,  and 
sayinge,  Hosiannato  the  Sonne  of  David, 
they  desdayncd, 

16  And  sayde  vnto  hjTn,  Ilearcst  thou 
what  these  saye  1  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them. 
Have  ye  never  redde,  Off  the  mouth  off 
babes  and  suekelinges,  thuu  haste  or- 
deyned  prayse  ] 

1 7  And  he  Icfte  them,  and  went  out  of 
the  cite  vnto  Bethani ;  and  passed  the 
tyme  there. 

18  In  the  mornynge,  as  he  rctixrncd 
in  to  the  cite  ageyne,  he  hungred. 

19  And  s])yed  a  fygge  tree  iu  the  waye, 
and  cam  to  it,  and  iounde  nothingc  there 
on  but  Icves  only;  and  said  to  it,  Never 
frute  growe  on  the,  hence  forwardes.  And 
anon  the  fygge  tree  wyddered  awaye. 

20  And  when  his  disciples  sawe  that, 
they  marvelled,  sayinge,  How  sone  is 
the  fygge  tree  wyddered  awaye. 

21  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  yff  ye 
shall  have  fayth,  and  shall  not  dout,  ye 
shall  nott  only  do  that  which  Y  have 
done  to  the  fygge  tree,  but  also  yi  ye 
shall  saye  vnto  this  mountaync.  Take 
thy  silfe  a  waye,  and  cast  thy  silfc  in  to 
the  see,  it  shalbc  done. 

22  And  whatsoever  thinge  ye  shall  axe 
in  youre  prayers  if  ye  beleve,  ye  shall 
receave  hit. 

23  And  when  he  was  come  into  the 
temple,  the  chefe  prestes  and  the  seni- 
ores  of  the  people  cam  vnto  him  as  he 
Avas  tcachinge,  and  sayde,  By  what 
auctorite  docst  thou  these  thinges'?  and 
who  gave  the  this  power"? 

24  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  I  also  wyll  axe  of  you  a  ccrtayuc 
question,  which  if  ye  asuyle  me,  Y  in 
lyke  wyse  wyll  tell  you,  by  what  auc- 
torite I  do  these  thinges. 

25  Whence  was  the  ]>aptim  of  Jhon  ; 
from  hevcn,  or  of  men  ?  And  they 
thought  iu  themselves,  sayinge ;  Yf  we 
shall   saye   from   licven,   he    wyll   saye 


no 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOI^,  995.     [St.  Matt. 
Forliwam   ne   gelyftle    ge   him  1- 

26  Gyf  Ave  secga])  of  m  annum,  we 
ondrseda])  dis  folc,  ealle  liig  ha^fdon 
loliannem  for  anne  witegan. 

27  Da  andswaredon  liig  and  cwajdon, 
We  nyton.  Da  cwsej)  he,  Ne  ic  eow  ne 
secge,  of  hwylcuni  anwealde  ic  das  }jiug 
wyrce. 

28  Hu  ))inc)j  eow?  A'n  mann  htefde 
twegen  suna ;  dfi  cwse])  he  to  dam  ykl- 
ran,  Suna,  ga  and  wyrce  to  dseg  on 
minum  win-aei'de. 


29  Da  cwpe]?  he,  Icnelle; 

code  deh  syddan  to  dam  win-gerde. 

30  Da  cwse])  he  eal  swa  to  dam  6d- 
rum.  Da  andswarude  se  him,  and  cwse)?, 
Hlaford,  ic  ga  ;  and  ne  code  swa  deah. 

31  Hw^der  dara  twegra  dyde  dses 
fajder  willan  1  Da  cwsedon  hig,  Se 
[yldra.]'''  Da,  cwse);  se  Httlend  to  him, 
So]?  ic  eow  secge,  dset  manfiiUe  and 
myltystran  ga]?  bef5ran  eow  on  Godes 
rice. 

3  2  lohanncs  com  on  ryhtwisnesse  wege, 
and  ge  ne  gelyfdon  him ;  witodhce 
manfiille  and  myltystran  gelyfdon.  And 
ge  gesawon,  and  ne  dydon  syddan  nane 
dced-b5te,  diet  ge  gelyfdon  on  him. 


33  Gehyi'a])  nu  oder  bigspel.'''  Sum 
hiredes  ealdor  wtes,  se  plantode  win- 
gerd,  and  betyude  hyne,  and  sette  dter 
on  Avin-Avi'ingan,  and  getimbrode  anne 
stypel,  and  gesette  done  myd  eor])-tylion, 
and  ferde  on  elj^eodignysse. 

34  Da  dfera  weastma  tid  genealfehte, 
da  sende  he  hys  Jjcowas  to  dam  eor}?- 
tylion,  dfet  hig  onfengon  his  wsestmas. 

35  Da  nam  on  hig  hys  jjeowas,  and 
SAVungon  sumne,  sumne  hi  ofsl5gon, 
sumne  hig  oftorfodon. 

36  Da  sende  he  eft  odre  |;eowas,  selran 
donne  dam  eeiTan  wzeron,  da  dydon  hig 
dam  gelice. 

37  JEt  nyhstan  he  sende  hys  sunu  hym 


XXI.  26-s:.]   WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

seie  to  vs,  "\Mii  tberfore  beleuen  je  nat 
to  hym  ? 

26  Sothcly  5if  we  slnilcn  seie  of  men, 
we  dretleu  the  cumpanyc  of  pcple,  for 
alle  hailde  Joon  as  a  prophote. 

27  Ami  thei  answeryuge  to  Jliesu 
seideu,  "We  witen  nat.  And  he  scith 
to  hem,  IsVther  I  seie  to  5on,  in  what 
power  I  do  these  thingis. 

2S  Foi-sothe  wliat  scineth  to  50U?  Sum 
man  hadde  two  sonys ;  and  he  cnm- 
mynge  ui5  to  the  firste  scide,  Sonc,  go 
for  to  worehe  this  day  in  to  myn 
vyue5erd. 

29  Sotliely  he  answer}Tige  seith,  I 
nyle ;  foi-sothe  afterward  he  stirid  by 
penaunce,^  wente. 

30  Foi-sothe  he,  cummjTige  to  the 
tother,  seide  lie  maner.  And  he  an- 
sweiynge  seith,  Lord,  I  go  ;  and  he 
wente  nat. 

31  Who  of  the  two  dide  the  fadris 
will  ?  Thei  seien  to  hym,  The  firste. 
Jhesus  scith  to  hem,  Trewly  I  seie  to 
50U,  for  puplicanys  and  hooris  shulen 
go  before  50U  in  to  the  kyngdam  of 
God. 

32  Forsothe  Joon  cam  to  50U  in  the 
weye  of  rijtwisnesse,  and  50  bileeueden 
nat  to  hym  ;  but  puplicanys  and  hooris 
beleucden  to  hym.  Sothely  566  seeyuge 
nether  hadde  don  penaunce  afterward, 
that  5e  bilecuyden  to  hjTu. 

33  Heere  5e  an  other  parable.  Ther 
was  an  husbondman,  that  plantidc  a 
vj-ne  5erd,  and  5aue  an  hegge  aboute, 
and  dalue  a  pressour  therynne,  and 
bildide  a  toure,  and  hiride^  it  to  erthe 
tiliers,  and  wente  feiTe  in  pilgrimage. 

34  Forsothe  Avhenne  the  tyme  of  fruytis 
nei5ide.  he  sente  his  seruauntis  to  the 
ei-the  tiliers,  that  thei  token  fniytis  of 
it. 

35  And,  his  seruauntis  taken,  the  erthe 
tiliers  beeten  the  toon,  an  other  thei 
slewen,  but  another  thei  stoonyden  to 
deth. 

36  Eftsones  he  sente  other  seruauntis, 
mo  than  the  firste,  and  liche  maner 
thei  didca  to  hem. 

37  Forsothe  at  the  laste  he  sent  his 


TYNDALE,i526. 


lU 


vnto  vs.  Why  dyd  ye  not  then  belcve 
h  jTn  ? 

26  But  and  iff  we  shall  saye  of  men, 
then  feare  we  the  people,  for  all  men 
helde  Jhon  as  a  proj^iet. 

27  And  they  answered  Jesus  and  sayde, 
We  cannot  tell.  He  lyke  wyse  sayd 
vnto  them,  Nether  tell  I  you,  by  what 
auctorite  Y  do  these  thinges. 

28  WJiat  saye  ye  to  thys  1  A  certayne 
man  had  ij  sonncs ;  and  cam  to  the 
elder  sayinge  ;  Go  and  worke  to  daye  in 
my  vyneyarde. 

29  He  answered  and  sayd,  I  wyll  not ; 
bxit  afterwaxde  repented,  and  went. 

30  Then  cam  he  to  the  seconde,  and 
sayde  lyke  wyse.     And  he  answered  and 

I  sayde,  I  wyll,  S}t  ;  yet  went  he  not. 

I  3 1  Whedder  of  these  ij  fulfj-lled  there 
i  fathers  wyll  ?  And  they  sayde  vnto 
hym,  The  fp'st.  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them, 
Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  the  pub- 
licans and  the  hai-lotes  shal  come  into 
the  kyngdome  off  God  before  you. 

32  For  Jhon  cam  vnto  you  in  the  waye 
of  righte  wesnes,  and  ye  beleved  hym 
not;  but  the  publicans  and  the  whoores 
beleved  hjm.  But  ye  though  ye  sawe 
it,  yet  wei'C  not  moved  with  repentaunce, 
that  ye  myght  afterwarde  have  beleved 
hpn. 

33  Herken  another  similitude.  There 
was  a  certayne  housholder,  whych  set  a 
vyne3'arde,  and  hedged  it  rounde  about, 
and  made  a  wynpresse  in  it,  and  bilt  a 
tower,  and  Ictt  it  out  to  husbandmen, 
and  went  in  to  a  straunge  countre. 

34  And  when  the  tyme  of  the  finite 
drewe  neare,  he  sent  his  servauntes  to 
the  husbandmen,  to  reccave  the  frutes 
of  it. 

35  And  the  husbandmen  caught  his 
servauntes,  and  bet  won,  kylled  another, 
and  stoned  another. 

36  Againe  he  sent  other  servauntes, 
moo  then  the  fyrst,  and  they  served 
them  lyke  wyse. 

37  Btit  last  of  all  he  sent  vnto  them 


112 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

to,  and  cwse]?,  Hig  forwandiaj)  dset  liig 
ne  don  mnium  suna  swa. 

38  Witodlice  da  da  tylian  done  sunu 
gesawon,  da  cweedon  liig  betwyx  bym, 
Des  ys  yrfenuma,  uton  gan,  and  ofsleau 
hyne,  and  liabban  us  hys  sehta. 

39  Da  nam  on  big,  and  ofslogon  hyne, 
and  awurpon  widutan  done  wiu-geard. 

40  Hwset  dejj  does  "\vin-geardes  blaford 
dam  eor|?-tyliou,  donne  he  cym|)  1 

41  Da  cwsedon  hig,  He  forde])  da  yfel- 
an  mid  yfele,  and  gesett  hys  win-gerd 
mid  odrum  tilion,  de  him  hys  wiestm 
hyra  tidum  agyfon. 

42  Da  cw8e|)  se  Hcclynd,  Ne  r?edde  ge 
nsefre  on  gewritun,  Se  stan  de  da  timbri- 
endan  awurpon,  ys  geworden  to  dtere 
hyrnan  heafde  1  Dys  ys  fram  Drihtne 
geworden,  and  hyt  ys  wundorhc  on 
urum  eagum. 

43  Fordam  ic  secge  cow,  dset  eow  by  J) 
fetbroden  Godes  rice,  and  hj]>  geseald 
dtere  })eode  de  hys  earna]?. 

44  And  se  de  fyl)>  uppan  dysne  stan, 
he  by])  tobrysed ;  and  he  tobrysj)  done, 
de  he  on  uppan  fy\\>. 

45  Da  dsera  sacerda  ealdras  and  da 
Pharisei  dys  bigspel  gehyrdon,  da  on- 
geton  hig  dtet  he  bit  ssede  be  him. 

46  Hi  sohton  hyne,  and  ondredon  dret 
folc,  fordam  de  hi  hsefdon  hyne  for  ccnne 
witeffan. 


Chap.  XXII.     i  Dil  ssede   he  hym 
eft  oder  bigspell,  and  dus  cwsej). 

2  Heofona  rice  ys  gelic  gewurden  dam 
cyninge  de  macode  hys  suna  gyfta. 

3  And  sende  his  Jjeowas  and  cljqoode 
da  geladodan  to  dam  gyftum,  da  noldon 
hi  cuman. 

4  Da  sende  be  eft  odere  j^eowas,  and 


XXI.3S.-XXII.4.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

sone    to    licm,    seyinge,    Thci     sliuloii 
sliaine^  my  sone. 

38  Sotlioly  the  ertlic  tiliers,  seeynge 
tlie  sone,  seidcu  with  yiine  licm  self, 
This  is  the  eire  ;  cunic  50,  slca  we  hym, 
aud  we  sliulon  haue  liis  ei'itage. 

39  And,  hym  taken,  lliei  kestcn  out  of 
the  vyn5erd,  and  slewen. 

40  Tlierfore  whcnnc  the  lord  of  the 
vyne5erd  shal  cume,  what  shal  he  do 
to  the  ilk  crthe  tiliersl 

41  Thei  seien  to  hym,  He  shal  lese 
jiiele  the  yae\  men,  and  sette  to  hire 
his  vyne5erd  to  other  erthe  tiliers,  the 
whiche  shulen  jelde  to  hym  fruytis  in 
her  tymes. 

42  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Ecdden  50 
neuer  in  scripturis.  The  stoon  the  Avhiche 
beldynge  men  reproueden,  this  is  maad 
in  to  the  heued  of  the  corner  1  Of  the 
Lord  this  thing  is  maad,  and  it  is  mer- 
ueilous  in  oure  eijen. 

43  Therfore  I  seie  to  50U,  for  the 
kyngdam  of  God  shal  be  taken  fro  50U, 
and  shal  be  5ouen  to  a  folk  doinge 
fruytis  of  it. 

44  And  he  that  shal  falle  on  this  stoon, 
shal  be  broken  togidre ;  forsothe  vpon 
whom  it  shal  falle,  it  shal  togidre  poune 
hym. 

45  And  when  the  prineis  of  prestis 
and  Pharisees  hadden  herde  his  parablis, 
thei  knewen  that  he  seide  of  hem. 

46  And  thei,  seekynge  to  holde  hym, 
dreden  the  cumpanyes  of  peple,  for  thei 
hadden  hym  as  a  prophete. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


113 


Chap.  XXII.  i  And  Jhesus  answer- 
ynge  seide  eftsone  in  i)arablis  to  hem, 
seijTige, 

2  The  kyngdam  of  heuenes  is  maad  lie 
to  a  man  kyng  that  made  weddingus  to 
his  sone. 

3  And  he  sentc  his  seruauntis  for  to 
clepc  men  beden  to  the  weddyngis,  and 
thei  wolden  nat  eume. 

4  Eftsoone  he  sente  other  seruauntis, 


hys   awnc   sonnc,    sayinge,    They    wyll 
feare  my  sonne. 

38  When  the  husbandmen  sawc  his 
Sonne,  they  saydc  amonge  them  selves, 
Tliys  ys  the  heyre ;  eome  on,  lett  vs 
kyll  hym,  and  lett  vs  take  hys  inheryt- 
aunce  to  oure  selves. 

39  And  they  caught  h}Tii,  and  tln*ust 
him  out  of  tlie  vyneyarde,  and  shlewe 
him. 

40  Wlicn  the  lorde  of  the  vyneyarde 
commeth,  what  wyll  he  do  with  those 
husbandmen  1 

4 1  They  sayde  vnto  hym.  He  will  evyll 
dcstroye  those  evyll  persons,  and  wyll 
lett  out  hys  vyneyarde  vnto  other  hus- 
bandmen, whych  shall  delyver  hym  his 
frute  att  tymes  convenient. 

42  Jesus  saide  vnto  them,  Dyd  ye 
never  redde  in  the  scriptui-es,  The  same 
stone  which  the  bylders  refused,  is  set 
in  the  princypall  parte  of  the  corner? 
This  was  the  Lordes  doinge,  and  yt  is 
mervelous  in  oure  eyes. 

43  Therfore  saye  I  vnto  you,  the  king- 
dome  of  God  shalbe  taken  from  you, 
and  shalbe  geven  to  the  gentyls  which 
shall  brynge  forth  the  frutes  off  it. 

44  And  whosoever  shall  fall  on  thys 
stone,  shalbe  alto  broken  ;  and  whom- 
soever thys  stone  shall  fall  oppon,  he 
shall  grynde  him  to  powder. 

45  And  when  the  chefe  prestes  and 
Pharyses  herde  his  similitudes,  they 
perceaved  that  he  spake  of  them. 

46  And  they  went  about  to  laye 
hondes  on  hym,  but  they  feared  the 
people,  because  they  counted  hym  as 
a  prophet. 


Chap.  XXII.  i  And  Jesus  answered 
and  spake  vnto  them  agayne  in  simili- 
tudes, sayinge, 

2  The  kyngdome  of  heven  is  lyke  vnto 
a  certayne  kinge  which  maryed  his 
Sonne. 

3  And  sent  forth  his  servauntes  to  call 
them  that  were  byd  to  the  wcddinge, 
and  they  wolde  nott  come. 

4  AgejTie   he   sentt  forth   other   ser- 

I 


114 


GOTHIC  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

SEede  dam  geladedon,  Nu  !  ic  gegearwode 
mine  feorme,  mine  fearras  and  mine  fiig- 
elas  synt  ofslegene,  and  ealle  mine  })ing 
synt  gearwe ;  cuma}?  to  dam  gyftura. 

5  Da  forgymdon  hig  dset,  and  ferdon, 
sum  to  hys  tiine,  sum  to  hys  mang- 
guuge. 

6  And  da  5dre  namon  hys  [leowas,  and 
mid  teouan  geswenctou,  and  ofslogon. 

7  Da  se  cyning,  dtet  gehyrde,  da  wses 
be  yrre  ;  and  sende  liys  here  to,  and 
fordyde  da  manslagan,  and  hyra  burh 
forbsernde. 

8  Da  cwpej)  he  to  hys  ];eowum,  Witod- 
lice  das  gyfta  synt  gearwe,'''  ac  da  de 
geladode  weeron,  ne  synt  wyrde. 

9  Ga)5  nu  witodHce  to  wega  gelsetum, 
and  clypia|)  to  disum  gyftum,  swa 
hwylce  swa  ge  gemeton. 

10  Da  eodon  da  Jjeowas  ut  on  da 
wegas,  and  gegaderedon  ealle  da  de  hig 
gemetton,  gode  and  yfele  ;  da  waerun 
da  gyft-hus  mid  syttyndum  mannum 
gefyllede. 

1 1  Da  code  se  cyning  in,  dxt  he  wolde 
geseon  da  de  dfer  s*ton ;  da  geseali  he 
doer  Benne  mann  de  nses  mid  gyftlicum 
reafe  gescryd. 

12  Da  cwfe])  he,  La  freond,  humeta 
eodest  dii  in,  and  nfefdest  gyftlic  reaf  ? 
Da  gesuwode  he. 

13  And  se  cyning  cwsej?  to  hys  J)enon, 
Gebinda]?  hys  handa  and  hys  fet,  and 
wurpa))  hyne  on  da  uttran  jjystro ;  dser 
by])  wop  and  tojja  gristbitung. 

14  Witodlice  manega  synt  geladode, 
and  feawa  gecorene.''" 

15  Da  ongunnon  da  Pharisei  rsedan, 
da?t  hig  woldon  done  Hselend  on  hys 
spreece  bef5n. 

16  Da  sendon  hi  him  hyi-a  leorning- 
cnihtas  to,  mid  dam  Herodianiscum, 
and  dus  cwsedon,  Lareow,  we  witon  dcet 
dii  eart  s6})fest,  and  du  laerest  Godes 
weg  myd  sojjfestnysse,  and  dii  ne  wand- 
ast  for  nanum  menu,  ne  du  ne  besceaw- 
ast  nanes  mannes  had. 


XXIT.  5-i6.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

sciyngc,  Seie  jee  to  the  men  bcden  to 
the  foestc,  Loo !  I  haue  made  rcdy  my 
mete,  my  boles  and  volatilis  beu  slayu, 
and  alio  thiugis  rcdy  ;  cummc  50  to  the 
wcddyngus. 

5  .Sothely  thai  dispisidcn,'''  and  thci 
wentcu  awey,  oon  in  to  his  vync5crd, 
forsotho  an  other  to  liis  marchaundise. 

6  But  the  other  hcklen  his  scruauntis, 
and  slowen  hem,  ponishcd  with  contek. 

7  Forsothe  the  kyng,  whenne  he  hadde 
lierde,  was  wroth ;  and,  his  hoostis  sente, 
he  loste^  the  man  quellcrs,  and  brente 
her  citee. 

8  Thanne  he  seith  to  his  seruauntis, 
Sothely  the  weddyngis  l^en  redy,  but 
thei  that  weren  clepid  to  the  feeste, 
wercn  nat  worthi. 

9  Therfore  go  5ee  to  the  outgoyngis 
of  wcyes,  and  whom  euere  je  shulen 
fynde,  clepe  to  the  weddyngis. 

10  And  his  seruauntis,  gon  out  in  to 
the  weyes,  gedredeu  togidre  alle  that 
thei  founden,  good  and  yuel  ;  and  the 
weddyngis  of  men  sittynge  at  mete  beu 
fulfiUid. 

1 1  Forsothe  the  kyng  entride,  that 
he  sliulde  see  men  sittynge  at  mete ; 
and  he  see3  there  a  man  nat  clothid 
with  brijd  cloth  is. 

12  And  he  seith  to  hym,  Frend,  hou 
entridist  thou  hidir,  nat  hauynge  brijd 
clothe?     And  he  was  doumbe. 

13  Thanne  the  kyng  seide  to  the  my- 
nystris,  His  hondis  and  feet  bounden, 
sende  5ee  hym  into  vttermore  derk- 
nessis ;  there  shal  be  Aveepyng  and 
betyng  to  gidre  of  teeth. 

T  4  Forsothe  many  ben  clepid,  but  fewe 
chosen. 

15  Thanne  Pharisees,  goynge  awey, 
token  a  counseile,  that  thei  shulden 
take  Jhesus  in  word. 

16  And  thei  senden  to  hym  her  dis- 
ciplis,  with  Ei-odyauys,''^  seiynge,  ^Maister, 
we  Aviten,  that  thou  art  sothfast,  and 
thou  techist  in  trewthe  the  weye  of  God, 
and  there  is  no  cure^  to  thee  of  eny 
man,  for  thou  beholdist  nat  the  persoouc 
of  men. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


Hi 


vauntes,  sayingc.  Tell  them  which  are 
bydden,  Lo !  I  have  prei)arcd  my  dyn- 
ner,  mync  oxen  and  my  fatlingcs  arc 
kyllcd,  and  all  thingcs  arc  rcdy  ;  come 
vnto  the  mariagc. 

5  They  made  light  of  it,  and  went  their 
wayes,  won  to  his  fcrme  place,  another 
about  his  merehandysc. 

6  The  remnaunt  toke  his  servauntes, 
and  intreated  them  vngoodly,  and  slewe 
them. 

7  When  the  kinge  herdc  that,  he  was 
■\vToth  ;  and  sent  forth  his  warryers,  and 
distroyed  those  murtheres,  and  brent 
vjipe  theire  cite. 

8  Then  sayde  he  to  hys  servauntes, 
The  weddinge  was  prepared,  butt  they 
which  were  bydden  there  to,  were  not 
worthy. 

9  Go  ye  therefore  out  in  to  the  bye 
ways,  and  as  many  as  ye  fynde,  byd 
them  to  the  mai'iage. 

10  The  servauntes  Avent  out  in  to  the 
Avayes,  and  gaddered  togedder  as  many 
as  they  coulde  fynde,  l)Ooth  good  and 
bad  ;  and  the  weddinge  was  furnysshed 
with  gestes. 

1 1  The  kinge  cam  in,  to  viset  hys 
gestes  ;  and  spyed  there  a  man  which 
had  not  on  a  weddinge  garment. 

12  And  sayde  vnto  hym,  Frcnde,  hoAve 
camyst  thou  in  hydder,  and  hast  not  on 
a  Aveddyng  garment  1  And  he  was  even 
spechlesse. 

13  Then  sayde  the  kyngc  to  hys  minis- 
ters. Take  and  bynde  hym  hande  and 
fote,  and  caste  hym  into  vtter  dei'cknes ; 
there  shalbe  Avepinde  and  gnassinge  of 
tcth. 

1 4  For  many  arc  called,  and  feaAve  be 
chosen. 

15  Then  Avcnt  the  Fariscs,  and  toke 
counsell,  hoAve  they  myght  tangle  him 
in  his  Avordes. 

16  And  sent  vnto  In'm  there  disci- 
ples, Avith  Herodcs  servauntes,  sayingc. 
Master,  aa'C  knoAve,  that  thou  arte  true, 
and  that  thou  teachcst  the  Avaye  of  God 
trucli,  nether  carest  for  eny  man,  for 
thou  consydrest  nott  mennes  estate. 


I  2 


116 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

17  Ssecje  us,  hwset  |)inc]j  de.  Ys  hyt 
alyfed  da?t  man  Casere  gafol  sylle,  de 
11a? 

18  Da  se  Hselend  liyra  facn  geliyrde, 
da  cw£e]j  he,  La  licceteras,  hwi  faudige 
ge  min  1 

19  JEt-fwa])  me  daes  gafoles  mynyt. 
Da  brohtou  hi  hhn  anne  peninc. 

20  Da  cwse]>  se  Hselend  to  him,  Hwses 
anlicnys  ys  dis,  and  dis  ofergewrit  1 

21  Hig  cweedon,  Dees  Caseres.  Da 
cw8e|j  he,  A'gyfaJ>  dam  Casere  da  jjing 
de  dtes  Casyres  synt,  and  Gode  da  Jjing 
de  Godes  synt. 

22  Da  hig  dset  gehyrdon  da  wundrod- 
on  hig ;  and  forleton  hyne,  and  ferdon 
onweg. 

23  On  dam  dsege  comon  to  him  Sad- 
ucei,  da  secgeaj)  daet  nan  Eeryst  ne  sy, 
and  hig  acsedon  hyne, 

24  And  cwsedon,  Lareow,  Moyses  ssede, 
gyf  hwa  dead  syg,  and  beam  na^bbe, 
dset  his  br5dor  nyme  hys  Avif,  and  stryne 
hym  beam. 

25  Witodlice  myd  us  wserou  seofun 
gebi'cdru ;  and  se  forma  fette  wif,  and 
for))-ferde.  And  Icefde  hys  breder  his 
wif  butan  bearne ; 

26  And  se  oder  ealswa,  and  se  Jjrydda, 
od  done  seofojjan. 

27  Da  set  sidemestan,  for]j-ferde  dset 
wif. 

28  Hwylces  dsera  sufona  by])  dast  wif, 
on  dam  ccriste  1  ealle  hig  hsefdon  hig. 

29  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  hym  and 
cw3e}>,  Ge  dweliajj,  and  ne  cunnon  halige 
ge-\vi-itu,  ne  Godes  meegen. 

30  Witodhce  ne  Avifiaf)  hig,  ne  hig  ne 
ceorlia)j,  on  dam  seryste ;  ac  hig  synt 
swylce  Godes  englas  on  heofone. 

31  Ne  rsedde  ge,  be  deadra  manna 
Eeryste,  dset  eow  fram  Gode  geseed  wses, 

3  2  Ic  eom  Abrahames  God,  and  Isaaces 
God,  and  lacobes  God  ?  nys  God  na 
deadra,  ac  lybbendra. 


XXII.  17-32.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 7  Tlierfore  seie  to  vs,  what  it  semeth 
to  thee.  Is  it  leful  to  5euo  to  Cesar''' 
rente  l^ 

18  Forsothc,  the  wickednessc  of  hem 
knowen,  Jhesus  selth,  Ypocritis,  what 
teinjiten  5ee  me  1 

1 9  Shewe  5ee  to  me  the  prynte  of  the 
moneye.  And  thci  oftVidon  to  liym  a 
peny. 

20  And  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Whos  is 
this  ymage,  and  the  wrytyng  aboue  1 

21  Thei  seyen  to  hym,  Of  Cesar. 
Thanne  he  seith  to  hem,  Therfore  5elde 
5ce  to  Cesar  tho  thingis  that  ben  Ces- 
aris.  and  to  God  tho  thingis  that  ben 
of  God. 

22  And  thei  heerynge  wondi'eden ;  and, 
hym  hift,  thei  wenten  awey. 

23  In  that  day  Saducees,  that  seyen 
thei'e  is  no  i-ysyng  a3ein,  camen  ni3  to 
hym,  and  axiden  hym, 

24  Seyinge,  Maister,  Moyses  seide,  5if 
eny  man  be  dead,  nat  hauynge  a  sone, 
that  his  brother  wedde  his  wyf,  and 
reyse  seed  to  his  brother. 

25  Forsothe  seuen  bretheren  weren  at 
vs  ;  and  the  first,  a  wijf  Aveddid,  is  dead. 
And  he  nat  hauynge  seed,  left  his  wijf 
to  his  brother ; 

26  xVlso  the  secounde,  and  the  thridde, 
til  to  the  seuenthe. 

27  Forsothe  the  laste  of  allc,  and  the 
womman  is  dead. 

28  Therefore  in  the  rysynge  a3ein, 
whos  wijf  of  the  seuene  shal  she  be  1 
for  alle  hadden  hir. 

29  Sothcly  Jhesus  auswerynge  seith  to 
hein,  3ce  erren,  nether  knowynge  the 
scripturis,  nether  the  vertu  of  God. 

30  Forsothe  in  the  rysyng  a5eyn, 
neither  thei  wcdden,  nether  ben  weddid ; 
but  thei  ben  as  the  aungelis  of  God  in 
heuene. 

31  Sothely  of  the  rysynge  ajein  of 
dead  men,  jee  han  nat  rad,  that  it  is 
seid  of  the  Lord,  seyinge  to  30U, 

32  I  am  God  of  Abraham,  and  God  of 
Ysaac,  and  God  of  Jacob  ?  he  is  nat 
God  of  deed  men,  but  of  lyuynge  men. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


117 


1 7  Tell  vs  there  fore,  howe  thynkeste 
thou.  Is  it  lawfull  to  ycve  tribute  vnto 
Cesar,  or  not  ] 

18  Jesus  perceavcd  there  wylyiies,  and 
sayde,  Why  temptc  ye  me,  ye  ypocrytes? 

19  Lett  me  se  the  tribute  money. 
And  they  toke  hym  a  peny. 

20  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  AVhose 
ys  thys  ymage,  and  superscripcion  1 

21  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Cesars.  Then 
sayde  he  vnto  them,  Geve  therefore  to 
Cesar  that  which  is  Cesars,  and  geve 
vnto  God  that  which  is  Goddes. 

22  When  they  herde  that  they  mar- 
velled ;  and  lefte  hym,  and  went  there 
Avaye. 

23  The  same  daye  the  Saduces  cam 
vnto  hym,  Avhich  saye  that  there  is  no 
resurreccion,  and  they  axed  hym, 

24  Saynge,  Master,  Moses  bade,  if  a 
man  dye,  havinge  no  chyldren,  that  the 
brother  mary  his  Avyfe,  and  reyse  vppe 
seed  A'nto  his  brother. 

2  5  There  were  Avith  vs  seven  brethren ; 
the  f}Tst  maried,  and  dyed  with  out 
ysshcAve.  And  lefte  hys  Avyfe  vnto  hys 
brother ; 

26  Lyke  Avise  the  seconde,  and  the 
thryd,  vnto  the  seventhe. 

27  Laste  of  all,  the  Avoman  dyed  also. 

28  No  Ave  in  the  resurreccion,  Avhose 
wyfe  shall  she  be  of  the  vij  1  for  all  had 
hei'. 

29  Jesus   answered    and    sayde   vnto 
them,  Ye  are  deceaved,  and  knoAve  not . 
Avhat  the  scripture  meaneth,  nor  yett  the 
vertue  of  God. 

30  For  in  the  resurreccion,  they  nether 
mary,  nor  are  niai-yed ;  but  are  as  the 
angels  of  God  in  heven. 

31  As  touchynge  the  resurreccion  off 
the  deed,  have  ye  nott  redde,  Avhat  ys 
sayde  vnto  you  off  God,  Avhich  sayeth, 

32  I  am  Abrahams  God,  and  Ysaaks 
God,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  ?  God  ys 
nott  the  God  of  the  deed,  but  of  the 
lyvinge. 


118 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

33  Da  dset  folc  dtet  gehyrde,  da 
wundredon  hig  hys  lare.'*' 

34  Da  da  Phariseiscan  geliyrdon,  dast 
he  het  da  Saduceiscan  stylle  beon,  da 
eodon  hig  togsedere. 

35  And  an,  de  wses  doere  se  Ifireow, 
acsode  hyne,  and  fandode  Lys,  dus 
cwedende, 

36  La  htreow,  hwset  ys  dset  meeste 
bebod  on  dsere  se  1 

37  Da  cwse})  se  Hselend,  Lufa  Drihten 
dinne  God,  on  eah-e  dini'e  heortan,  and 
on  eah-e  dinre  sawle,  and  on  eallum 
dinum  mode. 

38  Dis  ys  dset  mseste  and  doet  fyrnieste 
bebod. 

39  Oder  ys  dysum  gelic ;  Lufa  dinne 
nehstan  swa  swa  de  sylfne. 

40  On  dysum  twilm  bebodum  by{> 
gefylled  call  seo  se. 

41  Da  da  Phariseiscan  gegaderode 
wseron,  da  cwoe]j  se  Haelend, 

42  Hwajt  })inc))  eow  be  Criste,  hwses 
sunu  ys  he  1  Hig  cwsedon,  Dauides, 

43  Da  cw£ej)  se  H?elend,  Hwi  clypa]? 
Dauid  hyne  on  gaste  Drihten,  and 
cwy}>, 

44  Drihten  cwsejj  to  minum  Drihtne, 
Site  on  mine  swydran  healfe,  od  dset  ic 
gesctte  dine  iynd  de  to  fot-scearaole  1 

45  ^y^  Dauid  hyne  on  gaste  Dryhten 
dypa}?,  liu  ys  he  liys  sunu  1 

46  Da  ne  mihton  hig  him  niln  word 
andswarian,  ne  nan  ne  dorste  of  dam 
dsege,  hyne  nan  \>uig  mare  acsian. 


Chap.  XXIII.  i  Da  spra?c  se  Hsel- 
end  to  dam  folce,  and  to  hys  leorning- 
cnyhtum, 

2  And  cwsejj,  Boceras  and  Pharisei 
SEeton  ofer  Moyses  lareow-setl. 

3  Healda)?,  and  AvjTcea]),  swa  hwa;t  swa 
hig  secgeaj).  And  ne  do  ge  ua  fefter 
heora  worcum ;  hig  secgea)),  and  ne  dojj. 

4  Hig  binda)>  hefige  bp-dyna,  de  man 
{  aberan  ne  mseg,  and  lecgeaj)  da  uppan 


XXII.33-XXIIL4.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

33  And  the  cumpanyes  of  peple  heer- 
yngc,  womlrcdcu  in  his  tcchync^e. 

34  Forsothe  Pharisees,  hceryngc  that 
he  hadde  put  silence  to  Saducees,  camen 
to  gidie  in  to  oon. 

3,")  And  oon  of  hcni,  a  toclicr  of  the 
hiwe,  axode  Jhesus,  tcniptynge  hym, 

36  Maistre,  whichc  is  a  greet  maunde- 
ment  in  the  hiwe  1 

37  Jhesus  seide  to  h}Tn,  Thou  shalt 
Knie  the  Lord  thi  God,  of  al  thin 
herte,  and  in  al  thi  soule^  and  in  al  thi 
mynde. 

38  This  is  the  firste  and  the  most 
maundcnicnt. 

39  Forsothe  the  sceounde  is  lie  to 
this;  Thou  shalt  loue  thi  nei5bore  as 
thi  self. 

40  In  these  two  maundementis  Langith 
al  the  lawe  and  prophetis. 

41  Sothely  the  Pharisees  gedrid  to 
gidre,  Jhesus  axide  hem, 

42  Seyinge,  What  semeth  to  50U  of 
Crist,  whos  sone  is  he  1  Thei  seyen  to 
hym.  Of  Dauith. 

43  He  scith  to  hem,  Therforc  hou 
Dauith  in  spirit  clepith  hym  Lord, 
seyinge, 

44  The  Lord  seide  to  my  Lord,  Sitte 
on  my  ri5thalf,  til  that  I  put  thin 
enmyes  a  stole  of  thi  feet  1 

45  Therfore  jif  Dauyd  clepith  him 
Loi'd,  hou  is  he  his  sone? 

46  And  no  man  mijt  answere  a  word 
to  hym,  nether  eny  man  was  hardy  fi'O 
that  day,  for  to  axe  hym  more. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


119 


Chap.  XXIIl.  i  Thanne  Jhesus  spac 
to  the  cumpanyes  of  peple,  and  to  his 
disciplis, 

2  Seiynge,  Vpon  the  chaier  of  Moyses, 
scribis  and  Pharisees  seeten. 

3  Therfore  kepe  jee,  and  do  566  alle 
thingis,  what  euere  thingis  thei  shulen 
seie  to  30U.  But  nyl  5ee  do  after  her 
werkis ;  sothely  thei  scicn,  and  don  nat. 

4  Sothely  thei  byndcii  to  greuouse 
chargis,  and  vnportable,'''  and  puttcn  in 


33  And  when  the  people  herdc  that, 
they  were  astonyed  at  hys  doctrine. 

34  When  the  Pharises  had  horde  howe 
that  he  had  put  the  Saduces  to  silence, 
they  drewe  togeddcr. 

35  And  won  of  them,  whych  was  a 
doctour  off  lawe,  axed  him  a  question, 
temptinge  him,  and  sayinge, 

36  Master,  whych  is  the  grett  com- 
maundment  in  the  lawe  1 

37  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him,  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  Lorde  God,  with  all  thyne 
herte,  wyth  all  thy  soule,  and  with  all 
thy  mynde. 

38  This  is  the  fyrst  and  that  grett 
commaundment. 

39  And  there  ys  another  lyke  vnto 
thys ;  Thou  shalt  love  thyne  neghbour 
as  thy  selfe. 

40  In  these  two  commaundmenteshange 
all  the  lawe  and  the  prophettes. 

41  Whyll  the  Pharises  were  gaddered 
togedder,  Jesus  axed  them, 

42  Saynge,  What  thinke  ye  of  Christ, 
whose  Sonne  is  he  ?  They  sayde  vnto 
hym,  The  sonne  of  David. 

43  He  sayde  vnto  them,  Howe  then 
doeth  David  in  spirite  call  him  Lorde, 
saynge, 

44  The  Lorde  sayde  to  my  Lorde,  Sytt 
on  my  ryght  honde,  tyll  I  make  thyne 
enncmycs  thy  fote  stole  1 

45  Yf  David  call  hym  Lorde,  howe  is 
he  then  his  sonne  1 

46  And  none  of  them  coulde  answcre 
him  ageyne  one  worde,  nether  durste 
eny  man  from  that  daye  forth,  axe  hym 
eny  moo  questions. 


Chap.  XXIIL     i  Then  spake  Jesus 
to  the  people,  and  to  hys  disciples, 

2  Saynge,  The  scrybs  and  the  Pharises 
sitt  in  Moses  seate. 

3  Whatsoever  they  byd  you  observe, 
that  obsoi-ve,  and  do.  But  after  their 
workes  do  not ;  for  they  sayc,  and  do 
not. 

4  Ye  and  they  bynde  hevy  burthens, 
and  greveous  to  be  borne,  and  ley  them 


120 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.  [St.  Matt. 

manna  exla ;    and  nella]>  liig  da    mid 
heora  fingre  set-Iirinan. 

5  Ealle  heora  wore  liig  d5)),  dset  menn 
hi  geseon ;  hig  tobrEeda}'  hyra  heals- 
Ijec/  and  msersia])  heora  reafa  fnadu. 

6  Hig  lufigeajj  da  fyrmestan  setl  on 
gebeorscypum,  and  da  fyrmestan  lareow- 
setl  on  gesamnungum ; 

7  And  dset  hig  man  grcte  on  stratum, 
and  dait  menn  hig  lareowas  nemnon. 

8  jSTe  gyrne  ge  dset  eow  man  lareowas 
nemne  ;  an  ys  eower  lareow,  ge  synt 
ealle  gebrodru. 

9  And  ne  nemne  ge  eow  feder  ofer 
eorjjan,  an  ys  eower  feeder,  se  de  on 
heofonum  ys. 

10  Ne  eow  man  ne  nemne  lareowas, 
fordam  an,  Crist,  is  eower  lareow. 

11  Se  de  eower  yldest  sy,  beo  se  eower 
]>ea.. 

1 2  Witodlice  se  de  hyne  upp-alieff>,  se 
byl?  genyderod ;  and  se  de  hyne  sylfne 
ge-eadmet,  se  by|)  up-ahafen.''' 

13  Wa  eow,  bocyras  and  Pharisei,  lic- 
ceteras,  fordam  ge  beluca[)  heofona  I'ice 
beforan  mannum  ;  ne  ge  in  ne  ga]j,  ne 
ge  ne  gejiafiaj)  dset  odre  ingan. 


14. 


15  Wa  eow,  bocyras  and  Pharisei,  lic- 
ceteras,  fordam  ge  befara})  sse  and  eor)5- 
an,   dset  ge   don  anne  seljjeodine  ;     and^ 
donne  he  geworden  by];,  ge  ged5)j  hyne 
helle  beam,  twyfealdlicor  donne  eow. 

16  Wa  eow,  blindan  latteowas,  ge  sec- 
geaj),  Sav;!  hwylc  swa  swere)>  on  temple, 
di^t  ys  naht ;  swa  hwa  swa  swerej)  on 
dses  temples  golde,  se  ys  scyldig. 

1 7  Eala  ge  dysegan  and  blindan,  hwsed- 
er  ys  mare,  de  dset  gold,  de  dset  tempi 
de  dset  gold  gehalga]?  1 

18  And  swa  hwa  swa  swere])  on  dam 
weofode,  dset  ys  naht ;   swa  hwylc  swa 


XXIII.  5-iS.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

to  slmlclres  of  men  ;  but  with  Iier  fyngir 
tlici  wolcii  uat  luoue  hem. 

5  Thciforc  thei  dou  allc  her  wcrkis, 
thiit  thei  be  seen  of  men  ;  forsothc  thei 
alargen  her  filateries/  and  magnyfie 
hemmys. 

6  Sothely  thei  hiueu  the  first  sittyng 
placis  in  supers,  and  the  first  chaiers  in 
synagogis  ; 

7  And  sahitaciouns  in  the  chepyng, 
and  to  ben  clepid  of  men  uiaistirs. 

8  Sotliely  nyl  5ee  ben  clejiid  maistir  ; 
for  con  is  5oure  maistir,  forsothc  alio 
56  bcu  brethren. 

9  And  nyl  5c  clepe  to  50U  a  fadir  on 
ertlie,  for  oon  is  pure  fadir,  that  is  in 
heuenes. 

10  Nether  be  je  clepid  maistirs,  for 
oon  is  50ur  maistre,  Crist. 

11  He  that  is  more  of  50U,  shal  be 
joure  mynystre. 

12  Forsothe  he  that  shal  hie  hym  self, 
shal  be  mekid  ;  and  he  that  shal  meeke 
hym  self,  shal  ben  euhaunsid. 

13  Sothely  woo  to  50U,  scribis  and 
Pharisees,  ypocritis,  for  ■^e  closen  the 
kyngdam  of  heuenes  before  men  ;  sothe- 
ly 56  cutren  nat,  ne  sutlre  men  entrynge 
for  to  entre. 

14  Woo  to  30U,  scribis  and  Diarisees, 
ypocritis,  that  etcn  the  housis  of  widues, 
in  longe  preier  preyinge  ;  for  this  thing 
56  shulcn  take  the  more  dom. 

15  Woo  to  50U,  scribis  and  Pharisees, 
ypocritis,  tliat  cumpasen  the  se  and  the 
lond,  that  jee  maken  o  proselite  ^^  and 
whanne  he  shal  be  maad,  56  maken  hym 
a  sone  of  lielle,  double  more  than  50U. 

16  Woo  to  50U,  blynde  lederis,  that 
seien.  Who  euere  shal  swere  by  the 
temple  of  God,  no  thing  is  ;  sothely  he 
that  slial  swere  in  the  gold  of  the  temple, 
owitli.^ 

17  "^ee  folis  and  blynde,  forsothe  what 
is  more,  the  gold,  or  tlic  temple  that 
halowith  the  gold  ] 

18  And  wlio  cucr  shal  swere  in  the 
auter,   no   tiling   i.s ;    but   he   that  shal 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


121 


o'l  mennes  shuldcrs ;  but  they  them 
sylfe  wyl  not  move  them  with  one 
fynger. 

5  All  there  workcs  they  do,  for  to  be 
sene  of  men  ;  they  sett  abroadc  there 
j)hilateris,  and  make  large  borders  on 
there  garmenttes. 

6  And  love  to  sytt  vppermoostc  at 
feastes,  and  to  have  the  chefc  seates  iu 
the  synagogges ; 

7  And  gretynges  in  the  mai'ketes,  and 
to  be  called  of  men  i-abi. 

8  But  ye  shall  nott  sufFre  youre  selves 
to  be  called  rabi ;  for  one  )'s  youre 
master,  that  is  to  wytt  Christ,  and  all 
ye  ai-e  brethren. 

9  And  call  ye  no  man  youre  father  on 
the  crth,  for  one  is  youre  father,  and  he 
is  in  heven. 

10  Be  ye  not  called  masters,  for  one 
3's  youre  master,  and  he  is  Christ. 

11  He  that  is  greateste  amonge  you, 
shalbe  j'oure  servaunte. 

12  But  whosoever  exaltcth  hym  silfc; 
shalbe  brought  lowe  ;  and  he  that  sub- 
mitteth  him  silfe,  shalbe  exalted. 

13  AVo  be  vnto  you,  scribs  and  Pharises, 
dissemblers,  for  ye  sheet  vp  the  kyng- 
dom  of  heven  before  men ;  ye  youre 
selves  goo  nott  in,  nether  suffre  ye  them 
that  come  to  enter  in. 

14  Wo  be  vnto  you,  scribes  and  Pha- 
rises, for  ye  devoure  widdowes  houses, 
and  that  vnder  a  coloure  of  praying 
longe  prayers  ;  wherfore  ye  shall  receave 
greater  damnacion. 

15  Wo  be  vnto  you,  scriljcs  and  Pha- 
rises, ypocritcs,  for  ye  compasse  see  and 
londe,  to  brynge  one  in  to  youre  belefe ; 
and  when  ye  have  brought  him,-  ye 
make  hym  two  folde  more  the  chylde 
off  hell,  then  ye  youre  selves  arc. 

16  Wo  be  vnto  you,  biynd  gides,  for 
ye  saye,  Whosoever  sweare  by  the  tem- 
ple, yt  ys  nothinge  ;  but  whosoc\er 
sweare  by  the  golde  of  the  temple,  he  is 
detter. 

17  Ye  folcs  and  blindc,  whether  is 
greater,  the  golde,  or  the  temple  that 
sanctifyeth  the  golde  ] 

18  And  whosoever  swcareth  by  the 
aulter,  it  is  nothinge  ;    but  whosoever 


122 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

swere])  on  doere    ofFriinge  de  ofer  daet 
weofocl  ys,  se  ys  gyltig. 

19  Eala  ge  blindaii,  hw?eder  ys  mare, 
de  offrung,  de  dset  weofod  de  gehalgaj) 
da  offrunge  ? 

20  Witodlice  se  de  swere]?  on  weofode, 
he  swerej)  on  liim,  and  on  eallum  dam 
de  him  ofer  synt. 

21  And  se  de  swere})  on  temple,  he 
swerej)  on  him,  and  on  dam  de  him  on- 
eardiaf). 

22  And  se  de  swera[)  on  lieofonan,  he 
sweryjj  on  Godes  })rym-setle,  and  on 
dam  de  ofyr  dset  sitt. 

23  Wa  eow,  boceras  and  Pharisei,  lic- 
ceteras,  ge  de  teodia})  mintan,  and  dile, 
and  cumyn,  and  ge  forleton  da  |)ing  de 
synt  hefigeran  dsere  je,  dom,  and  mild- 
heortnysse,  and  geleafan.  Das  |)ing  hyt 
gebyrede  daet  ge  dydon,  and  da  odre  ne 
forleton. 

24  La  blindan  latteowas,  ge  drehnigea|> 
done  gnajt  Tiweg,  and  drincaj?  done  olfend. 

25  Wa  eow,  boceras  and  Pharisei,  lic- 
ceteras,  fordam  go  cltensia])  dret  widutan 
ys,  caliceas  and  discas ;  and  ge  synt  in- 
nan  fulle  reaflaces  and  unclaennysse. 

26  Eala  du  blinda  Phariseus,  cleensa 
eeryst  djet  widinnan  ys  calices  and  disces,. 
dset  hyt  si  claene  dset  widutan  ys. 

27  Wa  eow,  boceras  and  Pharisei,  Kc- 
ceteras,  fordam  ge  synt  gelice  hwitum 
byrgenum,  da  |;incea|)  mannum  utan 
wlitige  ;  and  hig  synt  innan  fulle  de- 
adra  bana,  and  ealre  fylj'e. 

28  And  swa  ge  setywaj)  mannum  utan 
rihtwise  ;  innan  ge  synt  fulle  liccetunge- 
and  unrihtwisnesse. 

29  Wa  eow,  boceras  and  Pharisei,  Iic- 
ceteras,  ge  de  timbriaj)  witegena  byrg- 
ena,  and  glengaj)  rihtwisra  gemynd- 
stowa, 

30  And  ge  eweda)),  Gyf  we  weeron  on 
ure  fsedera  dagum,  nseron  we  heora  ge- 
feran  on  dsera  Avitegena  blodes  gyte. 

31  Witodlice  ge  synt  eow  sylfum  to 
gewitnysse,  d?et  ge  synt  dtera  bearn  de-i 
ofsloijon  da  witejjan.  \ 


XXI 11.  I9-3I-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

swcrc  in  the  jifte  that  is  on  the  aiitcr, 
owitli. 

1 9  Blyiulc  men,  forsothc  what  is  more, 
the  5ift,  or  the  auter  that  halowith  the 
5ifte  I 

20  Forsothe  he  that  swcrith  in  the 
autor,  swerith  in  it,  and  alle  thingis  that 
ben  theron. 

21  And  he  that  swcrith  in  the  tcmjilc, 
swerith  in  it,  and  in  hym  that  dwellith 
in  the  temple. 

22  And  he  that  swerith  in  licncnc, 
swerith  in  tlie  trone  of  God,  and  in  hym 
that  sittith  theron. 

23  Woo  to  50U,  scribis  and  Pharisees, 
Jl^ocritis,  that  tithen  mente,  anete,  and 
comyn,  and  han  lefte  tho  thingis  that 
ben  grenouser^  of  the  h;we,  dom,  and 
mercy,  and  feith.  And  these  tliingis  it 
behofte^  for  to  do,  and  not  to  leeue 
hem. 

24  Blynde  leders,  clensynge  a  gnatte, 
but  swulowynge  a  camch 

25  Woo  to  50U,  scril)is  and  Pharisees, 
ipocritis,  that  maken  clene  that  thing  of 
the  cuppe  and  plater,  that  is  with  out- 
forth  ;  forsothe  with  ynnc  30  ben  ful  of 
raueyne  and  vnclennesse. 

26  Thou  blynd  Pharisee,  dense  first 
that  thing  of  the  cuppe  and  plater  that 
is  with  ynneforth,  that  and  that  thing 
that  is  with  outenforth  be  maad  clene. 

27  Woo  to  50U,  scribis  and  Pharisees, 
ipocritis,  that  ben  lie  to  scpulcris  maad 
Avhijt,  the  whiche  with  outen  forth  semen 
faire  to  men  ;  sothely  with  ynnc  thei  ben 
ful  of  boonys  of  dead  men,  and  al  filthe. 

28  So  and  5ee  forsothe  with  outen 
forth  apcren  iuste  to  men  ;  but  with 
jTine  jec  ben  ful  of  ypocrisie  and  wickid- 
nesse. 

29  Woo  to  30U,  scribis  and  Pharisees, 
ipocritis,  that  bclden  scpulcris  of  pro- 
j)hetis,  and  maken  faire  the  birielis  of 
iuste  men, 

30  And  seien,  5if  '^^'e  hadden  ben  in 
the  dayes  of  our  fadris,  we  shuldcn 
nat  han  ho.  liere  felowis  in  the  blood  of 
prophetis. 

31  And  so  5e  ben  in  witnessyng  to  5011 
self,  for  5e  ben  the  sonys  of  hem  that 
slowen  the  prophetis. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


12:} 


swearcth  by  the  offeringc  that  lyoth  on 
the  anltre,  ys  detter. 

19  Ye  foles  and  blinde,  whether  is 
greater,  the  oll'eringe,  or  the  aultrc 
whych  sanctifyeth  the  offeringc  1 

20  Whosoever  therfore  swearcth  bo 
the  anltre,  sweareth  bi  it,  and  by  all 
that  there  on  is. 

21  And  whosoever  sweareth  by  the 
temple,  swearcth  by  it,  and  by  hym  that 
dwellcth  there  in. 

22  And  he  that  sweai'cth  by  hcven, 
swearcth  by  the  seate  of  God,  and  by 
hym  that  sytteth  thereon. 

23  Wo  be  to  you,  scrybes  and  Pha- 
rises,  desemblers,  for  ye  tythe  mynt, 
annys,  and  commen,  and  leave  the 
waygthtyer  mattres  of  the  lawe  ondone, 
iudgcment,  mercy,  and  fayth.  These 
ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to  have 
lefte  the  othre  ondone. 

24  Ye  blinde  gydes,  which  stray nc  out 
a  gnat,  and  swaloAve  a  cammyll. 

25  Wo  be  to  you,  sci-ybes  and  Pharises, 
ypocrites,  for  ye  make  clene  the  vtter 
side  off  the  cuppe  and  off  the  platter ; 
but  with  in  they  are  full  of  brybcry  and 
cxcesse. 

26  Thou  blynde  Pharise,  dense  fyrst 
that  which  is  with  in  the  cuppe  and  the 
platter,  that  the  outsyde  maye  also  be 
dene. 

2  7  Wo  be  to  you,  scrybes  and  Pharises, 
ypocrites,  for  ye  are  lyke  vnto  paynted 
tombes,  which  appere  beautyfull  out- 
wardcs ;  but  are  with  in  full  off  deed 
mens  bones,  and  of  all  fylthyncs. 

28  So  are  ye,  for  outwardes  ye  appere 
rightuus  vnto  men  ;  when  with  in  ye 
are  full  of  dissimulacion  and  iniciuitc. 

29  Wo  be  vnto  you,  scribes  and  Pha- 
rises, ypocrytes,  ffor  ye  bilde  the  tombes 
off  the  prophetes,  and  garnisshc  the 
sepulchres  off  iuste  men, 

30  And  saye,  Yf  we  had  bene  in  ourc 
fathers  tyme,  we  wolde  not  have  bene 
partners  with  them  in  the  bloud  of  the 
])r()phetcs. 

31  So  are  ye  witnesses  vnto  youre 
selves,  that  ye  are  the  children  of  them 
which  killed  the  prophetes. 


124 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Matt. 

32  And  gefylle  ge  diet  gemet  eowra 
fsedera. 

33  Eala  ge  nseddran,  and  nfeddrena 
cynn,  \m  fleo  ge  frani  helle  dome?^ 

34  Ic  sends  to  eow  witegan,  and  wise 
boceras ;  and  ge  liig  ofslea]?,  and  li6]>, 
and  swinga))  on  eowrum  gesomnungum, 
and  ge  big  ebta})  of  byrig  on  byrig  ; 


35  Dtet  ofer  eow  cume  eelc  rihtwis 
b]5d,  de  WEBS  agoten  ofer  eoi'jjan,  fram 
Abeles  bl5de  daes  rihtwisan  od  Zach- 
arias  blod,  Baracbias  suna,  done  ge  of- 
slogon  betwyx  dam  temple  and  dam 
Aveofode. 

36  SoJ?  ic  eow  secge,  ealle  das  Jjing 
cumaj)  ofer  das  cneorisse. 

37  Eala  Jerusalem,  cala  Jerusalem,'''  du 
de  da  witegan  ofslihst,  and  mid  stanum 
oftorfast  da  de  to  de  asende  synt,  swide 
oft  ic  wolde  dine  beam  gegaderigan, 
swa  seo  benii  byre  cicenu  under  byre 
fyderu  gegadera)?,  and  dii  noblest. 

38  Witodlice  mi !  byj>  eower  bus  eow 
weste  forlseten. 

39  So))  ic  secge  eow,  ne  geseo})  ge 
me  lieonon-forj5,  ^rdam  de  ge  secgeou, 
Sy  gebletsod  se,  de  com  on  Dribtnes 
naman. 


Chap.  XXIV.  i  And  da  se  Hselend 
ut-eode  of  dam  temple  ;  bim  to-genea- 
Iccbton  bys  leorning-cnibtas,  dset  bi  bim 
tetywdon  daes  temples  getimbrunge. 

2  Da  andswarode  be  bim  and  cwos]>, 
Geseo)>  ge  call  dis  1  So})  ic  secge  eow, 
ne  by])  ber  Isefed  stan  uppau  stane,  de 
ne  beo  toworpen. 

3  Da  he  sset  uppan  Oliuetes  dune,  da 
comon  bys  leorning-cnibtas  diblice,  and 
cweedon,  Sfege  us,  bwsenne  das  })ing 
gewurdon,  and  bwylc  tacn  si  dines 
tocymes,  and  worulde  ge-endunge. 

4  Da  andswarode  be  bim  and  cwsejj, 
Warnia]),  dset  eow  nan  ne  beswice. 


XXIII. 32.-XXIV. 4.] '^VYCLIFFE,  1389. 

32  Ami  5c  fulfillen  the  mesure  of  30urc 
fadris. 

33  3^*0  sarpcntis,  fruytis^  of  eddris,''' 
hoii  shulcn  500  Hcc  fro  the  doiu  of 
hellc  ? 

34  Therforc  loo !  I  sendc  to  50U  pro- 
phctis,  and  wise  men,  and  seribis  ;^  and 
of  heia  5ec  sliulen  slee,  and  cvucitie, 
and  of  hem  50  shuleu  bete  in  jour  syna- 
gogis,  and  shuleu  pursue  fro  citee  in  to 
citee ; 

35  That  al  the  iuste  blode  come  vpon 
50U,  that  was  shed  on  the  erthe,  fro 
the  blood  of  iust  Abel  til  the  blood  of 
Zacharie,  the  sone  of  Barachie,  whom 
3ee  sloweu  bitwixe  the  temple  and  the 
autcr. 

36  Ti*ewli  I  seie  to  50U,  alle  these 
thingis  shulen  come  vpon  this  genera- 
cioun. 

37  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  that  sleest 
prophctis,  and  stonyst  hem  that  ben 
sent  to  thee,  hoii  oft  wold  I  gedre  to 
gidre  thi  sonys,  as  an  henne  gedreth 
togidre  hir  ehikenys  vndir  hir  wengis, 
and  thou  woldist  nat. 

38  Loo !  50ure  hous  shal  be  lefte  to 
50U  desert.^ 

39  Forsothe  I  seie  to  30U,  jee  shvilen 
nat  see  me  fro  hennys  forth,  til  that  jce 
seicn,  Blessid  is  he,  that  cumeth  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


125 


Chap.  XXIV.  i  And  Jhesus,  gon  out 
of  the  temple,  wente ;  and  his  disciplis 
camen  nij  to  hym,  that  thei  shulden 
shewe  to  hym  the  bildjnigis  of  the 
temple. 

2  Forsothe  he  answerynge  seith  to 
hem.  Seen  jee  alle  these  thingis  1  Trewly 
I  seie  to  50U,  a  stoon  shal  nat  be  lefte 
here  on  a  stoon,  the  whiche  shal  nat  be 
distruyed. 

3  Sothely  hym  sittynge  on  the  hil  of 
Olpicte,  disciplis  camen  nij  to  him 
priuely,  seiynge,  )Seie  to  vs,  whannc  thes 
thingis  schulen  be,  and  what  tokene  of 
thi  comynge,  and  of  ending  of  the  world. 

4  And  Jlicsus  answeringe  scide  to  hem, 
Se  3c,  that  no  man  disceyue  30U. 


32  Fulfyll  ye  lykc  wyse  the  measure 
of  youre  fathers. 

33  Ye  serpcntes,  and  gencracion  of 
vipers,  howe  shall  ye  scape  the  damp- 
nacion  of  hell  1 

34  Wherforc  bcholde!  Y  sende  vuto 
you  pruphctcs,  wyse  men,  and  scribes ; 
and  ofl'  them  some  shall  ye  kyll,  and 
crucifie,  and  some  shall  ye  scourge  in 
youre  synagogges,  and  persecute  from 
cite  to  cite  ; 

35  Thatt  all  righteous  blond  may  ftxll 
on  you,  which  was  sliced  apon  the  erth, 
from  the  bloud  of  rightous  Abcll  vnto 
the  bloud  of  Zacharias,  the  sonne  of 
Barachias,  whom  ye  slewc  betwcne  the 
temple  and  the  altre. 

36  Verely  Y  say  vnto  you,  all  these 
thinges  shall  light  apon  this  gencra- 
cion. 

37  Hierusalcm,  Hierusalem,  which  kyll- 
est  prophetes,  and  stonest  them  which 
are  sent  to  the,  howe  often  wolde  I  have 
gaddered  thy  children  to  gedder,  as  the 
henne  jraddreth  her  chickens  vnder  her 
wynges,  but  ye  wolde  not. 

38  Beholde !  youre  habitacion  shalbe 
lefte  vnto  you  desolate. 

39  For  Y  saye  vnto  you,  ye  shall  not 
se  me  hence  forth,  tyll  that  ye  saye, 
Blessed  ys  he,  that  commeth  in  the 
name  off  the  Lorde. 


Chap.  XXIV.  i  And  Jesus  went  out, 
and  departed  from  the  temple  ;  and  his 
disciples  cam  to  hym,  for  to  shewe  hym 
the  byldinge  of  the  temple. 

2  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Se  ye  not 
all  these  thinges  1  Verely  Y  saye  vnto 
you,  there  shall  not  be  here  leeft  one 
stone  vppon  another,  that  shall  not  be 
destroyed. 

3  And  as  he  sat  vppon  the  mount 
Olivete,  his  disciples  cam  vnto  hym 
secretly,  sayingc.  Tell  vs,  when  this 
shalbe,  and  what  signe  shalbe  of  thy 
comminge,  and  of  the  endc  of  the  worldc. 

4  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them.  Take  hede,  that  no  man  desceave 
you. 


126 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

5  Manega  cuma)j  on  mmum  naman, 
and  cwecta]?,  Ic  com  Crist ;  and  be- 
swicajj  manega. 

6  Witodlice  ge  gehyra]?  gefeoht,  and 
gefeolita  lilisan ;  wai-nigea)i,  dset  ge  ne 
beon  gedrefede ;  etas  Jjing  seed  on  ge- 
weordan,  ac  nys  donne  gyt  se  ende. 

7  peod  win|>  ongen  })eode,  and  rice 
ongen  rice,  and  mann-cwealmas  beojj, 
and  huugras,  wide  geond  land,  and  eorjj- 
an  styrunga  ; 

8  Ealle  das  |nng  synt  dsera  sara  an- 
ginnu. 

9  Donne  syllaj>  hi  eow  on  gedrefed- 
nysse,  and  ofsleaj)  eow,  and  ealle  menn 
eow  liatigeaj)  for  minum  naman. 

10  And  donne  beo]>  manega  unge- 
trywsode,  and  belsewa))  betwyx  him,  and 
hatigaj)  him  betwyuan. 

1 1  And  manega  lease  witegan  cuma}>, 
and  beswicajj  manega. 

1 2  And  fordam  de  unrihtwisnys  ricsajj, 
manegra  lufu  acola]) ; 

13  Witodlice  se  de  |5urhwuna}5  od  ende, 
se  by))  hal. 

14  And  dis  g5dspel  by|)  bodod  ofer 
ealle  eorjian,  on  gewitnesse  eallum  {fe- 
odum ;  and  doune  cymf)  seo  ge-endung. 

15  Donne  ge  geseo)>  da  onsceonunge 
drere  toworpennysse,  de  se  witega  ge- 
cvgej),  Daniel,  da  he  stod  on  haligre 
stowe ;   ongyte,  se  de  hyt  rset ; 

16  Fleon  donne  to  muntiim,  da  de  on 
ludea-lande  synt ; 

17  And  se  de  ys  uppan  hys  huse,  ne 
ga  he  nyder  dset  he  senig  l>iug  on  his 
huse  fecce ; 

18  And  se  de  is  on  recere,  ne  cyn-e  he 
dset  he  hys  tunecan  nyme. 

19  Wa  eacniendum  and  fedendum  on 
dam  dagum. 

20  Bidda)),  dset  eower  fleam  on  wintra, 
odde  on  reste-dsege,  ne  geweorde. 

2 1  WitodHce  donne  hj]>  swa  mycel  ge- 
deorf,  swa  nses  of  middan-geardes  frumau 


XXIV.  5-21.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

5  !Many  scluilcn  come  in  my  name, 
scyyngc,  I  am  Crist ;  and  thei  scluilcn 
disccyue  mauyc. 

6  Sothly  50  ben  to  liccre  batcyls^  and 
opynyouns  of  bateyls  ;  se  5e,  that  5c  ben 
not  distroblid  ;  forsoth  it  bilioucth  thes 
tliingis  to  be  don,  but  not  5it  is  the 
ende. 

7  Folk  schal  ryse  to  gldcre  a5cn  folk, 
and  rcwme  in  to  rowme,  and  pcstilencis, 
and  hungris,  and  erthemouyngis  schulen 
be  by  placis ; 

8  Forsothe  alle  thes  thingis  ben  bigyn- 
nyngis  of  sorwis. 

9  Thenne  thei  schulen  bitake  50U  in  to 
tribulacioun,  and  thei  schulen  slee  50U, 
and  5e  schulen  be  in  hate  to  alle  folkis 
for  my  name. 

10  And  thanne  manye  schulen  be 
sclaundrid,  and  to  gidere  bitraye,'''  and 
in  hate  haue  to  gidere. 

I T  And  many  false  prophetls  schulen 
ryse,  and  disceyue  many. 

12  And  for  wiekidnesse  schal  be  plen- 
teous, the  chai'ite  of  manye  schal  wexe 
coold ; 

1 3  Forsothe  he  that  schal  dwelle  stable 
vnto  the  ende,  he  this  schal  be  saaf. 

14  And  this  gospel  of  kyngdom  schal 
be  prechid  in  al  the  woi'ld,  in  to  witness- 
inge  to  alle  folkis  ;  and  thanne  the  ende 
schal  come. 

15  Therfore  whenne  50  schulen  se  the 
abhomynacioun  of  discomfort,  that  is 
seid  of  Danyel,  the  prophete,  stondynge 
in  the  hooly  place  ;  he  that  redith,  vndir- 
stonde ; 

16  Thanne  thei  that  ben  in  Judee,  fle 
to  mountcyns ; 

17  And  he  that  is  in  the  hous  roof, 
come  not  down  to  take  ony  thing  of  his 
hous ; 

18  And  he  that  is  in  the  feeld,  turne 
not  a5en  to  take  his  coote. 

19  Forsoth  wo  to  wymmcn  with  ehilde 
And  noryschinge  in  tho  dayes. 

20  Sothly  preie  3e,  that  50ure  fleynge 
be  not  maad  in  wyntir,  or  saboth. 

2 1  Forsothe  thanne  schal  be  greet  tri- 
bulacioun, what  maner  was  not  fi'o  the 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


127 


5  For  many  shall  come  in  my  name, 
sainge,  Y  am  Christ ;  and  shall  deceave 
many. 

6  Ye  shall  heare  of  warrcs,  and  of  the 
noysc  of  warres  ;  but  se,  that  ye  be  not 
troubled  ;  for  all  these  thinges  nmste 
come  to  passe,  but  the  ende  is  not  yet. 

7  For  nacion  shall  ryse  ageynste  nacion, 
and  realme  ageynste  realme,  and  there 
shalbe  pestilence,  and  honger,  and  erth- 
(juakes  in  all  quarters ; 

8  All  these  are  the  beginnynge  off 
sorowes. 

9  Then  .shall  they  put  you  to  trouble, 
and  shall  kyll  you,  and  ye  shalbe  hated 
off  all  nacions  ffor  my  names  sake. 

10  And  then  shall  many  fall,  and  shall 
betraye  won  another,  and  shall  hate  won 
the  other. 

11  And  many  Itxlce  prophetes  shall 
ai-yse,  and  shall  deceave  many. 

1 2  And  because  iniquite  shall  have  the 
vpper  hande,  the  love  of  many  shall 
abate ; 

J  3  But  he  that  endureth  to  the  ende, 
shalbe  safe. 

14  And  this  gospell  off  the  kyngdom 
shalbe  preached  in  all  the  worlde,  for  a 
witncs  vnto  all  nacions ;  and  then  shall 
the  ende  come. 

1 5  When  ye  then  shall  sc  the  abomi- 
nacion  and  desolacion,  spoken  of  by 
Daniell,  the  prophet,  stonde  in  the  holy 
place ;  whosoever  redeth  it,  let  hym 
vnderstonde  it ; 

16  Then  let  them  which  be  in  lury, 
flye  into  the  mountaynes  ; 

17  And  lett  hym  whych  is  on  the 
housse  toppe,  not  come  doune  to  take 
enytinge  out  of  his  housse ; 

18  Nether  let  hym  which  is  in  the 
felde,  returne  backe  to  fetche  his  clothes. 

19  Wo  be  in  those  dayes  to  them  that 
are  with  chylde  and  to  them  that  geve 
sucke. 

20  Butt  praye,  thatt  youre  fiyght  be 
not  in  the  ^vinther,  nether  on  the  saboth 
daye. 

21  For  then  shalbe  greate  tribula- 
cion,  suche  as  was  not  fi'om  the  begin- 


128 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.   [St.  Matt. 
od  dis,  ne  nu  ne  geweor]?. 

22  And  buton  da  dagas  gescyrte  wser- 
on,  nsere  nan  mann  hal  geworden ;  ac 
for  dam  gecorenum,  de  he  geceas,  da 
dagas  beo)>  gescyrte. 

23  Donne  gyf  eow  hwa  S£eg}>,  Nu! 
Crist  ys  her,  odde  dser,  ne  gelyfe  ge 
him. 

24  Donne  cumajj  lease  Cristas  and 
lease  witegan,  and  dop  mycle  tacn  and 
fore-beacn  ;  dset  da  beop  on  gedwolan 
gelgedde,  gyf  hyt  beon  mseg,  de  gecorene 
wseron. 

25  A¥itodlice  !  ic  hyt  eow  foressede. 

26  Gyf  hig  eow  secgea|>,  Her  he  ys  on 
westene,  ne  fare  ge  ut ;  gyf  hig  secgeajj, 
Her  he  ys  on  Jjurh-farun,  ne  gelyfe  ge. 

27  Witodlice  swa  swa  liget  fserj)  fram 
est-dsele,  and  8etyw]>  od  west-deel,  swa 
by]j  mannes  suna  tocyme. 

28  Swa  hwser  swa  hold  hj]>,  daeder 
beo])  eai'nas  gegaderode. 

29  S5na  sefter  dsera  daga  gedrefyd- 
nesse,  seo  sunne  by)?  forsworcen,  and  se 
mona  hys  leoht  ne  syljj,  and  steorran 
feallajj  of  dsere  heofenan,  and  dsere  heof- 
enan  misegenu  beojj  astyrede. 

30  And  donne  setywj)  mannes  suna 
tacn  on  heofonan,  and  donne  wepajj 
ealle  eorj'an  mseg|)a  ;  and  geseoj)  man- 
nes sunu  cumendne'''  on  heofonan  genip- 
um,'*'  mid  myclum  masgene  and  msegen- 
])rymme. 

31  And  he  asent  hys  englas  mid  bym- 
an,  and  mycelre  stefne  ;  and  hi  gegad- 
erigaj)  hys  gecorenan  of  feower  middan- 
eardes  endum,  of  heofona  heahnyssum 
od  hyra  gemseru. 

32  Leornigeajj  bigspel  be  dam  fic- 
treowe.  Donne  hys  twig  by]?  hnesce, 
and  leaf  acennede,  ge  witon,  dset  sumor 
ys  gehende ; 

33  And  wite  ge  swa,  donne  ge  das 
jjing  geseo]),  dset  he  ys  on  durum  ge- 
hende. 

34  So})  ic  secge  eow,  dset  deos  cneorys 
ne  gewit,  serdam  de  ealle  das  jjing  ge- 
weordon ; 


XXIY.  2-34.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

bi^ynnynj^j  of  tlic  world  to  now,  ncthir 
schal  1)0  inaatl. 

22  Ami  no  but  tlio  daycs  liaiklcn  be 
brc2:gicl,  al  ileisoli^  sohulde  not  be  maaJ 
saaf ;  but  tho  ilaycs  scliuleu  be  maad 
schort,  foi"  the  cliosun  men. 

23  Thanne  if  ony  man  sclial  seie  to 
50U,  Lo !  here  is  Crist,  or  there,  nyle  5c 
bileue. 

24  Forsothe  false  Cristis  and  false  pro- 
phetis  schulon  rysc,  and  thci  schulcn 
3yuc  grcte  tokenes  and  wondris  ;  so  that 
also  the  chosync  be  Icdd  in  to  errour,  if 
it  may  be  don. 

25  Lo  1  I  banc  biforc  scid  to  50U. 

26  Therforo  if  thci  schulcn  seie  to  50U, 
Loo  !  he  is  in  desert,  nyle  ;e  go  out  ; 
loo  I  in  pryuey  chambris,"''  uyle  30  bileue. 

27  Sothli  as  leyt  goth  out  fro  the  eest, 
and  apperith  til  in  to  the  west,  so  schal 
be  and  the  comynge  of  niannus  sonc. 

28  "Where  enci'e  the  body  schal  be,  and 
the  eeglis  schulcn  be  gedcrid  thidur. 

29  Forsothe  anoon  aftir  the  tribula- 
cioun  of  tho  dayes,  the  sunne  schal  be 
maad  dcrk,  and  the  mone  schal  not  3yue 
bir  lijt,  and  sterris  schulen  fallc  down 
fro  heuene,  and  the  vertues  of  heuenes 
schulen  be  mouyd. 

30  And  thanne  the  tokcne  of  mannus 
sone  schal  appere  in  heuene,  and  thanne 
alle  kynredis'''  of  erthe  schulcn  weyle ; 
and  thei  schulcn  se  mannus  sone  com- 
ynge in  the  clowdis  of  heuene,  with 
moche  vertu  and  mageste. 

31  And  he  schal  sende  his  angelis  with 
a  trumpe,  and  greet  voice ;  and  thei 
schulcn  gcdere  his  chosyne  fro  foure 
wyndis  of  heuene,  fro  the  hi5cstc  thiugis 
of  heuenes  til  teermes^  of  hem. 

32  Lerne  5e  the  parable  of  a  fyge  tree. 
"Whenne  his  bou3^  is  now  tendre,  and 
leeuys  sprungcn,  3ee  witcn,  that  somer 
is  ni5 ; 

33  So  and  3ee  whcnnc  5CC  shulen  se 
alle  these  thiugis,  witith  that  it  is  ni3, 
and  in  the  5atis. 

34  Trewly  I  seie  to  50W,  for  this  genc- 
racioun  slial  nat  passe,  til  that  alJe 
thingis  be  don  j 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


129 


nyngc  off  the  worlde  to  this  tyme,  ncr 
shalbe. 

22  Ye  and  except  those  dayes  shulde 
be  shortened,  shulde  no  llcsse  be  saved ; 
butt  for  the  choscns  sake,  those  dayes 
shalbe  shortened. 

23  Then  yff  cny  man  shall  saye  vnto 
you,  Lo  !  here  is  Christ,  or  there  is 
Christ,  belevc  it  not. 

24  Ffor  there  shall  arise  falce  Christes 
and  falce  prophctcs,  and  shall  gcvc 
grcate  signes  and  wonders  ;  so  greatly 
that  yff  it  were  possible,  even  the  chosen 
shulde  be  brought  in  to  errourc. 

25  Take  hedc  !  I  have  tolde  you  before. 

26  Yff  they  shall  saye  vnto  you,  Lo ! 
he  is  in  the  desert,  go  not  forth ;  yff 
they  saye,  lo  !  he  is  in  the  secret  places, 
beleve  nott. 

27  For  as  the  lightnynge  conieth  out 
off  the  eest,  and  shynetli  vnto  the  wcest, 
so  shall  the  commynge  off  the  sonne  of 
man  be. 

28  For  wheresoever  a  deed  body  is, 
even  thythcr  wyll  the  egles  resorte. 

29  Immediatly  after  the  tribulacious 
ofl'  those  dayes,  shall  the  sun  be  derken- 
eth,  and  the  mone  shall  not  geve  her 
light,  and  the  starres  shall  fall  from 
heven,  and  the  powers  of  heven  shall 
move. 

30  And  then  shall  appere  the  sygne  ot 
the  sonne  off  man  in  heven,  and  then 
shall  all  the  kynreddes  of  the  erth 
morne ;  and  they  shall  se  the  sonne  of 
man  come  in  the  cloudes  of  licven,  with 
power  and  grcate  maieste. 

31  And  he  shall  sende  his  angelles 
with  the  grcate  voyce  of  a  tromp  ;  and 
they  shall  gadder  to  gedthcr  his  chosen 
from  the  fower  wyndes,  and  from  the 
one  ende  off  the  worlde  to  the  other. 

32  Learne  a  similitude  of  the  fygge 
tree.  When  his  braunches  are  yet  tender, 
and  his  leves  spronge,  ye  knowe,  that 
sommer  is  nye  ; 

33  So  lyke  wyse  when  ye  se  all  these 
thynges,  be  ye  sure  that  it  is  neare,  even 
at  the  dores. 

34  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  thatt  this 
gcneracion  shall  not  passe,  tyll  all  be 
fuimied  i 


130 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

35  Heofone  and  eorjje  ge\vlta)>,  witod- 
lice  mine  word  ne  gewitajj. 

36  Nat  nan  mann  be  c!am  dtege  ne 
be  dfei-e  tide,  ne  furdan  englas,  buton 
fedei^  ana. 

37  Witodlice  swa  swa  on  Noes  dagum 
^Yses,  swa  by})  mannes  suna  tocyme. 

38  Swa  hi  wseron,  on  dam  dagum  jer 
dam  flode,  etende  and  drincende,  and 
wifigende  and  gyfta  syllende,  od  done 
dseg,  de  Noe  on  da  earce  eode ; 

39  And  hi  nyston,''"  ter  d?et  flod  com, 
and  nam  hig  ealle,  swa  by])  mannes  suna 
toc}Tne. 

40  Donne  beo])  twegen  on  secere,  an 
by])  genumen,  and  oder  by])  leefed ; 

41  Twa  beo])  set  cwyi-ne  grindende,  an 
by])  genumen,  and  oder  by])  Isefed ; 
twegen  beo])  on  bedde,  an  by})  genumen, 
and  oder  by])  Icefed.'*' 

42  Waciga])  witodlice,  fordam  de  ge 
nyton  on  hwylcere  tide  eower  Hlaford 
cuman  wyle. 

43  Witaj),  dfet  gyf  se  hired es  ealdor 
wiste  on  hwylcere  tide  se  J'cof  toweard 
waere,  witodlice  he  wolde  wacigean,  and 
nolde  ge])afigan"''  daet  man  hys  hils  un- 
derdulfe. 

44  And  fordam  beo  ge  gearwe,  fordam 
de  mannes  sunu  wyle  cuman,  on  dsere 
tide  de  ge  nyton. 

45  Wenst  dii  hwa  sy  getrywe  and 
gleaw  ])eow,  done  geset  hys  hlaford  ofer 
his  hired,  daet  he  him  on  tide  mete 
sylle  1 

46  Eadig'''  ys  se  })eow,  de  hys  hlaford 
byne  gemet  dus  dcndue,  donne  he  cym}). 

47  So})  ic  eow  secge,  daet  ofer  call  dfet 
he  ah  he  byne  geset. 

48  Gyf  se  yfela  ])eowa  ]ienc])  on  hys 
heortan  and  cwy]>,  Min  hlaford  ufera)) 
hys  cyme, 

49  And  agyn]>  beatan  hys  efen-])eowas, 
and  yt  and  drinc])  mid  druncenum  ; 

50  Donne  cym})  dees  weales  hlaford  on 


XXIV.  35-5°-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

35  Heuene  and  erthe  slmlen  passe,  but 
my  wordis  slmleu  nat  passe. 

36  Forsothe  of  tliilk  Jay  and  hour  no 
man  woot,  nctlier  angclis  of  hcuencs,  no 
but  the  I'iuhr  alone. 

37  Forsotlie  as  it  was  in  the  dayes  of 
Noye,  so  shal  be  and  the  comyng  of 
manncs  sone. 

38  For  as  in  the  days  bifore  the  grete 
flood,  thei  weren  etynge  and  drinkynge, 
■\veddynge  and  takynge  to  weddynge,  til 
in  to  tliat  day,  in  the  whiche  Noe  entride 
in  to  the  ship  ; 

39  And  thei  knewen  nat,  til  that  the 
grete  flood  came,  and  toke  alle  men,  so 
shal  be  the  cummyng  of  mannes  sone. 

40  Thanne  two  shulen  be  in  a  feeld, 
oon  shal  be  taken  to,  and  an  other 
left;^ 

41  Two  wymmen  shulen  be  gryndynge 
in  00  querne,  oon  shal  be  taken  to,  and 
the  other  forsaken  ;  two  in  00  bed,  the 
toon  shal  be  taken  to,  and  the  tother 
forsaken. 

42  Therfore  Avake  5ee,  for  jee  witen 
nat  in  what  houre  50ure  Lord  is  to 
cumme. 

43  Sothely  that  thing  wite  5ee,  for  5if 
the  housbonde  man  wiste  in  what  houre 
the  theef  were  to  cumme,  trewly  he 
shulde  wake,  and  sufi"re  nat  his  hous  to 
be  vndirmynyd. 

44  And  therfore  and  366  be  redy,  for  in 
what  hour  566  gessen  nat,  mannes  sone 
is  to  cumme. 

45  Who  gessist  thou  is  a  trew  seruaunt 
and  prudent,'*'  whom  his  lord  ordeynyde 
on  his  meynec,  that  he  5cue  to  hem 
mete  in  tyme  ? 

46  Blissid  is  that  seruaunt,  whom  his 
lord,  whenne  he  shal  cumme,  shal  fynde 
doynge  so. 

47  Trewly  I  seie  to  50U,  for  vpon  alle 
his  goodis  he  shal  ordeyne  hym. 

48  Forsothe  jif  thilk  yuel  seruaunt 
shal  seie  in  his  herte,  My  lord  makith 
dwellynge^  to  cum, 

49  And  bigynne  to  smyte  his  euen 
seruauntis,  sothely  ^if  he  ete  and  drynke 
with  drunkcnlewe  men  ; 

50  The   lord    of  thilk    seruaunt   shal 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


llil 


35  Heven  and  erth  shall  perisshe,  but 
my  wordcs  shall  abyde. 

36  But  of  that  dayc  and  houre  knowith 
no  man,  no  not  the  angels  of  heven,  but 
my  father  only. 

37  As  the  tyme  of  Noe  was,  so  lyke 
wysc  shall  the  commynge  of  the  sonne 
off  man  be. 

38  For  as  in  the  dayes  before  the  floud, 
they  dyd  eate  and  drynke,  mary  and 
were  maried,  even  vnto  the  daye,  that 
Noe  entred  in  to  the  shyppc  ; 

39  And  knewc  of  nothynge,  tyll  the 
floude  cam,  and  toke  them  all  awaye,  so 
shall  also  the  commynge  off"  the  sonne 
ofl"  man  be. 

40  Then  two  shalbe  in  the  feldes,  the 
one  shalbe  receaved,  and  the  other  shalbe 
refused  ; 

41  Two  shalbe  gryndinge  at  the  myll, 
the  one  shalbe  receaved,  and  the  other 
shalbe  refused 


42  'VVake  therefore,  because  ye  knowe 
nott  what  houre  youre  Master  wyll 
come. 

43  Off"  this  be  sure,  that  yff"  the  good 
man  off  the  housse  knewe  what  houre 
the  thefe  Avolde  come,  he  wolde  suerly 
Avatche,  and  not  suftre  his  housse  to  be 
broken  vppe. 

44  Therfore  be  ye  also  redy,  for  what 
houre  ye  tinke  leest  on,  in  the  same 
shall  the  sonne  of  man  come. 

45  Who  is  a  faythfuU  servaunte  and 
AV}'se,  Avhom  his  master  hath  made  ruler 
over  his  housholde,  ffbr  to  geve  them 
meate  in  season  convenient  1 

46  Hapj)y  is  that  servaunt,  Avhom  hys 
master,  when  he  comcth,  shall  flndc  so 
doinge. 

47  Verely  Y  saic  vnto  you,  he  shall 
make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goodes. 

48  But  and  yf  the  evyll  servaunt  shall 
saye  in  his  herte,  My  master  wyll  differ 
his  commynge, 

49  And  begynn  to  smyte  his  felowes, 
ye  and  to  eate  and  to  drynke  with  the 
dronkcn  ; 

50  That  servauntes  master  wyll  come 

K  2 


15l> 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

dam  dsege  de  he  na  lie  wen}*,  and  011 
dsere  tide  de  he  nat, 

51  And  todselj)  hyne,  and  aset  hys  dsel 
myd  licceterum  ;  deer  by]^  wop,  and  toj^a 
efi'istbituno:. 


Chap.  XXV.'''  i  Donne  byjj  heofena 
rice  gelic  dam  tyn  fsemnum,  de  da  leoht- 
fatu  namon,  and  ferdon  ongen  done 
brydguman  and  da  bryde ; 

2  Hyra  fif  wseron  dysige,  and  fif 
gleawe. 

3  Ac  da  fif  dysegan  namon  leoht-fatu, 
and  ne  namon  nanne  ele  mid  hym  ; 

4  Da  gleawan  namon  ele  on  hyra  fatum 
mid  dam  leoht-fatum. 

5  Da  se  brydguma  ylde,  da  hnappedon 
hig  ealle  and  slepon. 

6  Witodlice  to  middere  nihte  man 
hrymde  and  cwae}),  Nu  !  se  brydguma 
cymj),  fara])  him  togenes. 

7  Da  aryson  ealle  da  fsemnan,  and 
glengdon  heora  leoht-fatu. 

8  Da  cwae  don  da  dysegan  to  dam 
Avisum,  Syllajj  us  of  eowrum  ele,  fordam 
ure  leoht-fatu  synt  acwencte. 

9  Da  andswaredon  da  gleawan,  and 
cwaedon,  Nese,  delses  de  we  and  ge 
nabbon  genoh,  g&]>  to  dam  cypendum, 
and  bycgaj)  eow  ele. 

I  o  "Witodlice  da  hig  ferdon  and  Avoldon 
bycgean,  da  com  se  brydguma ;  and  da 
de  gearwe  wseron,  eodoii  in  mid  him  to 
dam  gyftum  ;  and  seo  duru  wa;s  belocen. 

I I  Da  set-nehstan  comon  da  odre  fcem- 
nan,  and  cwsedon,  Dryhtyn,  dryhtyn, 
laet  us  in. 

1 2  Da  andswarode  he  heom  and  cw&eh, 
So])  ic  eow  secge,  ne  can  ic  eow. 

13  "Witodlice  waciajj,  fordam  de  ge 
nyton  ne  done  dseg  ne  da  tide  . 


14  Sum  man  ferde  on  eljjeodinysse, 
and  clypode  hys  j^eowas,  and  betsehte 
hym  hys  sehta ; 

15  And   anum    he    sealde    fif  pund, 


XXTV.  5 1 .-XXV.  1 5.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Clime  in  the   day  in  wliiche  lie  liopith 
nat,  anil  in  hour  that  he  knowlth  nat, 

51  And  shal  departe  hyni,  and  put 
his  part  with  jiioci'itis  ;  there  shal  be 
weepynge,  and  betynge  togidrc  of  teeth. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


133 


Chap.  XXV.  i  Tlianne  the  kyngdam 
of  heucncs  shal  be  lie  to  ten  virgynys, 
the  whiche,  takynge  her  launipis,  wente 
out  mcetynge  the  spouse/  and  the 
spousesse  / 

2  Forsothe  fyue  of  hem  weren  foolis, 
and  fyue  prudent. 

3  But  the  fyue  foolis,  her  laumpis  taken, 
token  nat  oyle  with  hem  ; 

4  Forsothe  the  prudent  token  oyle  in 
her  vessels  with  laumpis. 

5  Forsothe  the  spouse"^  makynge  dwell- 
ynge,  alle  nappiden  and  slepten. 

6  Sothely  at  myd  ni5t  a  cry  was  maad, 
Loo  !  the  spouse  cummeth,  go  3ee  out 
metpige  to  hym. 

7  Thanne  alle  the  virgynys  rysen  vp, 
and  anourneden  her  laumpis. 

8  Sothely  the  foolis  seiden  to  the  wise, 
5eue  5ee  to  vs  of  5oure  oile,  for  oure 
laumpis  ben  qwenehid. 

9  The  prudent  answereden,  seyinge, 
Lest  perauenture  it  suffise  nat  to  us  and 
to  50U,  go  5ee  rather  to  men  sellynge, 
and  bye  to  50U. 

10  Forsothe  the  while  thei  wenten  for 
to  bye,  the  spouse  came  ;  and  tho  that 
weren  redy,  entriden  in  with  hym  to 
the  weddyngis  ;  and  the  5ate  is  shit. 

1 1  Sothely  at  the  last  and  the  other 
virgynys  camen,  seyinge,  Lord,  lord, 
opene  to  vs. 

1 2  And  he  answerynge  seith,  Trculy  I 
seie  to  50U,  I  knowe  nat  30U. 

13  And  so  wake  5ee,  and  preye,  for 
jee  witen  nat  the  day  ne  the  hour     . 


14  Sothely  as  a  man  goynge  fer  in 
])ilgrimage,  clepide  his  seruauntis,  and 
bitoke  to  hem  his  goodis ; 

15  And  to  oon  he  5aue  fyue  talentis,^ 


in  a  daye  when  he  loketh  not  for  hyiu, 
and  in  an  houre  that  he  is  not  ware  of, 

51  And  wyll  devyd  hym,  and  geve 
hym  his  rewarde  Aveth  ypocrites  ;  there 
slialbe  wcpinge,  and  gnassliinge  of  tethe. 


Chap.  XXV.  i  Then  the  kyngdom 
of  heven  shalbe  lykcncd  vnto  x  virgins, 
which  toke  their  lampes,  and  went  to 
mete  the  brydgrom ; 

2  Fyve  of  them  were  folysshe,  and  fyve 
were  wyse. 

3  The  foles  toke  their  lampes,  but  toke 
none  oyle  with  them  ; 

4  But  the  wyse  toke  oyle  with  them 
in  their  \ysselles  with  their  lampes  also. 

5  Whyll  the  brydgrome  taryed,  all 
slor.ibred  and  slepte. 

6  And  even  at  mydnyglit  there  was  a 
crye  made,  Beholde  !  the  brydgrome 
commeth,  goo  and  mete  hym. 

7  Then  all  those  virgins  arose,  and 
prepared  their  lampes. 

8  And  the  folysshe  sayde  to  the  wyse, 
Geve  vs  of  youre  oyle,  for  oure  lampes 
goo  out. 

9  But  the  wyse  answered,  sayinge.  Not 
so,  lest  there  be  not  ynought  for  vs  and 
you,  but  goo  rather  to  them  that  sell, 
and  by  for  youre  selves. 

10  In  conclusion  wliyll  they  went  to 
bye,  the  brydgroni  cam  ;  and  they  that 
were  redy,  went  in  Avith  hym  to  the 
weddinge  ;  and  the  gate  was  shett  vppe. 

11  Afterwardes  cam  also  the  other 
virgins,  sayinge.  Master,  master,  open 
to  vs. 

12  But  he  answered  and  sayde,  Verely 
I  saye  vnto  yOu,  Y  knowe  you  not. 

13  Loke  that  ye  watche  therefore,  for 
ye  knowe  nether  the  daye  nor  yet  the 
houre,  when  the  sonne  of  man  shall 
come. 

14  Lykwyse  as  a  eertcync  man  redy  to 
take  his  iorney  to  a  straimge  countre, 
culled  hys  servauntes  to  hym,  and  dc- 
lyvered  to  them  hys  gooddes  ; 

15  And  vnto  won  he  gave  v.  talentcs, 


i:j4 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

sumum  twa,  sumum  an,  segliwylcum  be 
hys  agenuiii  ma?gene  ;  and  fercle  soua. 

16  Da  ferde  se  de  da  fif  pund  under- 
feng,  ....  and  gestrynde  odere 
fife. 

17  And  ealswa  se  de  da  twa  underfeug, 
gesh'ynde  odre  twa. 

18  Witodlice  se  de  da?t  an  undcrfeng, 
ferde,  and  bedealf  liyt  on  eorj^au,  and 
behydde  hys  hlafordes  feob. 

19  Witodlice  *ftei-  mlclum  fyvste,  com 
dsera  J)eowa  blaford,  and  dyhte  byni 
gerad. 

20  Da  com  se  de  da  fif  pund  under- 
feng,  and  brobte  odi-e  fife,  and  cwiej), 
Hlaford,  fif  pund  dii  sealdest  me,  nu  ! 
ic  gestrynde  odre  fife. 

2 1  Da  cwPBJj  bys  blaford  to  bym,  Beo 
blij^e,  dii  goda  jjeow  and  getrywa ;  for- 
dam  de  dii  wserc  getrywe  ofer  lytle  j^ing, 
ic  gesette  de  ofer  mycle ;  ga  into  dines 
hlafordes  blisse. 

22  Da  com  se  de  da  twa  pund  under- 
feng,  and  cwsej?,  Hlaford,  twa  piind  du 
me  sealdest ;  mi !  ic  beebbe  gestryned 
odre  twa. 

23  Da  cw8e]5  hys  hlaford  to  bym,  Ge- 
blissa,  dii  goda  ]jeo\va  and  getrywa ; 
fordam  de  dii  Avsere  getrywe  ofer  feawa, 
ofer  fela  ic  de  gesette ;  ga  on  dines 
hlafordes  gefean. 

24  Da  com  se  de  dset  an  piind  uudei*- 
feng,  and  cw8sj>,  Hlaford,  ic  wat  dfet  du 
eart  beard  man  ;  dii  ripst  dser  dii  ne 
seowe,  and  gaderast  dser  du  ne  sjjreng- 
dest ; 

25  And  ic  ferde  of-draed,  and  behydde 
din  piind  on  eorjjan ;  her  dii  bsefst  dset 
din  ys. 

26  Da  andswarode  bys  blaford  him, 
and  cwse|;,  Dii  yfela  j^eow  and  slawa,  dii 
wistest  diet  ic  rype  dser  ic  ne  sawe,  and 
ic  gaderige  dser  ic  ne  stredde ; 

27  Hyt  gebjTcde  daet  dii  befjestest 
min  feob  myneterum,  and  ic  name  donne 
ic  come  dast  min  ys  mid  dam  gafole. 

28  A'nyma])  deet  pund  set  bym,    and 


XXV.  16-28.]     A\TrCLIFFE,  1389. 

forsothe  to  an  other  two,  but  to  an  other 
0011,  to  echo  after  his  owne  vcrtu  ;  and 
wente  forth  anoon. 

16  Forsothe  and  he  that  hadde  take 
f)iie  talentis,  Avente  forth,  and  wrou3te 
in  hem,  and  wan  other  fyue. 

17  Also  and  he  that  hadde  taken  two, 
van  other  two. 

18  Sothely  he  tliat  hadde  taken  oon, 
goyngc  forth,  dalf  in  to  the  crthe,  and 
hiilde  the  mone  of  his  lord. 

19  l^iot  after  nuiche  tynie,  the  lord  of 
tho  scruauntis  eame,  and  puttide  resoun 
with  hem. 

20  And  he  that  hadde  taken  fyue 
t-alentis,  cuniniynge  to,  oflfride  other 
fyue,  seyinge,  Lord,  thou  bitokist  me 
f\iie  talentis,^  loo !  I  haue  geten  ouer 
other  fyue. 

2)  His  lord  seith  to  hym,  Wei  be  thou, 
good  seruauut  and  feithful;'''  for  vpon 
fewe  thingis  thou  hast  ben  trewe,  I  shal 
ordcyne  thee  vpon  many  thingis  ;  entre 
thou  in  to  the  ioye  of  thi  lord. 

22  Forsothe  and  he  that  hadde  taken 
t^Yo  talentis,  eame  to,  and  seith.  Lord, 
thou  bitokist  to  me  two  talentis  ;  loo  ! 
I  haue  geten  ouer  other  two. 

23  His  lord  seith  to  him,  Wei  be  thou, 
good  seruaunt  and  trewe  ;  for  vpon 
fewe  thingis  thou  hast  ben  trewe,  I  shal 
ordeyne  thee  vpon  many  thingis  ;  entre 
thou  in  to  the  ioye  of  thi  lord. 

24  Forsothe  and  he  that  hadde  taken 
00  talent,  cummynge  to,  seith,  Lord,  I 
wote  that  thou  art  an  hard  man  ;  thou 
repist  wher  thou  hast  nat  sewen,  and 
thou  gederist  to  gidre  wher  thou  hast 
nat  spreedde  abrood ; 

25  And  I  dredynge  wente,  and  hidde 
thi  talent  in  the  erthe ;  loo  I  thou  hast 
that  that  is  thin. 

26  Sothely  his  lord  answerynge,  seide 
to  hym,  Yuel  seruaunt  and  slowe,  wistist 
thou  that  I  repe  wher  I  sewe  nat,  and 
gedere  to  gidre  wher  I  spradde  nat 
abrood  ? 

27  Therfore  it  bihouyde  thee  to  sende^ 
my  monee  to  chaungers,  that  and  I 
cummynge  shulde  haue  resceyued  for- 
sothe that  that  is  myn  with  vsuris. 

28  And  so  take  50  awey  fro  hym  the 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


I3.-I 


to  another  ij,  and  to  another  one,  to 
every  man  after  his  abilite  ;  and  streyght 
waye  departed. 

16  Then  he  that  hadde  rcceaved  the 
fyve  talentes,  went,  and  bestowed  them, 
and  wane  other  fyve. 

17  Lykwysc  he  that  receaved  ij,  gayned 
other  ij. 

18  But  he  that  receaved  one,  Avent,  and 
digged  a  pitt  in  the  erth,  and  hyd  his 
masters  money. 

19  After  a  longe  season,  the  lorde  or 
those  servauntes  cam,  and  reckcned  with 
them . 

20  Then  cam  he  that  had  receaved  fyve 
talentes,  and  brought  other  fyve,  sayinge, 
LLaster,  thou  deliveredes  vnto  me  fyve 
talentes,  lo  !  I  have  gayned  with  them 
fyve  moo. 

21  His  master  saide  vnto  him,  Well, 
good  servaunt  and  faythful ;  thou  hast 
bene  fixythfull  in  lytell,  I  Avyll  make  the 
ruler  over  moche ;  entre  in  into  thy 
masters  ioye. 

22  Also  he  that  receaved  ij  talentes, 
cam,  and  sayde,  Master,  thou  delyver- 
edes  vnto  me  ij  talentes  ;  lo  !  I  have 
wone  ij  other  with  them. 

23  His  master  saide  vnto  hym.  Well, 
good  servaunt  and  faythfull  ;  thou  hast 
bene  faythfull  in  litell,  I  woU  make  the 
ruler  over  moche ;  go  in  into  thy  mas- 
ters ioye. 

24  He  which  had  receaved  the  one 
talent,  cam  also,  and  said.  Master,  T 
considered  that  thou  wast  an  harde 
man  ;  which  repest  where  thou  sowedst 
not,  and  gadderest  where  thou  strawedst 
not ; 

25  And  was  affrayde  and  Avent,  and 
hyd  thy  talent  in  the  erth  ;  lo !  thou 
hast  thyn  awne. 

26  His  master  answered,  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Evyll  servaunt  and  slewth- 
fuU,  thou  knewest  that  I  repe  where  I 
sowed  nott,  and  gaddre  Avhcre  I  strawed 
nott ; 

27  Thou  oughtest  there  fore  to  have 
had  my  money  to  the  chaungers,  and 
then  at  my  cummynge  shulde  I  have 
receaved  my  money  with  vanntage. 

28  Take  therefore  the  talent  fro::i  hym, 


136 


GOTHIC,  360. 


'''38  Whanuli  }an  ])ulc  sewlnim  gast,  yah 
gala))ode(lum ;  ai|i|-'au  naqadana,  yah 
wasidedum  1 

39  Wlianuh  |)au  jnik  sewhum  siulcana, 
aij)jniu  in  karkarai,  yah  atiddyedum  du 

40  Yah  aiidhafyauds  sa  j^iudans  C[i]n]> 
du  im,  Amen  qijni  izwiSj  yah  ))anei 
tawidedu])  ainamnia  ))ize  minnistane 
broJ)re  meinaize,  mis  tawidedu]?. 

41  pan  nil  qi)>i))  yah  jjaim,  af  hleidumein 
ferai,  Giigo-i|)  fairra  mis,  yus  fraqijjanans, 
in  fon  ]  ata  aiweino,  Jiata  manwido  un- 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 
sylla])  dam  de  me  da  tyn  pund  brohte. 

29  Witodlice  selcon  cttera  dc  Iijefj)  man 
syl}7,  and  he  hsefj?  genoh  ;  dam  de  nsefjj, 
dset  hym  ])incj)  dtet  he  hsebbe,  dast  hyni 
by)j  setbroden. 

30  And  wurpa}?  done  minyttan  jjeowan 
on  da  littran  ))ystru ;  dsev  byj)  ■\v5p,  and 
t6j)a  gristbitung.''' 

3 1  Witodlice  donne  mannes  sunu  cjmp 
on  liys  m?egen-}irymme,  and  ealle  englas 
mid  him,  donne  sit  he  ofer  hys  mpegen- 
jjrymmes  setl ; 

32  And  ealle  );eoda  beo]>  tof5ran  hyni 
gegaderode,  and  he  asyndra))  hi  bim 
betwynan,  swa  swa  se  hyrde  asyndraj) 
da  seep  fram  tyccenum  ; 

33  And  be  geset  da  seep  on  hys 
swidran  healfe,  and  da  tyccenu  on  hys 
wynstran  healfe. 


34^ 


,  gebletsode  mines 


.     .     .     Cuma]?  ge 
faxler,  and  onfo)?  da^t  rice  diiet  eow  ge 
geanvod  ys  of  middan-geardes  frymjje. 

35  Me  hingrode,  and  ge  me  sealdon 
etan ;  me  {jyTste,  and  ge  me  sealdon 
drincan ;  ic  w£es  cmiia,  and  ge  me  in- 
ladodon  ; 

36  Ic  wa3s  nacod,  and  ge  me  scryddon; 
ic  WJES  untrum,  and  ge  eodon  to  me ; 
ic  AYses  on  cwearterne,  and  ge  comon 
to  me. 

37  Donne  andswaria]?  da  riht-wisan, 
and  cweda]',  Drihten,  hwsenne  gesawe 
we  de  hingrigendne,  and  we  de  feddon ; 
}>yrstendne,  and  we  de  drinc  sealdon  1 

38  Hwajnne  gesawe  we  daet  dii  cuma 
AVBere,  and  de  in-ladodon;  odde  nacodne, 
and  we  de  scryddon  1 

39  [■''Odde  bwtenne  gesawon  we  de 
untrumne,]  odde  on  cwearterne,  and  we 
comon  to  de  1 

40  Donne  andswara|>  se  cyning  hym 
and  cwy)j  to  heom,  86]?  ic  eow  secge, 
swa  lange  swa  ge  dydon  anum  of  dysum 
minum  Iffistum  gebr5druni,  swil  lange 
ge  hyt  dydon  me. 

41  Donne  sfeg|?  he  dam,  de  beo]>  on 
bys  Avynstran  healfe,  Gewita)?,  awyrgede, 
fram  mC;  on  dset  ece  fyr,  de  ys  deofle 


XXV.  29-41.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

talent,  and  jeue  50  it  to  liym  that  liath 
ten  talcntis. 

29  For  to  cuorv  man  liauyniic  it  slial 
l>o  5ouon,  and  he  shal  hano  plonte  ;  and 
to  liyni  that  hath  nat,  and  tliat  that  he 
scnieth  to  hane,  shal  be  taken  fro  hym. 

30  And  caste  5ee  out  the  vuprotitable 
sornannt,  and  send  5ee  hym  in  to  vtter- 
more  derknessis  ;  there  shal  be  wcep- 
ynge.  and  betyng  to  gidrc  of  teeth. 

3 1  Forsothe  whanne  mannes  sonc  shal 
ennie  in  his  mageste,  and  alle  his  angelis 
with  hym,  thanne  he  shal  sitte  on  the 
sege  of  his  magestee  ; 

32  And  alle  folkis  shnlen  be  gederid 
Ik  fore  hym,  and  he  sehal  departe  hem 
atwynne,  as  a  sheperde  depai'tith  scheep 
fru  kidis  ; 

^'il^  And  sothli  he  schal  seettc  the 
-  heep  on  his  ri5thalf,  the  kidis  forsothe 
en  the  lefthalf 

34  Thanne  the  kyng  schal  seie  to  hem, 
tliat  shulen  be  on  his  ri3thalf,  Come  566, 
the  blessid  of  my  fadir,  welde  360'''  the 
kyngdam  raaad  redy  to  30U  fro  the 
bygynnynge  ■*■  of  the  world. 

35  Forsothe  I  was  hungry,  and  50 
3auen  to  me  for  to  ete  ;  I  thristide,  and 
5ee  jCuen  to  me  for  to  drynke ;  I  was 
herberlesse,  and  366  gederiden^  me; 

36  Xakid,  and  5ee  heliden  me  ;  seik, 
and  3ee  visitiden  me  ;  I  was  in  prisoun, 
and  3e  cameu  to  mc. 

37  Thanne  iust  men  shulen  answere  to 
hym,  seyinge.  Lord,  whenne  sy3en  we 
thee  hungry,  and  we  fedd  thee  ;  thristy, 
and  we  3euen  to  thee  drynke  1 

38  Whenne  forsothe  seien  we  thee 
herberlesse,  and  we  gedriden  thee ;  or 
nakid,  and  we  heliden  thee  1 

39  Or  whenne  seien  we  thee  seek,  or 
in  prisoun,  and  we  camen  to  thee  1 

40  And  he  answerynge  shal  seie  to 
hem,  Treuly  I  seie  to  30U,  as  long  as 
5<e  diden  to  oon  uf  these  my  leste  bre- 
thren, 5ee  diden  to  me. 

41  Thanne  the  kyng  shal  seie  and  to 
hem,  that  shiden  be  on  his  left  half, 
Depart  fro  me,  3ee  cursid,  in  to  euer- 


TYNDALE.  1K26. 


137 


and  gcve  hit  vnto  him   which  hath  x 
talentes. 

29  For  vnto  every  man  that  hath  shal- 
bc  geven,  and  he  shall  have  abound- 
ance ;  and  from  hym  that  hath  not, 
shalbe  taken  awaye,  even  that  he  hath. 

30  And  cast  that  vnprophetable  ser- 
vaunt  into  vtter  dercknes ;  there  salbe 
wepynge,  and  gnasshingc  of  thetli. 

31  When  the  sonne  of  man  shall  come 
in  hys  maieste,  and  all  hys  holy  an- 
gelles  with  him,  then  shall  he  sytt 
vppon  the  seate  of  his  maieste  ; 

32  And  before  hym  shalbe  gaddred  all 
nacions,  and  he  shall  sever  them  wou 
from  another,  as  a  shepherde  putteth 
asunder  the  shepe  from  the  gootes ; 

33  And  he  shall  sett  the  shepe  on  his 
right  hondc,  and  the  gotes  on  his  lyfte 
honde. 

34  Then  shall  the  kynge  saye  to  them 
on  his  riglit  honde,  Come  ye,  blessed 
chyldren  of  my  fathei',  inheret  ye  the 
kyngdome  prepared  for  you  from  the 
becfinninge  of  the  worlde. 

35  For  I  Avas  anhongred,  and  ye  gave 
me  meate ;  I  thursted,  and  ye  gave  me 
drinke ;  I  was  herbroulesse,  and  ye 
lodged  me ; 

36  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me ; 
I  Avas  sicke,  and  ye  visited  me ;  I  was 
in  preson,  and  ye  cam  vnto  me. 

37  Then  shall  the  iuste  ansAvere  hym, 
sayinge,  jMaster,  when  saAve  Ave  the 
anhongred,  an  feed  the ;  or  a  thurst, 
and  gave  the  drynke  1 

38  When  sawe  Ave  the  herbroulesse, 
and  lodged  the ;  or  naked,  and  clothed 
the  1 

39  Or  Avhcn  saAve  avc  the  sicke,  or  in 
preson,  and  cam  vnto  the  ? 

40  And  the  kynge  shall  ansAvere  and 
saye  vnto  theni,*Verely  I  saye  vnto  you, 
in  as  mochc  as  ye  have  done  it  vnto 
Avon  of  the  leest  of  these  my  brethren, 
ye  have  done  it  to  me. 

41  Then  shall  the  kynge  saye  \-nto 
them,  that  shalbe  on  the  lyffte  hande, 
Departe  from  me,  ye  coursed,  into  ever- 


138  GOTHIC,  360. 

hul];in  yali  aggilum  'is. 

42  Uiite  gredags  was,  yan-ni  gebu]? 
mis  niatyan ;  afjjaursiJ'S  was,  yan-ni 
dragkidedujj  uiik ; 

43  Gasts,  yan-ni  galajjodeduj)  niik ; 
naqajjs,  yan-ni  wasidedu};  mik ;  sinks, 
yah  in  karkarai,  yan-ni  gaweisodedu]> 
meina. 

44  panuli  andhafyand  yali  ])al,  qij^and- 
aus,  Frauya,  whan  [mk  sewhum  gred- 
a:;ana,  aijijjau  af})aui-sidana,  aijjjjau  gast, 
ui[)|  an  naqadana,  ai}?]  an  sinkana,  aijjj^au 
i'n  karkarai,  yan-ni  andbahtidedeima  Jjus] 

45  pannh  andhafyi)) 'im,  qi))ands,  Amen 
qij-a  izwis,  yah  |;anei  -ni  tawidedu}? 
ainamma  jiize  leitihme,  mis  ni  tawided- 

46  Yah  galei}5and  ])ai  'in  balwem  aiw- 
eiuon ;  a|)  })ai  garaihtans  in  libain 
aiweinon. 


Chap.  XXVI.  +  i  Yah  war|),  bi})e 
ustaah  lesns  alia  J30  waurda,  qaj)  sipon- 
yam  stinaira, 

2  Wituj),  |)atei  afar  twans  dagans  paska 
Avair|)i{),  yas-sa  sunus  mans  atgibada,  du 
ushramyan. 

3  Panuh     


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Matt. 
and  hys  englum  gegearwod. 

42  Witodlice  me  hingrede,  and  ge  ne 
sealdon  me  etan ;  me  jjyrste,  and  ge  me 
drincan  ne  sealdon  ; 

43  Ic  w£)es  cuma,  and  ge  me  in  ne 
gelaciodon ;  ic  wses  nacod,  and  ge  ne 
scryddon  me  ;  ic  wses  untrum,  and  on 
ewearterne,  and  ge  ne  comon  set  me. 

44  Donne  andswai'igea}?  hym  Cta,  and 
cwedaj),  Di-yhten,  hwsenne  gesawe  Ave 
de  hingrigendne,  odde  })yrstendne,  odde 
cuman,  odde  untrumne,  odde  on  eweart- 
erne, and  Ave  ne  ])enedon  de  1 

45  Donne  andswara]?  se  cyning  heoni, 
and  cwyj?.  So]?  ic  eow  secge,  swa  lange 
swa  ge  ne  dydon  auum  of  dysum  Isest- 
um,  ne  dyde  ge  hyt  me. 

46  And  donne  farajj  big  on  ece  susle ; 
and  da  rihtwisan  on  daet  ece  lif. 


Chap.  XXVI.  i  Witodlice,  da  se 
Hselend  hsefde  ealle  das  sprseca  ge- 
endod,  da  cwa^]?  he  to  hys  leorning- 
cnihtum,''' 

2  Wite  ge,  daet  sefter  twam  dagum 
beo]>  eastro,  and  mannes  beam  by]» 
geseald,  dset  be  si  on  rode  ahangen, 

3  Da  Avseron  gesamnode  da  ealdras 
dsera  sacerda  and  hlafordas  dses  folces 
to  dasra  sacei'da  ealdres  botle,  de  woes 
genemned  Caiphas, 

4  And  big  bfefdon  mycel  gemot,  da3t 
big  Avoldon  done  Hselend  mid  facne 
besyrwan,  and  ofslean ; 

5  Hig  cwsedon  witodlice  sume,  Da?t  hyt 
ne  mihte  beon  on  dam  freols-dsege,  de-lses 
to  mycel  styrung  wurde  on  dam  folce. 

6  Da  se  Hselend  wa3S  on  Bethania,  on 
Symones  huse  dees  hreoflan, 

7  Da  genealffihte  him  to  sum  Avif,  seo 
hsefde  box  mid  deorwyr)>re  sealfe,  and 
ageat  uppan  hys  lieafod  dser  be  seat. 

8  Da  gesawon  hys  leorning-cnihtas  ^?et 
and  Avurdon  gebolgene,  and  cweedon,  To 
liAA'an  ys  dis  forspilled  1 

9  Dis  mihte  beon  geseald  to  myclum 
wurjje,  and  jiearfum  gedteled. 


XXY.  4^.-XXVI.  9.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

last}iige  fijr,  the  wliiche  is  maad  redy 
to  the  deuyl  and  his  aiiijelis. 

42  Sotholy  I  hungcryde,  and  5e  jauen 
nat  to  me  for  to  etc  ;  I  thristide,  and 
jee  5aucn  nat  to  me  for  to  diyuke  ; 

43  I  was  hcrborlessc,  and  jee  gedriden 
nat  me ;  nakid,  and  3ee  coucrcdon  nat 
me ;  seik,  and  in  prisouu,  and  jee 
visitidcn  nat  me. 

44  Thanne  and  thei  shulcn  answere  to 
hym,  seyinge,  Lord,  whanne  seien  we 
thee  hungrynge,  or  thristynge,  or  lier- 
berlesse,  or  nakid,  or  seik,  or  in  prisoun, 
and  we  seruyden  nat  to  thee  ? 

45  Thanne  he  shal  auswere  to  hem, 
seiynge,  Treuly  I  seie  to  50U,  hou  longe 
5ee  diden  nat  to  oon  of  these  Icste, 
nethcre  5ee  diden  to  me. 

46  And  these  shulcn  go  in  to  euer- 
lastynge  tourment ;  forsothe  the  iust 
men  in  to  euere  histinire  Ivf. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


139 


Chap.  XXYI.  i  And  it  is  don, 
whenne  Jhesus  hadde  cendid  alle  these 
wordis,  he  seide  to  his  disciplis, 

2  ATite  5ee,  for  after  two  dayes  pask 
shal  be  maad,  and  mannes  soue  shal  be 
bitaken,  that  he  be  crucified. 

3  Thanne  the  princis  of  prestis  and 
eldre  men  of  the  peple  ben  gedrid  in  to 
the  halle  of  the  prince  of  prestis,  that 
was  said  Caiphas, 

4  And  maden  a  counseile,  that  thei 
shulden  holde  Jhcsu  with  gile,  and 
slea ; 

5  Sothly  thei  seiden,  Nat  in  the  feste 
day,  lest  per  auenture  noys  were  maad 
in  the  peple. 

6  Foisothe  whenne  Jhesus  was  in  Eet- 
anye,  in  the  house  of  Symount  leprous, 

7  A  womman  hauynge  a  boxe  of  ala- 
bastre  of  preciouse  oynement,  came  ni3 
to  hym,  and  shedde  out  on  the  heucd  of 
hjTn  rcstinge. 

8  Sothely  disciplis  sceyngc  hadden 
dedeyn,  seyinge,  Wherto  this  lossc  ? 

9  Forsothe  it  mijte  be  soldo  for  myche, 
and  be  joucn  to  pore  men. 


lastingc  fire,  which  i.s  prepared  for  the 
dcvyll  and  hys  angels. 

42  For  I  was  an  hungred,  and  yc  gave 
mc  no  meate ;  I  thursted,  and  ye  gave 
me  no  drynke  ; 

43  I  was  hcrbroulcssc,  and  ye  lodged 
me  nott ;  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me  nott ;  I  was  sycke,  and  in  prcson, 
and  ye  visited  me  not. 

44  Then  shall  they  also  answere  hym, 
sayinge,  [Master,  when  sawe  we  the 
anhungred,  or  a  thurst,  or  herbroulcsse, 
or  naked,  or  sicke,  or  in  prcson,  and 
have  not  ministred  vnto  the  1 

45  Then  shall  he  answere  them,  and 
saye,  Verily  I  saye  vnto  you,  in  as  moche 
as  ye  dyd  it  nott  to  won  off  the  leest  of 
these,  ye  dyd  it  nott  to  me. 

46  And  these  shall  go  into  everlastinge 
payne ;  and  the  rightous  into  lyfe 
eternall. 


Chap.  XXVI.  i  And  hit  folowed, 
when  Jesus  had  fynisshed  all  these 
sayinges,  he  sayd  vnto  his  disciples, 

2  Ye  knowe,  that  after  .ij.  dayes  shal- 
be  ester,  and  the  sonne  of  man  shalbe 
delyvered,  for  to  be  crucified. 

3  Then  assembled  togcdder  the  chefe 
prestes  and  scrybes  and  senioui's  of  the 
people  in  to  the  palicc  off  the  hye 
preste,  which  was  called  Cayphas, 

4  And  heelde  a  counsell,  howe  they 
mygt  take  Jesus  by  suttclte,  and  kyll 
him ; 

5  Butt  they  sayd,  Not  on  the  holy 
daye,  lest  eny  trouble  aryse  amonge  the 
people. 

6  When  Jesus  was  in  Bethany,  in  the 
bousse  of  Symon  the  lypper, 

7  There  cam  vnto  him  a  woman  which 
had  an  alablastcr  boxe  of  precious  oynt- 
ment,  and  powrcd  it  on  his  heed  as  he 
sate  att  the  bourdc. 

8  When  his  disciples  sawc  that  they  had 
indignacion,  sayinge,  What  nedcd  this 
wast  1 

9  This  o}'ntmcnt  myght  have  bene  well 
solde,  and  yevcn  to  the  povrc. 


140 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

10  Da  se  Hselend  hyt  wiste,  da  cwsej) 
he  to  heom,  Hwi  synt  ge  grame  dysura 
wife  1  witocllice  god  weorc  lieo  worhte 
on  me. 

1 1  Symle  ge  habba]?  J^earfan  mid  eow, 
ac  ge  nabbaj;  me  symle. 


sealfc   on    minne 
ere    gesmyred    to 


12  Heo  dyde  das 
lichaman,  dtet  ic  w: 
bebyrganne. 

13  So}?  ic  secge  eow,  swa  hwser  swa 
dys  godspel  by]?  gebodod  on  eallum 
middan-earde,  by)>  gassed  on  hyre  ge- 
mynd,  dset  heo  dis  dyde. 

14  Da  ferde  an  of  dam  twelfum,  de 
wses  genemned  ludas  se  widersaca,  to 
dsera  sacerda  ealdrum, 

15  And  cwsejj  to  heom,  Hwset  wylle  ge 
me  syllan,  and  ic  hyne  belsewe  eow? 
Da  beheton  hig  hym  Jjritig  scyllinga. 

16  And  syddan  he  smeade  geornlice, 
dset  li6  hyne  wolde  belsewan. 

17  Da  on  dam  forman  gearcung-dfege 
genealcehton  da  leorning-cnihtas  to  dam 
Hselende,  and  dus  cwsedon,  Hwsei'  wylt 
du  dset  we  gegearwion  de  dine  })enunga, 
to  eastron  1 

18  Da  cwse])  se  Hselend,  Fara]?  on  das 
ceastre  to  sumum  men,  and  secgea}) 
him,  Se  lareow  seg]?,  Min  tima  ys  ge- 
hende  ;  dset  ic  mid  de  wyrce  mine  eastro 
mid  minum  leoiniing-cnihtum. 

19  And  da  leorning-cnihtas  dydon  swa 
se  Hselend  heom  behead ;  and  hig  ge- 
gearwodon  him  easter-J^enunge. 

20  On  dam  sefene,  sset  se  Hselend  mid 
hys  twelf  leorning-cnihtum  set  gereorde. 

2 1  And  da  hi  seton  he  cwse]?  to  him, 
Witodlice  ic  secge  eow,  dset  an  cower 
belsewjj  me. 

22  Da  wurdon  hig  swide  ge-unrotsode 
and  ongan  anra  gehwylc  cwedan,  Drihten, 
cwyst  du  com  ic  hyt  ? 

23  And  he  andswarode  and  dus  cwse)j, 
Se  de  bedyp]?  on  disce  mid  me  hys 
hand,  se  me  belsew}). 

24  Witodlice  mannes  smiu  fsei*]),  swa 
hit  awriten  ys  be  him ;  wa  dam  men, 
];urh  done    de   byj)   mannes    sunu    be- 


XXYI.  10-24.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

10  Sotlicly  Jhesiis  wytingc,  sclth  to 
licm,  What  be  5c  heiiy^  to  this  woin- 
manl  sothely  a  good  work  she  hutli 
wroujt  in  me. 

1 1  For  whi  5ce  shulcn  ciicrmore  haue 
pore  men  with  50U,  but  jee  shulcn  nat 
algatis  haue  me. 

12  Forsothe  tliis  womnian  sendenge 
this  oyncment  in  to  my  body,  made  for 
to  birye  me. 

13  Trculy  I  seie  to  ^ou,  wher  cuer  this 
gospel  shal  be  prcchid  in  al  the  world, 
it  shal  be  seide  and  that  this  womman 
dide,  in  to  mynde  of  hym. 

1 4  Thannc  oon  of  the  twelue,  that  was 
seide  Judas  Scarioth,  weute  forth  to  the 
princis  of  prestis, 

15  And  seith  to  hem,  "What  wolen  5ee 
5eue  to  me,  and  I  shal  bitake  hym  to 
30U 1  And  thei  ordeynedcn  to  hym 
thritti  platis  of  seiner. 

1 6  And  fro  that  tyme  he  sou3te  coue- 
nablete,  for  to  bitake  hym. 

1 7  Forsothe  in  the  first  day  of  the  fest 
of  pask  disciplis  caraen  to  Jhesu,  sey- 
inge,  "Wher  wolt  thou  we  make  redy  to 
thee,  for  to  ete  paske  1 

18  And  Jhesus  seith,  Go  5ee  in  to  the 
citee  to  sum  man,  and  seie  to  hym,  The 
maister  seith,  My  tyme  is  ni5  ;  at  thee 
I  make  paske  with  my  disciplis. 

19  And  the  disciplis  diden,  as  Jliesus 
comaundide  to  liem ;  and  thei  maden 
redy  pask. 

20  Forsothe  euenyng  maad,  he  sat  at 
the  mete  with  his  twelue  disciplis. 

2 1  And  he  seide  to  hem  etynge,  Treuly 
I  seie  to  50U,  for  oon  of  50U  is  to  be- 
traye  me. 

22  And  thei  ful  sory  bygunnyn  eche 
to  seie,  Lord,  wher  I  am  'i 

23  And  he  answerynge  seith,  He  that 
with  me  in  puttith  the  liond  in  the 
plater,  this  shal  bitraye  me. 

24  Forsothe  mannes  sone  goth,  as  it  is 
writen  of  hym  ;  but  woo  to  that  man, 
bi  whom  maunys  sone  shal  be  bitrayecl ; 


TYNDALE,  1526.  1-Jl 

10  "When  Jesus  vnderstod  that,  he 
sayde  vnto  them.  Why  trouble  ye  the 
woman  1  she  hath  wroght  a  good  worke 
apon  me. 

^  n  For  ye  .shall  have  povre  folke 
alwayes  with  you,  butt  me  shall  ye  not 
have  all  wayes. 

12  And  in  that  .she  eastcd  this  oynt- 
ment  on  my  body,  she  dyd  hit  to  bury 
me  with  all. 

13  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  where- 
soever this  gospcU  shalbe  jjrcachcd 
throughoute  all  the  worlde,  there  shall 
also  thys  thatt  she  hath  done  be  tolde, 
for  a  memoriall  of  her. 

14  Then  won  of  the  twelve,  called 
Judas  Iscarioth,  went  vnto  the  chefe 
prestcs, 

15  And  sayd,  W^hatt  wyll  ye  gevc  me, 
and  I  wyll  clelyver  hym  vnto  you  1  And 
they  apoynted  vnto  hym  thirty  peccs  of 
silver. 

16  And  from  that  tyme  he  sought 
oport unite,  to  betraye  hym. 

17  The  fyrst  daye  of  vnlevendcd  breed 
the  disciples  cam  to  Jesus,  sayinge  vnto 
hym,  Where  wylt  thou  that  we  pi'cpare 
for  the,  to  eate  the  ester  lambe  1 

18  And  he  said,  Go  into  the  cite  vnto 
souche  a  man,  and  saye  to  hym,  The 
master  sayeth,  ^ly  tyme  ys  almoste  come ; 
I  Avyll  kcpe  myne  ester  att  thy  housse 
with  my  disciples. 

19  And  the  disciples  dyd,  as  Jesus  had 
apoynted  them ;  and  made  redy  the 
ester  lambe. 

20  W^hen  the  even  was  coine,  he  sate 
doune  with  the  xij. 

21  And  as  they  dyd  eate,  he  sayde, 
Verely  I  sale  vnto  you,  that  w^on  of  you 
shall  l)etraye  me. 

22  And  they  were  excedinge  sorofuU 
and  began  every  man  to  saye  vnto  hym, 
Ys  hit  I,  master  1 

23  He  answerede  and  sayde.  He  that 
dcpcth  his  honde  with  me  in  the  disshe, 
shall  betraye  me. 

24  The  Siinnc  of  man  goetli,  as  yt  is 
wrytten  of  hym  ;  butt  wo  be  to  that 
man,  by  whom  the  Sonne  of  man  shalbe 


14-2 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

Isewed ;  Ijetere  wsere  dam  men,  dset  he 
nffifre  nsere  acemied. 

25  Da  cwfe})  ludas  de  hyne  belcewde, 
Cwyst  du,  ITireow,  hwfeder  ic  hyt  si  1  Da 
cwse})  se  Hselend,  Du  hyt  ssedest. 

26  Witodlice  da  hig  ttton,  se  Halend 
nam  hlaf,  and  hyne  gebletsode,  and 
brsec,  and  sealde  hys  leorning-cnihtum, 
and  cw9g{j,  Onfo)?,  and  etaj) ;  dis  ys  min 
lichama. 

27  And  he  genam  done  calie,  l^anciende, 
and  sealde  hyra,  dus  cwedende,  Driucap 
ealle  of  dysum ; 

28  Dis  is  witodlice  mines  blodes  calic 
niwre  se,  dtet  byj;  for  manegum  agoten, 
on  synna  forgyfennesse. 

29  Witodlice  ic  secge  eow,  dset  ic  ne 
drince  heononfor)),  of  dysum  eorjjHcan 
wine,  ftr  dam  dsege  de  ic  drince  dset 
niwe  mid  eow,  on  mines  feeder  rice. 

30  Da  hig  hiefdon  heora  lofsang  gesung- 
enne,  da  ferdon  hig  uppan  Oliuetes  dune. 

31  Da  ssede  se  Hselend  heom,  Ealle 
ge  wurdaj)  ge-untreowsode  on  me.  on 
dysse  nihte ;  hyt  ys  awriten,  purli  dses 
hyrdes  siege,  by})  seo  heord  todrsefed. 

32  Witodlice  sefter  dam  de  ic  of  deajje 
arise,  ic  cume  to  eow  on  Galilea. 

33  Da  andswp'de  Petrus  him,  and  dus 
cwse]?,  Deah  de  hig  ealle  ge-untreowsiou 
on  de,  ic  nfefre  ne  ge-untreowsige. 

34  Dii  cwse})  se  Hselend,  S6\>  ic  secge 
de,  dset  on  dyssere  nihte  serdam  de  cocc 
crawe,  Jjriwa  du  widssecst  min. 

35  Da  ssede  Petrus  him,  Witodlice 
deah  de  ic  .scyle  sweltan  mid  de,  ne 
widsace  ic  din.  Gelice  dam  cwredon 
ealle  da  odre  leorning-cnihtas. 

36  Da  com  se  Hselend  mid  him  on 
done  tun,  de  is  genemned  Gethsemani. 
And  ssede  hys  leorning-cnihtum,  Sitta}) 
her,  od  dcet  ic  ga  hider-geoud,  and  me 
gebidde. 

37  And  he  genam  Petrum,  and  Zebe- 
deus  twegen  suna,  and  ongan  unrotsian 
and  beon  unrot. 

38  Da  ssede  se  Hfelend  heom,  Unr5t 
ys  min  sawl  od  deajj ;  gebida])  her,  and 
waciajj  mid  me. 


XXVI.  25-38.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

it   •\vcrc   good   to   liyin,    5if    that    man 
hadde  nat  ben  boren. 

25  Forsothc  Judas  that  bitraycd  hym, 
aiiswcride,  seyinge,  ilaistcr,  whor  I  ami 
He  seith  to  hym,  Thou  hast  scid. 

26  Forsothc  hem  soupyngo,  Jhcsus 
toke  breed,  and  blisside,  aud  braekc, 
and  5aue  to  his  disoiplis,  and  seith,  Take 
3CC,  and  cte ;  this  is  my  body. 

27  And  he  takynge  the  cnppc,  dcde 
thankyngis,  and  ^aue  to  hem,  seyinge, 
Driuke  ^ee  al!e  herof ; 

28  This  is  my  blood  of  the  newe  testa- 
ment, the  whiche  shal  be  shed  out  for 
many,  in  to  remissioun  of  synnys. 

29  Forsothe  I  seie  to  50U,  I  shal  nat 
drinke  fro  this  tyme,  of  this  fruj-t  of  the 
vyne,  til  in  to  that  day  whenne  I  shal 
drinke  it  newe  with  50U,  in  the  kyng- 
dam  of  my  fadir. 

30  And  an  ympne^  seid,  thei  wenten 
out  in  to  the  mount  of  Olyuete. 

31  Thaune  Jhcsus  seith  to  hem,  Alle 
3e  shulcn  suftre  sclaundre  in  me,  in  this 
nijt ;  for  it  is  wrytyn,  I  shal  smytc  the 
sheperde,  and  the  sheep  of  the  floe 
shulcn  be  scatered. 

32  Forsothe  after  that  I  shal  ryse 
a3ein,  I  shal  go  bifore  50U  in  to  Galilee. 

33  Sothely  Petre  answerynge,  seith  to 
him,  And  5if  alle  shulen  be  sclaundrid 
in  thee,  I  shal  ueucre  be  sclaundrid. 

34  Jhcsus  seith  to  hym,  Trcwly  I  seie 
to  thee,  for  in  this  ni3t  bifore  the  cok 
crowe,  thries  thou  shall  denye  me. 

35  Petre  seith  to  hym.  And  3if  it  shal 
behoue  me  to  dye  with  thee,  I  shal 
nat  denye  thee.  Also  and  alle  disciplis 
seidcn. 

;^6  Thanne  Jhesus  came  with  hem  in 
to  a  toun,  that  is  seid  Gcsscmanye.  And 
he  scide  to  his  disciplis,  Sitte  566  heer, 
the  while  I  shal  go  thidir,  and  preie. 

37  And  Petre  taken  to,  and  two  sonys 
of  Zcbedee,  he  began  for  to  be  dis- 
tourblid^  and  sory  in  hcrte. 

38  Thanne  he  seith  to  hem,  My  soule 
is  sorowful  til  to  the  deth ;  susteyne 
3ee'''  here,  and  wake  3ee  with  me. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


H.'J 


betrayed  ;    it  had   bene   good  for  that 
man,  yti"  he  had  never  bene  borne. 

25  Then  Judas  which  betrayed  him, 
answcrede,  and  sayde,  Ys  yt  I,  master  ? 
He  sayde  vnto  hym.  Thou  haste  saide. 

26  As  they  ate,  Jesus  toke  breed,  and 
gave  thankes,  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to 
his  disciples,  and  sayde,  Take,  eate ; 
thys  ys  my  body. 

27  And  toke  the  cuppe,  and  gave 
thankes,  and  gave  it  them,  sayinge, 
Drinke  of  it  every  won  ; 

28  This  ys  my  bloudde  of  the  newe 
testament,  which  shalbe  sheddc  for  many, 
for  the  foryeveues  of  synnes. 

29  I  saye  vnto  you,  I  wyll  not  drynke 
hence  fourth,  of  this  frute  of  the  vyne 
tree,  vntyll  that  daye  when  I  shall 
di-ynke  it  newe  with  you,  iu  my  faders 
kyngdom. 

30  And  when  they  had  payd  grace, 
they  went  out  into  mountc  Olyvete. 

3 1  Then  sayd  Jesus  vnto  them,  All  ye 
shall  fall  this  nyght,  because  of  me  ;  for 
yt  ys  Avrytten,  I  wyll  smyte  the  shcp- 
herde,  and  the  shepe  of  the  flocke  shalbe 
scattered  abroode. 

32  But  after  I  am  rysen  ageyne,  I  wyll 
goo  before  you  into  Galile. 

33  Peter  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
him.  Though  all  men  shulde  be  hurte 
by  the,  yett  wyll  not  I  be  hurte. 

34  Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Yerely  I 
saye  vnto  the,  that  thys  same  night 
before  the  cocke  crowe,  thou  shalt  denye 
me  thryse. 

35  Peter  sayde  vnto  hym,  YfF  I  shulde 
dye  with  the,  yet  wyll  I  not  denye 
the.  Lyke  wyse  also  sayde  all  the  dis- 
ciples. 

36  Then  went  Jesus  with  them  in  to  a 
place,  which  ys  called  Gethsemane.  And 
sayde  vnto  hys  disciples,  Sitt  yc  here, 
wliyll  I  go,  and  praye  yonder. 

37  And  he  toke  with  liym  Peter,  and 
the  two  sonnes  of  Zcbede,  and  began  to 
wexe  sorofuU  and  to  be  in  an  agony. 

38  Then  sayd  Jesus  vnto  them,  My 
soule  is  bevy  even  vnto  the  deeth  ;  tary 
ye  here,  anel  watche  with  me. 


144 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

39  And  da  he  wses  lyt-hwon  ctiinou 
iigan,  he  afeoll  on  hys  ansyne,  and  hyne 
gebsed,  and  clus  cwse}?,  Feeder  niin,  gyf 
hyt  beon  msege,  gewite  Ctes  calic  fram 
me  ;  cleah  liwaedere  na  swa  swti  ic  wylle, 
ac  swa  swa  dii  wylt. 

40  And  he  com  to  hys  leorning-eniht- 
um,  and  he  gemette  hig  sUCpende. 
And  he  ssede  Petre,  Swa,  ne  mihte  ge 
nu  wacian  ane  tid  mid  me  1 

41  WaciaJ),  and  gebidda})  eow,  dtet  ge 
in  ne  gan  on  costnunge ;  witodh'ce  se 
gast  is  hrfed,  and  ctset  flsesc  ys  untrum. 

42  Eft  cdre  s^de  he  ferde,  and  hyne 
gebsed,  and  cwse)?,  Min  fteder,  gyf  des 
calic  ne  msege  gewitan,  buton  ic  hyne 
drince,  gewm-de  din  Avilla. 

43  And  he  com  eft,  and  gemette  hig 
slspende ;  s5|?lice  heora  eagan  wseron 
gehefegode. 

44  And  he  forlet  hig  eft,  and  ferde, 
and  hyne  gebsed  J^ryddan  side,  cwedende 
dset  ylce  gebed. 

45  Da  com  he  to  hys  leorning-cnihtum, 
and  Scede  heom,  Slapajj  eallunga,  and 
resta])  eow  ;  mi  !  gcnealsec])  seo  tid,  and 
mannes  sunu  byj)  geseald  on  synfulra 
hand  ; 

46  A'risa}),  uton  faran  ;  mi  !  genealsecj?, 
se  de  ine  belcew)). 

47  Da  he  das  ];ing  sprsec,  da  com 
ludas,  an  of  dam  twelfum,  and  micel 
folc  mid  hym,  mid  sweordum  and  sahl- 
um,  asende  fram  dfera  sacerda  ealdrnm, 
and  dfes  folces  ealdrum. 

48  Se  de  hyne  belsewde,  sealde  heom 
tacn,  and  cwse);,  Swa  hwseue  swa  ic 
cysse,  se  hyt  is  ;  nimajj  hyne. 

49  And  he  genealsehte  hr^dlice  to  dam 
H-cslende,  and  cwse}j,  Hal  beo  dii,  lareow  j 
and  he  cyste  hyne. 

50  Da  cwpe)j  se  Heelend  to  him,  Eala 
freond,  to  hwam  becom  dii  ]  Da  genea- 
Isehton  hig:,  and  done  Heelend  geuamon. 

5 1  Witudlice  !  an  dsera  de  mid  dam 
Heelende  wses,  abrsed  hys  sweord  ;  and 
asl5h  of  anes  dsera  sacerda  ealdres  beow- 


52  Da  cwse])  se  Hselend  to  hym,  Do 
din    sweord   on   hys   scsej^e ;    witodlice 


XXVI.  39-52.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

39  And  lie  gou  forth  u  litil,  folic  doun 
ill  to  Ills  face,  preyiiigc,  ami  scjiii^e, 
My  fadiv,  5if  it  is  possible,  passe  this 
eiippe  fro  me  ;  iiethclcs  iiat  as  I  Avole, 
but  as  thou  wolt. 

40  And  lie  came  to  his  disciplis,  and 
foondc  hem  slei")ynge.  And  he  seith  to 
Fotro,  So,  wher  5ee  mi5tc  nat  0011  hour 
wake  Mith  me  ] 

41  Wake  5ee,  and  preie,  that  5ce  cn- 
tren  nat  in  to  temptacionn  ;  forsothe 
the  spirit  is  redy,  bote  the  flesh  seik.'*' 

42  Eft  the  sceouiide  tyme  he  wente, 
and  prcide,  seyinge,  My  fadir,  jif  this 
ouppe  may  nat  passe,  no  bote  I  dryuke 
it,  thi  wille  be  don, 

43  And  eftsone  he  came,  and  foonde 
hem  slepynge ;  forsothe  her  e3en  Averen 
greued. 

44  And  hem  left,  he  wente  eftsone, 
and  preide  the  thridde  tyme,  the  same 
word  seyinge. 

45  Thanne  he  came  to  his  disciplis, 
and  seith  to  hem,  Slepe  jee  nowe,  and 
reste  50  :  loo  I  the  hour  hath  nei3ed, 
and  niannes  sone  shal  be  taken  in  to 
the  hondis  of  syuners  ; 

46  Eyse  3ee,  go  wee ;  loo !  he  that 
shal  take  me,  shal  nei5e. 

47  And  5it  hym  spekynge,  loo  !  Judas, 
oon  of  the  twelue,  and  with  hym  came 
a  grete  cumpanye,  Avith  swerdis  and 
battis,  sent  of  the  princes  of  prestis, 
and  of  cldre  men  of  the  peple. 

48  Forsothe  he  that  bitraicde  hym,  5aue 
to  hem  a  tokne,  seiynge,  Whom  cuer  Y 
shal  kisse,  he  it  is  ;  holde  566  hym. 

49  And  anon  he  cummynge  ni5  to 
Jliesu,  seide,  Haile,  maistre ;  and  he 
kisside  hym. 

50  And  Jhesus  seide  to  hym,  Frend. 
wherto  art  thou  comen  1  Thanne  thei 
camen  ni3,  and  castiden  hondis  in  to 
Jhesu,  and  heldcn  hym. 

51  And  loo  !  oon  of  hem  that  weren 
with  Jhesu,  holdynge  out  the  bond, 
drow3  out  his  swerd ;  and  he,  smytynge 
the  scruaunt  of  the  prince  of  prestis, 
kitte  of  his  litil  ere. 

52  Thanne  Jhesus  seith  to  hym,  Turne 
P    thi  swerd  in  to  his  place ;  sothcly  alle 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


145 


39  And  he  went  a  way  a  lytcll  aparte, 
and  fell  flatt  on  liys  face,  and  i)ra}ed, 
snyinge,  O  my  father,  yf  it  be  jjossyblc, 
Ictt  this  cuppe  passe  from  me  ;  never- 
thelesse  nott  as  I  wyll,  butt  as  thou 
wylt. 

40  And  he  cam  vnto  hys  disciples,  and 
founde  them  a  slepe.  And  sayde  to 
Peter,  What,  coulde  yc  not  watche  with 
me  one  hourc  1 

41  Watche,  and  praye,  that  ye  fall  not 
into  tcmptacion ;  the  spirito  ys  will- 
ynge,  but  the  flcsshe  is  weeke. 

42  He  Avent  agayiic  ons  moare,  and 
pryed,  sayinge,  O  my  father,  yf  this 
cuppe  can  nott  passe  away  from  me,  but 
that  I  drynkc  of  it,  thy  will  be  fulfylled. 

43  And  he  cam,  and  founde  them 
aslepe  a  gaync ;  for  their  eyes  were 
hev)'. 

44  And  he  Icffte  them,  and  Avent 
agayne,  and  prayed  the  thrid  tyme, 
sayinge  the  same  Avordes. 

45  Then  cam  he  to  hys  disciples,  and 
sayd  vnto  them,  Slepe  hence  forth,  and 
take  youre  reest ;  take  hede!  the  houre 
is  at  honde,  and  the  sonne  of  man  shal- 
be  betrayed  in  to  the  hondcs  of  synncrs ; 

46  Eyse,  lett  a-s  be  goinge ;  he  is  at 
honde,  that  shall  betraye  me. 

47  Whyll  he  yet  spake,  lo  !  Judas,  won 
of  the  tAvelve  cam,  and  Avith  him  a 
greate  multitude,  Avith  sweardes  and 
staves,  Avhych  Avere  sent  from  the  chefe 
prestes,  and  seniours  of  the  people. 

48  He  that  betrayed  hym,  gave  them 
a  token,  sayinge.  Whomsoever  I  kysse, 
that  same  is  he  ;  ley  hondcs  on  him. 

49  And  forth  withall  he  cam  to  Jesus, 
and  sayde,  Hayll,  master ;  and  kyssed 
him. 

50  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him,  Frende, 
Avhei-fore  arte  thou  come  1  Then  cam 
they,  and  layed  hondcs  on  Jesus,  and 
toke  him. 

5 1  And  beholde !  won  of  them  Avhicii 
Avcre  Avith  Jesus,  stretched  oute  his  honde, 
and  dvue  his  swearde ;  and  stroke  a 
scrvaunt  of  the  bye  preste,  and  smote 
of  his  care. 

52  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  hym,  Putt 
vppe  thy  SAvearde  in  to  his  sheathe ;  for 

L 


146 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  .995.     [St  .  Matt. 

ealle  da  de  sweord  nymajj,  mid  sweorde 
hig  forwurdaj). 

53  Wenst  du,  diset  ic  ne  myhte  biddan 
niinne  fteder,  dset  he  sende  me  uu  ma 
domie  twelf  eoi'edu  engla  1 

54  Hii  mtigon  beon  gefyllede  da  lialgan 
gewritu,  de  be  me  awritene  synt  ^  for- 
dam  dus  hyt  gebyra])  to  beonne. 

55  On  di3ere  tide  cwae|j  se  Hselend  to 
dam  foice,  Eallswa  to  l^eofe  ge  synt 
cumene,  mid  sweordum  and  mid  salilura, 
me  to  nymaime ;  da^ghwamlice  ic  sa?t 
mid  eow  on  dam  temple,  and  leerde  cow, 
and  ge  me  ne  namon. 

56  Dis  call  ys  geworden,  d?et  dfera 
witegena  halgan  gewritu  syn  gefyllede. 
Da  flugon  ealle  da  leorning-cnihtas,  and 
forleton  hyne. 

57  And  hig  genamon  done  Hselend, 
and  Iscddon  hyne  to  Caiphan,  djsra 
sacerda  ealdre,  dser  da  boceras,  and  da 
ealdras  gesamnode  wseron. 

58  Petrus  hym  fyligde  feorvane,  od  he 
com  to  dsera  sacerda  ealdres  botle  ;  and 
he  in-eode,  and  stet  mid  dam  j^enum, 
dset  he  gesawe  done  ende. 

59  Witodlice  dsera  sacerda  ealdras,  and 
eall  djet  gemot  sohton  lease  saga  ongen 
done  Hselend,  daet  hig  hyne  to  deajje 
sealdon ; 

60  And  hig  ne  mihton  nane  findan,  da 
da  manega  mid  leasum  onsagum  genea- 
Isehton.  Da  iet-nehstan  comon  twegen 
dsera  leogera, 

61  And  cwEedon,  Des  seede,  Ic  mseg 
towurpan  Godes  tempi,  and  sefter  J^iym 
dagum  hyt  eft  getimbrigean. 

62  Da  aras  se  ealdor  diera  sacerda  and 
cwse}',  Ne  andwyrdst  du  nan  ])ing  ongen 
da,  de  dis  de  onsecgea})  1 

63  Se  Hselend  suwode.  Da  se  ealdor 
dsera  sacerda  cwse]),  Ic  halsige  de  jjurh 
done  lifigendan  God,  dset  dii  secge  us, 
gyf  du  sy  Crist,  Godes  sunu. 

64  Da  cwsejj  se  Hselend  him  to,  Dset 
dii  ssedest ;  sofj  ic  eow  secge,  sefter 
dysum  ge  geseo]>  mannes  beam  sittendc 
on  da  swidran  healfe  Godes  mregen- 
Jjrymmcs,  and  cumendne  on  heofones 
wolcnum. 


XXYI.  53-64.]   WYCLIFFE,  1,389. 

that  shulen  take  swerd,  sliulon  pcrislic 
by  swerd. 

53  AYlier  gcssist  thou,  that  I  may  nat 
prcie  my  fadir,  and  he  shal  5euo  to  me 
now  move  than  twoUie  legions  of  angclis  ? 

54  Hou  thert'ore  slmlen  the  scriptm'is 
1)0  fulfillid  l  for  so  it  behoueth  to  be 
don. 

55  In  tl)at  hour  Jhcsus  seidc  to  the 
c'umpanyes  of  pe})le.  As  to  a  thcef  566 
liau  gon  out,  with  swerdis  and  battis, 
for  to  cacchc  me ;  day  by  day  I  satte 
at  50U,  techynge  iu  the  temple,  and  500 
lielden  not  me. 

56  Forsothe  al  this  thing  was  don,  that 
the  scripturis  of  prophetis  shulden  be 
iultillid.  Thanne  alio  disciplis  tledden, 
liym  forsaken. 

57  And  thei  holdynge  Jhesu,  ledden 
hym  to  Caiphas,  prince  of  prestis,  wher 
scribis  and  Pharisees,  and  the  eldrc  men 
of  the  peple  haddcn  cummen  to  gidre. 

58  Forsothe  Petre  suede  hym  afer,  til 
in  to  the  halle  of  the  prince  of  prestis  ; 
and  he  gon  ynne  with  ynric,  sate  with 
seruauntis,  that  he  shulde  se  the  eend. 

59  Forsothe  the  princis  of  pi'estis,  and 
alle  the  counseile  sou5tcn  fals  witness- 
ynge  a3einus  Jhesu,  that  thei  shulden 
take  hym  to  deth  ; 

60  And  thei  founden  nat,  whenne 
many  fals  witnessis  hadden  cummen  to. 
Treuly  at  the  laste,  two  fals  witnessis 
camen, 

61  And  seiden,  This  seide,  I  may  dis- 
truye  the  temple  of  God,  and  after  the 
thridde  day  bilde  it  a3ein. 

62  And  the  prince  of  prestis  rysynge 
seith  to  hym,  Answerist  thou  no  thing 
to  tho  thingis,  the  whiche  these  wit- 
nessen  a3einus  thee  ? 

63  Forsothe  Jhesus  was  stille.  And 
the  prince  of  prestis  seith  to  hym,  I 
couniour  thee  by  quycke  God,  that  thou 
seie  to  vs,  jif  thou  l;e  Crist,  the  sone  of 
God. 

64  Jhesus  seitle  to  hym,  Thou  hast 
seid  ;  netheles  I  seie  to  30U,  an  other 
tj-me^  500  shulen  se  mannes  sone  sitt- 
ynge  at  the  ri^thalf  of  the  vertue  of 
God,  and  cummynge  in  cloudis  of 
heuene. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


147 


all  they  that  ley  bond  on  the  sweai-de, 
shall  ])erysshe  with  the  swearde. 

.'",3  Other  thynkcst  thou,  that  I  can 
not  praye  my  father,  and  he  shall  gevc 
me  moo  then  xij.  legions  of  angellcs  ? 

54  Howe  then  shall  the  scri])tui-es  be 
fulfylled  1  for  so  muste  it  be. 

55  The  same  tyme  sayd  Jesus  to  the 
multitude.  Ye  be  come  out  as  it  were 
vnto  a  thefe,  with  sweardes  and  staves, 
for  to  take  me ;  dayly  I  sate  a  monge 
you,  teachinge  in  the  temple,  and  ye 
toke  me  not. 

56  All  this  was  done,  that  the  scrip- 
tures off  the  prophcttes  myglit  be  ful- 
filled. Tiien  all  his  disciples  forsoke 
him,  and  ileed. 

57  And  they  toke  Jesus,  and  leed  hym 
to  Cayplias,  the  liye  preeste,  where  tho 
scrybes,  and  the  senyours  were  assem- 
bled. 

58  Peter  folowed  hym  a  farre  of,  vnto 
the  hye  prestes  place ;  and  went  in, 
and  sate  with  the  servauntes,  to  se  the 
ende. 

59  The  chefe  prestes,  and  the  seniours 
and  all  the  counsell  sought  false  witnes 
ageinste  Jesus,  for  to  put  him  to  deeth  ; 

60  And  they  founde  none,  in  so  moche 
that  when  many  false  Avitnesses  cam, 
yet  founde  they  none.  At  the  last,  cam 
two  false  Avj-tuesses, 

61  And  sayd,  This  felowe  saide,  I  can 
distroye  the  temple  of  God,  and  bylde 
the  same  in  iij  dayes. 

62  And  the  chefe  preste  arose  and 
sayde  to  hym,  Answcrest  thou  nothinge, 
howe  is  it  that  these  beare  witnes 
agcynst  the  ? 

63  Butt  Jesus  helde  hys  peace.  And 
the  chefe  preeste  answered  and  said  to 
hym,  I  charge  the  in  the  name  ofF  the 
lyvinge  God,  that  thou  tell  vs,  whether 
thou  be  Christ,  the  Sonne  of  God. 

64  Jesus  sayd  to  hym,  Thou  haste 
sayd  3  nevcrthelesse  I  saye  vnto  you, 
here  after  shall  ye  se  the  sonne  of  man 
syttinge  on  the  right  honde  of  power, 
and  come  in  the  clowddes  of  the 
skyc. 

L  2 


148  GOTHIC,  360. 

])aiu'bum  weitwode  1 

sai !  nu  galiausidedujj  J)0  wayamerein  'is  ; 

66  "V^lia  izwis  ]?up;kei)>?  I}?  eis  and- 
hafyandans  qejjun,  Skula  daujjaus  ist. 

67  panuh  spiwun  ana  andawleizn  'is, 
yah  kaupastedun  ina  ;  sumail^-jjan  lofam 
slohun, 

68  Qijjandans,  Praiifetei  unsis,  Christn, 
Avlias  ist  sa  slahands  J)uk  1 

69  I))  Paitrus  uta  sat  ana  rolisnai ;  yali 
duaticldya  imma  aina  Jjiwi,  qij;andei,  Yah 
])u  wast  m.\\>  lesua  )jamma  Galeilaiau. 

70  '•'I]^  is  laugnida  fanva  )'aini  allaim, 
qijjands,  Ni  Avait  wha  qijjis. 

7 1  Usgaggandan  {^an  ina  in  daur,  ga- 
sawh  ina  anjjara,  yah  qa|>  du  ))aiin  yainar, 
Yah  sa  was  nii[)  lesua  J)amma  Nazoraiau. 

72  Yah  aftra  afaiaik  mi}5,  aijja  swar- 
ands,  ])atel  ni  kann  j^ana  mannan. 

73  Afav  leitil,  J-an  atgaggandans  }^ai 
standandans,  qef)un  Paitrau,  Bi  sunyai 
yah  ]>i\  ))ize  is ;  yah  auk  razda  Jjeina 
bandweij)  |juk. 

74  panuh  dugann  afdomyan  yah  swar- 
an,  Jjatei  ni  kann  ['ana  mannan.  Yah 
suns  hana  hiaikida. 

75  Yah  gamunda  Paitrus  waurdis  les- 
uis,  qi|)anis  du  sis,  patei  faur  hanins 
hruk,  Jjrim  sinj^am  afaikis  mik.  Yah 
usgaggands  ut,  gaigrot  baitraba. 


Chap.  XXVII.  i  At  maurgin  l^an 
waur})anana,  runa  nemun  allai  gudyans, 
yah  J)ai  sinistans  manageins  bi  lesu,  ei 
afdaujjidedeiua  ina. 

2  Yah  gabindandaus  ina  gatauhun,  yah 
anafulhuu  ina  Pauntiau  Peilatau,  kind- 
ina. 

3  panuh  gasaiwhands  ludas  sa  galew- 
yands  ina,  jjatei  du  stauai  gatauhans 
war];,  idreigonds,  gawandida  j^ans  j^rins 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

65  Da  dsera  sacerda  ealdor  slat  hys 
agen  reaf,  and  cwsejj,  Dis  ys  bysmor- 
sprac  ;  to  hvn  wihiige  we  senigre  octre 
sage  1  nu  !  ge  gehyrdon  of  hym  gylthce 
si:)r8ece ; 

66  Hwset  ys  sow  nu  geljuhf?  Hig  and- 
werdon  ealle  and  cwsedon,  He  is  deajjes 
scyldig. 

67  Da  spsetton  hig  on  hys  ansyne,  and 
beoton  hyne  mid  heora  fystum ;  sume 
hyne  slogou  on  his  ansyne  mid  hyra 
bradum  handum, 

68  And  cwsedon,  Sege  us,  Crist,  hwfet 
ys  se  cte  cle  sloh  1 

69  Petrus  s6|)hce  sset  ute  on  dam  cafer- 
tune ;  da  com  to  hym  an  |)eowen,  and 
cw£e)j,  And  du  wsere  mid  dam  Galilei- 
scean  Hgelende. 

70  And  he  Avidsoc  beforan  ealluni,  and 
cwiie]),  Nat  ic  hwoet  du  segst. 

71  Da  he  ut-eode  of  dsere  dura,  da 
geseah  hyne  oder  wyhi,  and  ssede  dam 
de  dter  wseron.  And  des  wks  mid  dam 
Nazareniscean  Hselende. 

72  And  he  Avids5c  eft  mid  a]je,  daet  he 
hys  nan  ))ing  ne  cude. 

73  Da  pefter  lytlum  fyrste,  genealsehton 
da  de  dter  st5don,  and  cwEedon  to  Petre, 
Sojjhce  du  eart  of  hym ;  and  din  sprsec 
de  geswiitelaj). 

74  Da  setsoc  he  and  swerede,  dset  he 
nrefre  done  man  ne  cude.  And  hrasdhce 
da  creow  se  coco. 

75  Da  gemunde  Peti'us  dies  Hselendes 
word,  de  he  cweej),  ^'rdam  de  se  coco 
crawe,  );riwa  dii  me  wids?ecst.  And  he 
eode  lit,  and  Aveop  bityrhce. 


Chap.  XXVII.  i  Witodlice  da  hyt 
morgen  wses,  da  worhton  ealle  daera 
sacerda  ealdras  gemot,  and  dses  folces 
ealdras  ongen  done  Hgelend,  dset  hig 
hyne  to  deajje  belsewdon. 

2  And  hig  laeddon  hyne  gebundenne, 
and  sealdon  hyne  dam  Pontiscean  Pilate, 
dam  deman. 

3  Da  geseah  ludas  de  hyne  belseAvde, 
da^t  he  fordemed  wses,  da  ongan  he 
hreowsian,  and  brohte  da  J^rittig  scyl- 


XXVI.65.-XXVII.3.]  WYCLIFFE,  1 3  89 

65  Tliaune  the  prince  of  prestis  kitte''' 
his  ciothis,  scyingo,  He  hath  bhisfenicd  ; 
what  5it  neclc  hau  we  to  witnessis  1  loo  ! 
now  5CC  hau  herd  blasfemye  ; 

66  What  senieth  to  50U?  And  thei 
ans\vcrynge  seiden,  He  is  gilty  of  deth. 

67  Thannc  thci  spittcn  in  to  his  face, 
and  suiytcn  hyni  with  bnffotis  ;  forsothe 
other  5ouen  strokis  with  the  pawm  of 
hondis  in  to  his  face, 

68  Scyinge,  Thou  Crist,  pi'ophecie  to 
vs,  who  is  he  that  smote  thcc  ? 

69  Sothcly  Petre  sat  with  outcn  in  the 
porche  ;  and  an  hond  niayden  came  ni5 
to  hym,  seyinge,  And  thou  were  with 
Jhcsu  of  Galilee. 

70  And  he  denyede  before  alle  men, 
seyinge,  I  woot  nat  what  thou  saist. 

7 1  Forsothe  hym  goynge  out  the  5ate, 
an  other  hond  mayden  say  hym,  and 
seith  to  hem  that  weren  there,  And  this 
was  with  Jhcsu  of  ISra5areth. 

72  And  eftsone  he  denyede  with  an 
ooth,  for  he  kuewe  nat  the  man. 

73  xVnd  after  a  litil,  thei  that  stoden 
came  ni5,  and  seiden  to  Petre,  Treuly 
and  thou  art  of  hem ;  for  whi  and  thi 
speche  makith  thee  opyn. 

74  Thanne  he  began  to  warye  and 
swere,  that  he  knewe  nat  the  man. 
And  anon  the  cok  crew. 

75  And  Petre  bithou5te  on  the  word 
of  Jhesu,  that  he  hadde  seide,  Bifore 
the  cok  ci-ewe,  thries  thou  shalt  denye 
me.     And  he  gou  out,  wepte  bittirly. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


149 


Chap.  XXVII.  i  Forsothe  the  morwe 
maad,  alle  the  princis  of  prestis,  and 
eldi'e  men  of  the  peple  token  eounseil 
a5eins  Jhesu,  that  thei  shulden  take 
liym  to  deth. 

J  And  thei  ladden  hym  bounden,  and 
bitoken  hym  to  Pilat  of  Pounce,  meire.+ 

3  Thanne  Judas  that  bitrayede  hym, 
seynge  that  he  was  dampnyd,  he  led  by 
pcnaunce,^  brou3te  a3ein  thritti  platis  of 


65  Then  the  hye  preste  rent  his  clothes, 
sayinge,  He  hath  blasphemed  ;  what  ncde 
we  off  ony  moo  witnesses  ?  lo  !  nowc 
have  ye  herde  his  blasjihcmy  ; 

66  What  thynckc  ye  1  They  answered 
and  sayd,  He  is  worthy  to  d}'e. 

67  Then  spat  they  in  hys  face,  and  bett 
him  with  there  listes  ;  and  other  smote 
him  with  the  palme  of  there  hondes  on 
the  face, 

68  Saynge,  Arcde  to  vs,  Christ,  who 
ys  he  that  smote  the  1 

6g  Peter  sate  with  out  in  the  palice ; 
and  a  damsell  cam  to  hym,  saynge, 
Thou  also  waste  Avith  Jesus  of  Galile. 

70  He  denyed  before  them  all,  sayinge, 
I  woot  not  what  thou  sayst. 

71  When  he  was  goone  out  into  the 
poorche,  another  wenche  sawe  hym,  and 
sayde  vnto  them  that  were  tliere,  Thys 
felowe  was  also  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

72  And  agayne  he  denyed  with  an 
oothe,  and  sayde,  I  knowe  nott  the  man. 

73  And  after  a  whyle,  cam  vnto  hym 
they  that  stode  bye,  and  sayde  vnto 
Peter,  Suerly  thou  arte  even  Avon  of 
them  ;  for  they  speache  bcAVTeyeth  the. 

74  Then  began  he  to  course  and  to 
sweare,  that  he  knewe  not  the  man. 
And  immedyatly  the  cocke  krewe. 

75  And  Peter  rcmembred  the  Avordes 
of  Jesu,  Avhych  he  sayde  vnto  hym, 
Before  the  cocke  croAve,  thou  shallt 
deny  me  tliryse.  And  Aveut  out  at  the 
dores,  and  Avepte  bitterly. 


Chap.  XXVII.  i  When  the  morn- 
ynge  AA'as  come,  all  the  chefe  prestes, 
and  senyours  off  the  people  helde  a 
eounsayle  agenst  Jesu,  to  put  hym  to 
deth. 

2  And  brought  hym  bounde,  and  de- 
lyvered  hym  vnto  Poncius  Pylate,  the 
debyte. 

3  Then  Avhen  Judas  Avhich  betrayed 
hym,  sawe  that  he  was  condempncd,  he 
repented  him  sylfc,  and  brought  ageyne 


150 


GOTHIC,  360, 


tiguns  silubrinaize  gudyam,  j'ali  sinlst- 
am, 

4  Qi|)ands,  Frawaurlita  mis,  galewyands 
bio})  swikn.  Ij)  eis  qejjun,  Wha  kara 
unsis  1  ]>u  witeis. 

5  Yah  atwairpands  Jjaim  silubram  iu 
alb,  aflaijj,  yah  galeijjands  usbaibab  sik. 

6  I}i  |)ai  gudyans  nimandans  })ans 
skattans,  qejjun,  Ni  skuld  ist  lagyan 
jjans  in  kaurbauaun,  unte  audawairpi 
bloJ)is  ist. 

7  Garuni  ])an  nimandans,  usbaubteduu 
us  jjaim  ])ana  akr  kasyins,  du  usfilhan 
ana  gastim. 


8  Du])])e  baitans  war]?  akrs  yains  aki's 
blo])is,  und  bina  dag. 

9  panub  usfullnoda,  })ata  qijsano  j^airb 
lairaimian  pi-aufetu,  qijjaudan,  Yab  us- 
nemun  jjrins  tiguns  sihibreinaize,  and- 
wairjji  ))is  wair])odins,  j^atei  garahnidedun 
fram  sunum  Israelis ; 

10  Yab  atgebuu  ins  und  akra  kasyins, 
swaswe  anabau})  mis  Frauya. 

Ill))  lesus  sto))  faura  kindina ;  yab 
frab  ina  sa  kindins,  qijjands,  pu  is  j)iud- 
ans  ludaie  1  Ij>  lesus  qaj)  du  imma,  pu 
qij)is. 

12  Yab  mi)>))anei  wrobijjs  was  fram 
)3aim  gudyam,  yab  sinistam,  ni  waibt 
andbof. 

13  panub  qa|)  du  imma  Peilatus,  Niu 
bauseis,  wban  filu  ana  jmk  weitwod- 
yand  1 

74  Yab  ni  andbof  imma  wijira  ni 
ainbun  Avaurde,  swaswe  sildaleikida  sa 
kindins  filu. 

15  And  dul}>  J)an  wbaryob  biubts  was 
sa  kindins  fraletan  ainana  ]?izai  managein 
bandyan,  ];anei  wildedun. 

16  Habaidedunub    pan   bandyan,   ga 
tarbidana  Barabban. 

17  Gaqumanaim  |)an  im,  qa])  im  Pei- 
Litus,  Wliana  Avilei]j  ei  fi-aletau  izwis  ? 
Barabban,  jiau  lesu,  saei  baitada  Cbrist- 
us? 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 
lingas  to  doera  sacerda  ealdrum, 

4  And  cwse]>,  Ic  syngode,  da  ic  sealde 
doet  ribtwise  blod.  Da  cwsedon  big, 
Hwfet  sprycst  du  dset  to  us  1 

5  And  be  awearp  da  scyllingas  in  on 
daet  tempi,  and  ferde,  and  mid  gryne 
byne  sylfne  abeng. 

6  Da  sol'lice  do^ra  sacerda  ealdras  on- 
fengon  dfes  seolfres,  and  cwsedon,  Nis 
byt  nti  alyfed  daet  we  asendon  byt  on 
ure  madm-cyste,  fordam  de  byt  is  blodes 
wurj). 

7  Hig  worbton  dii  gemot,  and  smea- 
don  bii  big  sceoldon  dses'Hselendes  wurj> 
ateon,  da  gebobton  big  aenne  fecer  mid 
dam  feo  tigel-Avyrbtena,  on  to  bebyrg- 
enne  el|)eodisce  men. 

8  Fordam  is  se  secer  gebaten  Acbel- 
demab,  dset  is  on  ure  gel^eode,  blodes 
jecer,  and  swa  be  is  gebaten  od  disne  dseg. 

9  Da  w£es  gefylled,  dset  gecweden  is 
Jjurb  Hieremiam  done  witegan,  dus  cwed- 
ende,  And  bi  onfengon  jjrittig  scyllinga, 
dses  gebobtan  wur}),  done  de  wses  ser 
gewurjjod  fram  Israbela  bearnum ; 

10  And  big  sealdon  di«t  on  tigel-wyrht- 
ena  secer,  swa  swa  Dribten  me  gesette. 

1 1  Da  stod  se  Hselend  beforan  dam 
deman ;  and  se  dema  byne  axode,  dus 
cwedende,  Eart  dii  ludea  cyning?  Da 
cwfej)  se  Hselend,  Dset  dii  segst. 

1 2  And  mid  dy  de  byne  wregdon  daera 
sacerda  ealdras,  and  da  blafordas,  nan 
})ing  be  ne  andsAvarode. 

13  Da  c\Yx]>  Pilatus  to  bim,  Ne  ge- 
byrest  du,  bu  fela  sagena  big  ongean 
de  secgea))  1 

.14  And  be  ne  andwjaxle  mid  nanum 
worde,  swa  dret  se  dema  wundrode  swid- 
lice. 

15  Hig  bsefdon  beom  to  gewunan  to 
beora  symbel-dfege  dset  se  dema  sceolde 
forgyfan  dam  folce  senne  foi'worbtne 
man,  swylcne  big  babban  woldon. 

16  He  hsefde  da  s5j)lice  senne  strangne 
))eofman  gebseftne,  se  woes  genemned 
Barrabbas. 

17  Da  daet  folc  gesamnod  w?es,  da 
cwae)>  Pilatus,  Hwseder  wylle  ge  dtet  ic 
eow  agyfe  1  de  Barrabban,  de  done  Hsel- 
end,  de  is  Crist  gebaten  1 


XXVII.  4-17.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

seiner  to  the  princis  of  prestis,  and  to 
the  cklre  men  of  the  jicple, 

4  SeyiuLje,  I  haue  synncil,  bitrayinge 
inst  blood.  And  thei  seideu,  What  to 
vs  1  sc  thou. 

5  And  the  platis  of  seluer  cast  awey  in 
the  temple,  he  wente  awey,  and  goyinge 
awey  he  hangide  hym  with  a  grano.^ 

6  Forsothe  the  princis  of  prestis,  taken 
the  platis  of  seiner,  sciden,  It  is  nat 
leueful  to  sende  hem  in  to  the  tresorie, 
for  it  is  the  pris  of  blood. 

7  Sothly  councell  taken,  thei  bou5ten 
with  them  the  feeld  of  a  potter,  in  to 
byryinge  of  dead  men. 


8  For  this  thing  the  ilk  feeld  is  clepid 
Acheldemak,  that  is,  a  feeld  of  blood, 
til  in  to  this  day. 

9  Thanne  it  is  fulfillid,  that  thing  that 
is  seid  by  the  prophete  Jeremye,  sey- 
ynge,  And  thei  token  thritty  platis  of 
syluer,  the  pris  of  a  man  preysid,  whom 
thei  preysiden  of  the  sonys  of  Yrael ; 

10  And  thei  5auen  hem  in  to  the  feeld 
of  a  potter,  as  the  Lord  ordeyned  to  me. 

1 1  Sothely  Jhesus  stood  byfore  the 
mejTe  ;^  and  the  presedent  axide  hym, 
seyinge,  Art  thou  kyng  of  Jewis  1  Jhesus 
seith  to  hjTn,  Thou  seist. 

12  And  whenne  he  was  acusid  of  the 
princes  of  prestis,  and  eldre  men  of  the 
peple,  he  answeride  no  thing. 

13  Than  Pilat  seith  to  hym,  Herist 
thou  nat,  hou  many  witnessyngis  thei 
seien  a5einus  thee  1 

14  And  he  answeride  nat  to  hym  to 
cny  word,  so  that  the  presedent  won- 
dride  gretely. 

15  Forsothe  by  a  solempne  day  the 
presedent  was  wont  for  to  delyuere  to 
the  peple  oon  bounden,  whom  thei 
wolden. 

16  Forsothe  "he  hadde  a  noble  man 
bounden,  that  was  seid  Barabas. 

17  Therfore  Pilat  seid  to  hem  gedrid 
to  gidre,  "Wiiom  wole  5ee,  I  leeue^  to 
50U  ]  wher  Barabas,  or  Jhesu,  that  is 
seid  Crist  I 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


151 


the  xx.K.  plattes  off  sylver  to  the  chefe 
prestes,  and  senyourcs, 

4  Sayngc,  1  have  synncd,  betraynge 
the  innocent  bloud.  And  they  sayde, 
What  is  that  to  vs  1  se  thou  to  that. 

5  And  he  cast  dounc  the  sylver  plates 
in  the  temple,  and  departed,  and  went 
and  houugc  hym  sylfe. 

6  The  chefe  prestes  toke  the  sylver 
plattes,  and  sayd.  It  is  not  lawfuU  for 
to  put  them  in  to  the  treasury,  because 
it  is  the  pryce  of  bloud. 

7  And  they  toke  counsell,  and  bought 
with  them  a  potters  felde,  to  bury 
strangers  in. 


8  Wherfore  that  felde  is  called  the  felde 
of  bloud,  vntyll  this  daye. 

9  Then  was  fullfylled,  that  which  was 
spoken  by  Jeremi  the  prophet,  sayinge, 
And  they  toke  xxx.  sylver  plates,  the 
value  of  him  that  was  prysed,  whom 
they  bought  of  the  chyldren  of  Israhel ; 

10  And  they  gave  them  for  the  potters 
felde,  as  the  Lorde  appoynted  me. 

1 1  Jesus  stode  before  the  debite ;  and 
the  debite  axed  him,  saynge.  Arte  thou 
the  kynge  of  the  lewes  '^  Jesus  sayd 
vnto  hym.  Thou  sayest. 

1 2  When  he  was  accused  of  the  chefe 
preestes,  and  senioures,  he  answered 
nothinge. 

13  Then  sayd  Pilate  vnto  him,  Hearest 
thou  not,  howe  many  thiuges  they  laye 
ayenste  the  1 

14  And  he  answered  him  to  never  a 
worde,  in  so  mochc  that  the  debyte 
marveylled  veiy  sore. 

1 5  Att  that  feest  the  debyte  was  wonte 
to  deliver  vnto  the  peplo  a  presoner, 
whom  they  wolde  chose. 

16  He  hade  then  a  notable  presoner, 
called  Barrabas. 

1 7  And  when  they  were  gaddered  to- 
gether Pilate  sayde  vnto  them,  Wliether 
wyll  ye,  that  Y  gevc  losse  vnto  you  I 
Barrabas,  or  Jesus,  which  is  called  Crysti 


152  GOTHIC,  360. 

18  Wissa  auk,  |)atei  in  neij^is  atgebim 
ID  a. 

19  Sitandin  ]jan  imma  ana  stauastola, 
insandida  du  'imma  qens  is,  qifiandei,  Ni 
■\vailit  ]>\\s  yah  Jjamma  gai'aibtin ;   .  .  .  . 


'  ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

1 8  He  wiste  s6})lice,  dset  hig  liyne  for 
andau  him  sealdon. 

1 9  He  sset  da  Pihxtus  on  his  dom-setle, 
da  sende  his  wif  to  hym,  and  cwse]?,  Ne 
beo  de  nan  })ing  gemtene  ongen  disne 
rihtwisan  ;  s6})lice  fela  ic  hoebbe  gejjolod 
to  doeg,  Jjurh  gesyhpie,  for  hym. 

20  Da  Iserdon  dasra  sacerda  ealdras 
and  da  hlafordas  da?t  folc,  deet  hig  btedon 
Barrabban,  and  done  Hselend  fordydon. 

21  Da  andwyrde  se  dema  and  S£ede 
heom,  Hwsederne  wylle  ge  da^t  ic  for- 
gyfe  eow  of  disum  twam  1  Da  cwsedon 
hig,  Barrabban. 

22  Da  cwse])  Pilatus  to  heom,  Witodhce 
hwset  do  ic  be  dam  Hselende,  de  is  Crist 
genemned  1  Da  cwsedon  hig  ealle,  Sy 
he  on  rode  ahangen. 

23  Da  cwpe])  se  dema  to  heom,  Witod- 
lice  hwiet  yfeles  dyde  des  1  Hi  da  swidor 
clypodon,  dus  cwedende,  Sy  he  ahangen. 

24  Da  geseah  Pilatus  d?et  hyt  naht  ne 
fremode,  ac  gewurde  mare  gehlyd,  da 
genam  he  w«ter,  and  ])w6h  hys  handa 
befdran  dam  folce,  and  cwfejj,  Unscyldig 
ic  eom  fram  dyses  rihtwisan  bldde ;  ge 
geseo]?. 

25  Da  andsvvarode  eall  dset  folc  and 
cwaej?,  Sy  hys  blod  ofer  us,  and  ofer  ure 
beam. 

26  Gii  forgeaf  he  hym  Barrabban,  and 
done  Hselend  he  let  swingan,  and  sealde 
heom  to  ahonne. 

27  Da  underfengon  does  deman  cempan 
done  Hselend  on  dam  doni-erne,  and 
gegaderodon  ealne  done  j^reat  to  heom. 

28  And  miscryddon  hyne  hys  agenum 
reafe,  and  scryddon  hyne  mid  weolcen- 
readum  scyccelse ; 

29  And  wuudon  cyne-helm  of  Jjornum, 
and  asetton  ofer  hys  heafod,  and  hreod  on 
hys  swidran  ;  and  bigdon  heora  cneow 
beforan  him,  and  bysmerodou  hyne,  dus 
cwedende,  Hal  wses  du,  ludea  cyning. 

30  And  spgetton  on  hyne,  and  namon 
hreod,  and  beoton  hys  heafod. 

31  And  sefter  dam  de  hig  hyne  dus 
bysmerodon,  hig  unscryddon  hyne  dam 
scyccelse,  and  scryddon  hyne  mid  hys  a- 
genum  reafe,  and  Iccddon  hyne  to  ahonne. 


XXVII.  18-31.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

18  Sothely  he  wistc,  that  by  enuye 
thei  botraiedou  hym. 

19  Forsutho  hym  sittyiic;c  for  iustisc,''' 
his  wyt  sente  to  hym,  scyini;o,  Ko  thing 
to  tlice  and  to  that  iust  man  ;  sothely  I 
haue  suffiid  this  day  many  thiugis  for 
hym,  by  a  visiouu.'*' 

20  Forsothe  the  princis  of  pvcstis  and 
the  eldre  men  tisiden^  to  the  peplis,  that 
thei  shuklon  axe  Barabas,  but  Jhesu 
thei  shulden  lese. 

21  Forsotlic  the  president  answcryngc 
seith  to  hem,  Whom  of  the  two  Avolen 
5ee  to  be  left^  to  50U  ?  And  thei  seiden, 
Barabas. 

22  Pihit  seith  to  hem,  What  thcrfore 
shal  I  do  of  Jhesu,  that  is  seid  Crist'? 
Alle  seien,  Be  he  crucified. 

23  The  presedent  seith  to  hem,  Sothely 
Avhat  of  yuel  hath  he  don  1  And  thei 
crieden  more,  seyinge,  Be  he  crucified. 

24  Forsothe  Pilat  seynge  that  he  pro- 
fitide  no  thing,  but  the  more  noyse  was 
maad,  water  taken,  Avashide  the  hondis 
byforc  the  peple,  seyinge,  I  am  innocent^ 
fro  the  blood  of  this  iust  man ;  se  jee. 

25  And  al  the  peple  answerynge  seide, 
His  blood  vpou  vs,  and  on  oure  sonys. 

26  Thanne  he  lefte  to  hem  Barabas, 
but  he  toke  to  hem  Jhesu  scourgid, 
that  he  shulde  be  crucified. 

27  Thanne  kni3tis  of  the  president  tak- 
ynge  Jhesu  in  the  mote  halle,  gcdriden 
to  hym  alle  the  cumpanye  of  kni5tis. 

28  And  thei  vnclothinge  hym,  diden 
aboutc  hym  a  rede  mantel ; 

29  And  thei  foldynge  a  crowne  of 
thoi'nis,  puttiden  on  his  heued,  and  a 
reed  in  his  ri5t  bond ;  and  the  knee 
bowid^  bifore  hym,  thei  scoi-nydcn  hym, 
seyinge,  Hayle,  kyng  of  Jewis. 

30  And  thei  spittynge  in  to  hym,  token 
a  reed,  and  smyten  his  heued. 

31  And  after  that  thei  hadden  scorned 
hym,  thei  vnclothiden  hym  of  the  mantel, 
and  thei  clothiden  hym  with  his  clothis, 
and  leddeu  hym  for  to  crucifie. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


1.13 


18  For  he  kncwe  well,  that  for  envy 
they  had  delyvered  hym. 

19  ^\  lieu  he  was  sett  dounc  to  gevc 
iudgcment,  his  wyfe  sent  to  hym,  say- 
inge.  Have  thou  nothinge  to  do  with 
that  iuste  man  ;  I  have  suffered  many 
thingcs  this  daye  in  my  slcpc,  about 
hym. 

20  The  chefe  prcestes  and  the  sen i ours 
had  parswaded  the  people,  that  they 
shulde  axe  Barrabas,  aud  shulde  destroye 
Jesus. 

2  I  The  del)ite  answered  and  saydc  vnto 
them,  Whether  of  the  twayne  will  ye 
that  I  Ictt  loosse  vnto  you  1  And  they 
saydc,  Barrabas. 

22  Pilate  sayde  vnto  them.  What  shall 
I  do  then  with  Jesus,  which  is  called 
Crist?  They  all  sayde  to  hym,  Lett 
hym  be  ci'ucificd. 

23  Then  sayde  the  debite,  What  evyll 
hath  he  done  ?  And  they  cryed  the 
more,  sayngc,  Lett  him  be  crucified, 

24  When  Pilate  sawe  that  he  prevayled 
nothinge,  butt  that  moare  busenes  was 
made,  he  toke  water,  and  wasshed  his 
hondes  before  the  people,  sayinge,  I  am 
innocent  of  the  bloud  of  this  iuste  per- 
son ;  and  that  ye  shall  se. 

25  Then  answered  all  the  people  and 
sayde.  His  bloud  fall  on  vs,  and  on  oure 
children. 

26  Then  lett  he  Barrabas  loosse  vnto 
them,  and  scourged  Jesus,  and  delyvered 
him  to  be  ci-ucified. 

27  Then  the  soudeours  of  the  debite 
toke  Jesus  vnto  the  comcn  hall,  and 
gaddered  vnto  him  all  the  company. 

28  And  stripped  hym,  and  put  on  hym 
a  purpyll  roobe  ; 

29  And  platted  a  croune  off"  thornes, 
and  putt  vppon  hys  heed,  and  a  rede  in 
his  ryght  honde  ;  and  bowed  theire 
knees  before  him,  saying,  Hayle,  kiuge 
of  the  lewes. 

30  And  spitted  vppon  hym,  and  toke 
the  rede,  and  smootc  hym  on  the  heed. 

3 1  And  when  they  had  mocked  him, 
they  toke  the  robe  off  hym  ageyne,  and 
put  his  awne  reymcnt  on  him,  and  lecd 
hym  awaye  to  cinicify  hym. 


154 


GOTHIC,  360. 


42 

.  Israelis 

1st,  atsteigadau  nu  af  }iamma  galgin,  ei 
gasaiwliaima  yah  galaubyam  imma  : 

43  Trauaida  du  Gu];a,  lausyadau  nu 
ina,  yabai  -s^ili  iiia  ;  qa}^  auk,  patei  Gujjs 
im  sunus. 

44  patuli  samo  yali  ]jai  waidedyans, 
])ai  mijjushramidans  imma,  idweitidedun 
imma. 

45  Fram  saihston  {jan  whellai  war}? 
riqis  ufer  ailai  airjjai,  und  wlieila  ni- 
undon. 

46  Iji  ]>an  bi  wbeila  niundon  ufliropida 
Icsus  stibnai  mikilai,  qi}jands,  Helei, 
Helei,   lima    sibak)?ani,    ))atei   ist,    Guj? 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

32  Sojjlfce  da  big  ut-ferdon,  da  ge- 
metton  big  genne  Cyreuiscne  man,  cum- 
ende  heom  togenes,  dses  nama  wses 
Symon  ;  done  hig  nyddon,  dset  he  bsere 
hys  rode. 

33  Da  comon  big  on  da  stowe  de  is 
genemned  Golgotha,  dset  is,  Heafodpan- 
nan  st5w, 

34  And  hig  sealdon  hym  wm  drincan 
wid  geallan  gemenged ;  and  da  he  hys 
onljyrigde,  da  nolde  he  hyt  drincan. 

35  S6j)lice  gefter  dam  de  big  byne  on 
rode  aliengon,  big  todteldon  hys  reaf, 
and  wurpon  blot  dasr  ofer,  dtet  wsere 
gefylled,  dset  de  gecweden  w?es  Jjurh 
done  -witegan,  and  dus  cwsejj,  Hig  to- 
dseldon  heom  mine  reaf,  and  ofer  mine 
reaf  big  wurpon  blot. 

36  And  big  beheoldon  byne  sittende  ; 

37  And  hig  asetton  ofer  hys  heafod  hys 
gylt,  dus  awriteune,  DIS  IS  SE  H^'L- 
END,  lUDEA  CYNING. 

38  Da  Avaeron  Tdiangen  mid  hym  twegen 
scea})an,  an  on  da  swidran  bealfe,  and 
oder  on  da  wynstran. 

39  Witodlice  da  weg-fei'endan  byne 
bysmeredon,  and  CAvehton  beora  heafod, 

40  And  cwsedon,  Wii,  diet  des  towyrp)? 
Godes  tempi,  and  on  |)rim  dagum  hyt 
eft  getimbraj) ;  gebsel  mi  de  sylfne  ;  gyf 
du  sy  Godes  sunu,  ga  nyder  of  daere 
rode. 

41  Eac  dsera  sacerda  ealdras  byne  by- 
smeredon, mid  dam  b5cerum  and  mid 
dam  ealdrum,  and  CAvsedon, 

42  O'dere  be  gebselde,  and  byne  sylfne 
gebeelan  ne  mseg ;  gyf  be  Israbela  cyn- 
ing  sy,  ga  nu  nyder  of  dsere  rode,  and 
we  gelyfajj  hym ; 

43  He  gelyfj)  on  God,  alyse  he  byne- 
nu,  gyf  be   Avylle ;    witodlice  he  seede,  ' 
Godes  sunu  ic  eom. 

44  Gelice  da  scea)jan,  de  mid  him  a- 
hangene  wseron,  byne  bysj^don. 

45  Witodlice  fram  dsere  sixtan  tide 
WEeron  gewurden  Jjystru  ofer  ealle  eorjj- 
an,  od  da  nigojian  tid. 

46  And  ymbe  da  nygojjan  tid  clypode 
se  Heeleud  micelre  stefne,  and  dus- 
cvfse]),  Heli,  Heli,  lema  zabdani,  dtet  is. 


XXVII.  32-46.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

32  Sothely  thei  c^oynoe  out,  fouiulcn  a 
man  of  8vrynoii,  ouniniynge  fro  a  toun, 
Symont  by  name  ;  thci  constrcyncden 
hym,  that  he  shukle  take  liis  crosse. 

33  And  thci  camcn  in  to  a  [ihice  that 
is  clepid  Golgatha,  that  is,  the  phice  of 
Caluarie. 

34  And  thei  5aucn  hym  for  to  drinke 
•\viyn  meyncfid  with  cjalle ;  and  whenne 
he  had  tastid,  he  wolde  nat  drinke. 

35  Sothely  after  that  thei  haddcn  cru- 
cified hym,  thei  departiden  liis  clothis, 
sendynge  lot,  that  it  shulde  be  fulfillid, 
that  is  scid  by  the  prophcte,  scyinge, 
Thei  departiden  to  hem  my  clothis,  and 
on  my  cloth  thei  senten  lot. 

36  And  tliei  sittynge  kepten  hym ; 

37  And  thei  puttidcn  on  his  heued  the 
cause  of  hym  Avryten,  This  is  Jhesus  of 
Nazareth,  kyng  of  Jewis. 

38  Thanne  two  theeues  ben  crucified 
with  him,  oon  on  the  ri3t  half,  and  oon 
on  the  left  half. 

39  Forsotlie  men  passynge  forth  blas- 
ferayden  hym,  moouynge  her  heuedis, 

40  And  se}'inge,  Vath,'*'  that  distroyist 
the  temple  of  God,  and  in  the  thvidde 
day  bildist  it  ajein  ;  sane  thou  thi  self; 
5if  thou  art  the  sone  of  God,  cume  doun 
of  the  crosse. 

41  Also  and  princis  of  prestis  scorn- 
ynge,  with  scribis  and  eldre  men,  seideu, 

41'  He  made  other  men  saaf,  he  may 
nat  make  hym  self  saaf ;  3if  he  is  kyng 
of  Yrael,  cume  he  nowc  doun  fro  the 
crosse,  and  we  bilcuen  to  hjTn  ; 

43  He  trustith  in  God,  delyuere  lie 
hATii  nowe,  5if  he  wole ;  forsothe  he 
seide.  For  I  am  Goddis  sone. 

44  Forsothe  and  the  theeuys,  that 
weren  crucified  with  hym,  puttiden  to 
hym  with  repreue  the  same  thing. 

45  Sothely  fro  the  sixte  hour  dercnessis 
ben  maad  on  al  the  erthe,  til  to  the 
nynethe  hour. 

46  And  about  the  nynthe  houre  Jhesus 
ci'iedc  with  grete  voice,  seyinge,  Hely, 
Hely,  lamazabatany,  that  is,  My  God, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


15"> 


32  And  as  they  cam  out,  they  founde 
a  man  of  Cyrcn,  named  Simon  ;  him 
they  compelled,  to  beare  his  crosse. 


33  And  cani  vnto  the  place  which  is 
called  Golgotha,  that  is  to  sayc,  a  place 
of  deed  mens  seniles. 

34  And  they  gave  him  veneger  to 
drynke  myxte  with  gall ;  and  when  he 
had  tasted  there  of,  he  wolde  not  drinke. 

35  "When  they  had  crucified  hym,  they 
I)artcd  his  garmentcs,  and  did  cast  lottes, 
to  fulfyll  that  was  spoken  by  the  pro- 
phet, They  have  parted  my  garmentes 
amonge  them,  and  apon  my  vesture 
have  cast  loottes. 

36  And  they  sate  and  watched  hym 
there ; 

37  And  they  set  vppc  over  his  heed 
the  cause  of  his  deeth  written,  This  is 
Jesus,  the  kynge  of  the  lewes. 

38  And  there  were  two  theves  crucified 
with  hym,  won  on  the  right  honde,  and 
another  on  the  lyfte  honde. 

39  They  that  passed  by  revyled  hym, 
waggynge  ther  heeddes, 

40  And  sayinge.  Thou,  that  destroyest 
the  temple  off  God,  and  byldest  it  in 
thre  dayes ;  save  thy  sylfc  ;  if  thou  he 
the  Sonne  of  God,  come  doune  from  the 
crosse. 

41  Lykwyse  also  the  prelates  mock- 
inge  hym,  with  the  scribes  and  seniours, 
sayde, 

42  He  saved  other,  hym  sylfe  he  can 
not  save  ;  yff  he  be  the  kynge  off  is- 
rahell,  let  hym  nowe  come  doune  from 
the  crosse,  and  we  woU  beleve  hym  ; 

.  43  He  trusted  in  God,  lett  God  delyvcr 
hym  nowe,  yf  he  will  have  hym  ;  for  he 
sayde.  I  am  the  sonne  otl"  God. 

44  That  same  also  the  theves,  which 
were  crucified  with  hym,  cast  in  his 
tethe. 

45  From  the  sixtc  hourc  was  ther 
derckncs  over  all  the  londe,  vnto  the 
nynth  houre. 

46  And  about  the  nynth  houre  Jesus 
crycd  with  a  loudc  voyce,  sayinge,  Eli, 
Eli,  lama  sabathani,  that  is  to  sayc,  My 


156  GOTHIC,  360. 

meins,  Gu])  meins,  duwhe  mis  bilaist  ? 

47  I})  sumai  jjize  yainar  standandane, 
gahausyandans,  qe]jun,  patei  Helian 
wopeijj  sa. 

48  Yah  suns  {jragida  ains  us  im,  yali 
nam  swamm  fullyands  aketis,  yah  lag- 
yauds  ana  raus,  draggkida  ina. 

49  Ijj  ])ai  an])arai  qejjun,  Let ;  ei  sai- 
Avhani  qimaiu  llelias,  uasyan  ina 

50  Ij)  lesus  aftra  hropyands  stibnai 
mikilai,  aflailot  ahman. 

51  Yah  };au  fciuvhah  alhs  diskritnoda '•' 
in  twa,  lupajjro  uud  dala)>.  Yah  air])a 
inreiraidu,  yah  staiuos  disskrituodedun ; 

52  Yah  hlaiwasnos  usluknodedun,  yah 
managa  leika  juze  ligandane  Aveihaize, 
urrisun. 

53  Yah  usgaggandans  us  hlaiwasnom, 
afar  urrist  is  iunatgaggandans  in  Jjo 
weihon  baurg,  yah  ataugidedun  sik  man- 
againi. 

54  1\>  huudafa])3  yah  ])ai  mi}?  imma 
witandaus  lesua,  gasalwhandans  )io  reir- 
on,  yali  ]>o  waui'ljauona,  ohtedun  ab- 
raba,  qij;andans,  Bi  sunyai  Gujjs  sunus 
ist  sa. 

55  Wesunuh  })an  yainar  qinons  manag- 
es fairrajn'o  saiwhandeins,  |)Ozei  hiisti- 
dedun  afar  Iciua  fram  Galeilaia,  and- 
bahtyaudeins  imma. 

56  In  jaimei  was  ilarya  so  Magdalene, 
yah  ?ilarya  so  lakobis,  yah  losez  aijjci, 
yah  aijjci  suniwe  Zaibaidaiaus. 

57  I})  \>an  sei\m  wavjj,  qam  manna 
gabigs  af  Arehnaj^aias,  jnzuh  namo  losef, 
saei  yah  silba  sipouida  lesua. 

58  Sah  atgaggands  du  Peilatau,  ba|)  Jjis 
leikis  lesuis.  panuh  Peilatus  uslaubida 
giban  {^ata  leik. 

59  Yah  nimands  jjata  leik,  losef  biAvand 
ita  sabana  hrainyamma, 

60  Yah  galagida  ita  in  uiuyamma 
seinarama  lilaiwa,  jjatei  ushuloda  ana 
staina  ;  j-ali  faurwahvyands  staina  mikil- 
amma  daurons  j^is  hUuwis,  galaij). 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Matt. 

on  Englisc,  Min  God,  min  God,  to  hm 
forlete  dii  me  1 

47  S6])Hce  sume  da  de  dser  stodon, 
and  dis  gehyrdon,  cwsedon,  Nu  he 
clypa})  Heliam. 

48  Da  hrsedlice  arn  an  heora,  and  ge- 
nam  iine  spongean  and  fylde  hig  mid 
ecede,  and  asette  an  hreod  titer  on,  and 
sealde  hym  drincan. 

49  Witodhce  da  odre  cwaedon,  Leet ; 
uton  geseon  hwseder  HeUas  cume,  and 
wylle  hyne  alysan. 

50  Da  clypode  se  Hjeleud  eft  micelre 
stefne,  and  asende  hys  giist. 

51  And  djer  rihte  daes  temples  wah- 
ryft  wear|)  tosliten  on  twegen  dselas, 
fram  ufeweardon  od  nydeweard.  And 
seo  eor})e  bifode,  and  stanas  toburston  ; 

52  And  byrgena  wurdon  ge-openode, 
and  manige  halige  lichaman  de  ser 
slepon,  aryson. 

53  And  dii  hig  iit-eodon  of  dam  byrg- 
enum,  jefter  hys  seryste  hig  comon  on 
da  haligan  ceastre,  and  seteowdon  hig 
manegum. 

54  Witodlice  dses  hundredes  ealdor  and 
da  de  mid  him  wseron  healdende  done 
Haelend,  da  hig  gesawon  da  eorjj-bifunge, 
and  da  J)ing  de  dajr  gewurdon,  hig 
ondredon  heom  J)earle.  and  cwsedon, 
S5|)lice  Godes  sunu  Avses  des. 

55  AVitodlice  daer  wseron  manega  Avif 
feorran,  da  de  fyligdon  dam  Hselende 
fram  Galilea,  him  Jienigende. 

56  Betwuh  dam  wses  seo  Magdalenisce 
Maria,  and  Maria  lacobes  moder,  and 
losephes  m5der,  and  Zebedeis  suuena 
moder. 

57  So))Iice  da  hyt  sefen  wses,  com  sum 
welig  man  of  Arimathia,  dees  nam  a  wses 
losep,  se  sylfa  wees  dses  Heelyndes 
leorning-cniht. 

58  He  genealtehte  to  Pilate,  and  bsed 
dses  Hselendes  lichaman.  Da  het  Pi- 
latus  iigyfan  him  done  lichaman. 

59  And  losep  genam  done  lichaman, 
and  bewand  hyne  mid  cleenre  scytan, 

60  And  lede  hyne  on  hys  niwan  byi'g- 
ene,  da  he  aheow  on  stane ;  and  he 
toawjdte  mycelne  stan  to  hlide  diere 
byrgene,  and  ferde  syddan. 


XXVII.  47-6o.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

my  God,  wbevto^   hast   thou   forsaken 
mee? 

47  Sothly  suinnicn  stonilyngc  there, 
and  heerynge,  seiden,  This  clepith  Hely. 

48  And  anon  oon  of  hem  renn}Tige, 
filHde  a  spoungc  taken  with  aycel,^  and 
puttide  to  a  reed,  and  5aue  to  hym  for 
to  drinke. 

49  But  other  seiden,  Suffre  thou  ;  see 
we  wher  Hely  cumnie,  deljiierynge 
Lyra. 

50  Forsothc  Jhesus  eftsoncs  cryynge 
with  grete  voice,  seiite  out  the  spirit. 

51  And  loo  !  the  veile  of  the  temple  is 
kitf''  in  to  two  parties,  fro  the  hei3est 
til  doun.  And  the  erthe  is  nioued,  and 
stoonys  ben  cleft ; 

52  And  biriels  ben  openyd,  and  many 
bodies  of  seintes  that  slepteu,'''  rysen 
a5ein. 

53  And  thei  goynge  out  of  her  biriels, 
after  his  resureccioun  canien  in  to  the 
holy  citee,  and  apeeriden  to  manye. 

54  Treuly  centurio  and  thei  that  weren 
with  hyni  kcpinge  Jhesu,  the  nioouynge 
of  the  erthe  seen,  and  thoo  thingis  that 
weren  done,  dredden  greteli,  seyinge, 
Terrely  this  was  Goddis  sone. 

55  Forsothe  there  weren  there  many 
wymnien  afer,  that  sueden  Jhesu  fro 
Galilee,  mynystryuge  to  hym. 

56  Amonge  whiche  was  ]\Iarie  Mawcie- 
Ic^-nc,  and  !Marie  of  Jamys,  and  the 
modir  of  Joseph,  and  the  modir  of 
Zebedees  sones. 

57  Forsothe  when  the  euenyng  was 
maad,  there  came  a  riche  man  fro 
Armathiu,  Joseph  by  name,  the  whiche 
and  he  was  disciple  of  Jhesu. 

.-,8  He  wente  to  Pilate,  and  axide  the 
lH>dy  of  Jhesu.  Thanne  Pilate  com- 
iiundide  the  body  to  be  5olden. 

.VI  And  the  body  taken,  Joseph  wlap- 
pide  it  in  a  clcne  sendcl,^ 

60  And  puttide  it  in  his  newe  biriel, 
that  he  haddc  hewen  in  a  stoon  ;  and  he 
walowid  to  a  grete  stoon  at  the  dore 
of  the  biriel,  and  wente  awey. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  137 

God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ? 

47  Some  of  them  that  stodc  there, 
when  they  herdc  that,  sayde.  This  man 
calleth  for  Helias. 

48  And  streyght  way  won  off  them 
ranne,  and  toko  a  sponge  and  filled  it 
full  of  veneger,  and  put  it  on  a  rede, 
and  gave  hym  to  drynke. 

49  Other  sayde,  Let  be;  let  vs  se 
whyther  Helias  wyll  come,  and  delyver 
hym. 

50  Jesus  cryed  agayne  with  a  lowdc 
voyce,  and  yelded  vppe  the  goost. 

51  And  beholde  !  the  vaylc  of  the 
temple  was  rent  in  two  parties,  from 
the  toppe  to  the  bottom.  And  the  erth 
did  quake,  and  the  stones  did  rent ; 

52  And  gi-aves  did  open,  and  the 
bodies  off  many  saynctes  which  slept, 
ai'ose. 

53  And  cam  out  off  their  graves  after 
his  resurreccion,  and  cam  in  to  the  holy 
cite,  and  appered  vnto  many. 

54  When  the  pety  captayne  and  they 
that  Avere  with  hym  watchinge  Jesus, 
sawe  the  erth  quake,  and  those  thynges 
which  hapened,  they  feared  greatly, 
sayinge.  Off  a  surete  this  was  the  sonne 
off  God. 

55  And  many  wemen  were  there  be- 
holdinge  hym  a  fan-e  off,  which  folowed 
Jesus  from  Gallic,  ministringc  vnto 
hym. 

56  Amonge  the  which  was  Mary  Mag- 
dalen, and  Mary  the  mother  off  James, 
and  the  mother  of  Joses,  and  the  mother 
off  Zebedes  chyldren. 

57  When  the  even  was  come,  there 
cam  a  ryche  man  off  Aramathia,  named 
Joseph,  which  same  also  was  Jesus 
disciple. 

58  He  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the 
body  of  Jesus.  Then  Pilate  commaunded 
the  body  to  be  delivered. 

59  And  Joseph  tokc  the  body,  and 
wrapped  it  in  a  clene  lynnyne  clooth, 

60  And  put  it  in  his  newe  tombe, 
which  he  had  hewen  out  even  in  the 
rokc  ;  and  rolled  a  greate  stone  to  the 
dore  of  the  sepulcre,  and  departed. 


158 


GOTHIC,  360. 


61  Wasuli  Jjau  yainar  Marya  Magdalene 
yah  so  anjjava  Llarya,  sitaudeins  and- 
"wairj)is  |)ainma  hlalwa. 

62  Iftumin  jjan  daga,  saei  ist  afar  par- 
askaiwein,  gaqemun  auliumistans  gud- 
yans  yah  Fareisaieis  du  Peilatau, 

63  Qijjandans,  Frauya,  gamundedum, 
])atei  yains  airzyands  qa|>  uauh  libands, 
Afar  Jirins  dagans  urreisa. 

64  Halt  nu  witan  ))amma  hlaiwa  uud 
Jjaua  j^ridyaii  dag ;  ibai  ufto  qimaudans 
]jai  siponyos  is,  binimaina  imma,  yah 
qijjaina  du  managein,  Ui'rais  us  dauj^aim ; 
yah  ist  so  speidizei  au'zijja  wairsizei 
j)izai  frumein. 

65  Qa))  im  Peilatus,  Habaijj  Avardyans; 
gaggif),  witaiduh  swaswe  kuiinu}?. 

661])  eis  gaggandans,  galukun  )jata 
hlaiw,  faursiglyaudans  fiana      .... 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

61  DjBr  Ava^s  s5))lice  seo  Magdalenisce 
Maria  and  seo  oCter  Maria,  sittende  vet 
dsere  byrgene. 

62  Witodlice  odrum  diege,  cle  wa?s 
gearcung-dfeg,  comon  togoedere  dyera 
sacerda  ealdras  and  cla  Sundor-halgau 
to  Pilate, 

63  And  cwsedon,  Hlaford,  we  gemunon, 
dset  se  swica  Sisde  da  he  on  life  wees, 
.^fter  jjrym  dagon  ic  arise. 

64  Hat  nu  healdan  da  byrgene  od 
done  jjryddan  djeg  ;  de-lses  hys  leorning- 
cnilitas  cumon,  and  forstelon  hyne,  and 
secgeon  dam  folce,  dset  he  aryse  of 
dea})e ;  donne  bj-])  dset  seftere  gedwyld 
wyrse  donne  daet  serre. 

65  Da  cw8e|>  Pilatus,  Ge  habba]>  heord- 
rsedenne ;  faraj?,  and  healda})  swa  swa 
ge  witon. 

66  So})lice  hig  ferdon,  and  ymbe-trym- 
cdon  da  byrgene,  and  inseglodon  done 
stan,  mid  dam  weardum. 


Chap.  XXVIII.+  i  S5))lice  dam  restc- 
dseges  sefene,  se  de  onlihte  on  dam 
forman  reste-dsege,  com  seo  Magdalen- 
isce Maria,  and  seo  oder  Maria,  dtet  hig 
woldon  geseon  da  byrgene. 

2  And  dser  wear)?  geworden  micel  eov]>- 
bifung  ;  witodlice  Drihtenes  eugel  astah 
of  heofonan,  and  genealcehte  and  awylte 
done  stan,  and  sset  doer  on  uppan. 

3  Hys  ansyn  wses  swylce  ligyt,  and 
hys  reaf  swa  hwite  swa  snaw ; 

4  Witodlice  da  Aveardas  AVi^ron  afyrhte, 
and  Weeron  gCAA'ordene  swylce  hig  deade 
Avseron. 

5  Da  andsAvarode  se  engel  and  ssede 
dam  Avifon,  Ne  ondrsede  ge  coaa',  ic  AA'at  j 
Avitodlice  dset  ge  secea|j  done  Hselend, 
done  de  on  rode  ahangen  ^Yses ; 

6  Nys  he  her,  he  aras,  sojjlice  SAva  SAA'a 
he  Scede ;  cuma}),  and  geseo]j  da  stoAve, 
de  se  Hselend  Avses  on-aled. 

7  And  farajj  hrcedlice,  and  secgea]?  hys 
leorning-cnihtum,  dtet  he  aras.  And 
s6]>lice  he  cym])  befoi-an  eow  on  Gali- 


XXVII.  6 1  .-XXVIII.  7.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


ir)9 


61  Forsothe  Maryo  Mawdclcyne  and 
an  othcrc  Alarye  wcrcn  there,  sittynge 
a^eins  the  sepulcre. 

62  Sothely  on  the  tothci-  day,  that  is 
after  pascke  euenyuge,  the  i)rincis  of 
prestls  and  Pharisees  camen  to  gidcre 
to  Pihitc, 

6^  Seiynge,  Sire,  we  han  niynde,  for 
the  ilkc  traitour^  saydc  5it  lyuyuge, 
Aftir  thre  dayes  I  shal  ryse  ajen. 

64  Therfore  comaunde  thou  the  sepul- 
cre to  be  kept  til  in  to  the  thridde  day; 
lest  perauenture  his  diseiplis  conien,  and 
stelen  him,  and  scyen  to  the  i^cple,  He 
is  risun  fro  deeth ;  and  the  laste  errour 
schal  be  worse  than  the  formere. 

65  Pih^t  seith  to  hem,  ^c  han  the 
kepingc  ;  go  5c,  kepe  50  as  56  kunnen. 

66  Forsoth  thei  goynge  forth,  kepten^ 
the  sepulcre,  markinge^  the  stoon,  with 
kcperis. 


Chap.  XXVIII.  i  Forsothe  in  the 
cuenyng  of  the  saboth,'''  that  schyneth 
in  the  tirste  day  of  the  woke,  Marie 
Mawdcleyu  cam,  and  another  Marie,  for 
to  se  the  sepulcre. 

2  And  lo  I  thcr  was  maad  a  greet 
erthe  niouyng ;  forsoth  the  aungel  of 
the  Lord  cam  douu  fro  heuene,  and 
comynge  to  turuide  awey  the  stoon,  and 
sat  tlieron. 

3  Sothli  his  lokyng  was  as  leyt,  and 
his  clothis  as  snow  ; 

4  Forsothe  for  di-ede  of  him  tlie  keperis 
ben  afferid,  and  thei  ben  maad  as  deede 
men. 

5  Forsothe  the  aungel  answeringe  seide 
to  the  wymmen,  Nyle  50  drede,  for  I 
woot  that  5c  seken  Jhesu,  that  is  cruci- 
fied; 

6  He  is  not  here,  sothli  he  roos,  as  he 
seide ;  come  56,  and  seeth  the  place, 
where  the  Lord  was  putt. 

7  And  56  goynge  souc,  sole  to  his  dis- 
eiplis and  to  Pctre,  for  lie  liath  risun. 
And  lo !    he  schal  go  bifore  50U  in  to 


61  There  was  ]\rary  Magdalene  and 
the  other  Mar}-,  sittinge  over  aycnste 
the  sepulcre. 

62  The  ncxte  daye,  that  foloweth  good 
frydayc,  the  bye  prestos  and  Pharises 
got  them  selves  to  Pilate, 

63  And  sayde,  Syr,  avc  remember,  that 
this  deceyvcr  saydc  whyll  he  was  yet 
alyve,  After  thre  dayes  Y  wyll  aryse 
agayne. 

64  Commaunde  thei'fore  that  the  sepul- 
cre be  made  sure  vntyll  the  thyrd  daye ; 
lest  paraventure  his  disciples  come,  and 
stcale  hym  awaye,  and  saye  vnto  the 
people,  He  ys  rysen  from  decth  ;  and 
then  the  laste  erroure  shalbe  worsse 
then  the  first  was. 

65  Pilate  saydc  vnto  them,  Take  watche 
men ;  go,  and  make  ytt  as  sure  as  ye 
can. 

66  They  went,  and  made  the  sepulcre 
sure  with  watche  men,  and  sealed  the 
stone. 


Chap.  XXYIII.  i  The  saboth  daye 
att  even,  which  dauneth  the  morowe 
after  the  saboth,  ]\Iary  ^Magdalene,  and 
the  other  Mary  cam,  to  se  the  sepulcre. 

2  And  bchokle  !  there  was  a  greate 
erth  quake  ;  for  the  angell  of  the  Lorde 
descended  from  heven,  and  cam  and 
rowlled  backe  the  stone  ffrom  the  dorc, 
and  sate  apon  it. 

3  His  countcnaunce  was  lyke  lyght- 
nynge,  and  his  rayment  whyte  as  snowe ; 

4  For  fearc  of  hym  the  kcpers  were 
astuiuiyed,  and  were  as  deed  men. 

5  The  angell  answered  and  sayde  to 
the  wemen,  Feare  ye  not,  I  knowe  wele 
ye  seke  Jesus,  which  was  crucified ; 

6  He  is  not  here,  he  is  rysen,  as  he 
sayde ;  come,  and  se  the  place,  where 
the  Lorde  was  put. 

7  And  goo  quickly,  and  tell  his  dis- 
ciples, that  he  is  rysen  from  deeth. 
And  beholde  !    he  wyll  go  before  you 


160 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Matt. 

learn  ;  dser  ge  liyne  geseo]?.  Nu!  ic  secge 
eow.''' 

8  Da  ferdon  hig  hrpedlice  fram  d?ere 
byrgene,  mid  ege  and  mid  myclum 
gefean,  and  union  and  cyddon  liyt  hys 
leorning- cnihtmn. 

9  And  efne !  da  com  se  Htelend  ongean 
hig,  and  cwse]),  Hale  wese  ge.  Hig 
genealsehton,  and  genamon  liys  fet,  and 
to  him  ge-eadmeddon. 

10  Da  c\v0e]j  se  Hselend  to  heom,  Ne 
ondrsede  ge  eow  ;  faraj),  and  cyda)j 
minum  gebrodriim,  dset  hig  faron  on 
Galileam ;    dser  hig  geseo]?  me. 

11  Da  da  hig  ferdon,  da  com  on  sume 
da  weai'das  on  da  ceastre,  and  cyddon 
dfera  sacerda  ealdrum  ealle  da  ))ing  de 
da^r  gewordene  wseron. 

12  Da  gesamnodon  da  ealdras  hig, 
and  worhton  gemot,  and  seaklon  dam 
Jjegnum  micel  feoh, 

13  And  cwsedon,  Secgea]?,  dset  hys 
leorning-cnihtas  comon  nihtes,  and  for- 
stielon  hyne,  da  we  slepon. 

14  And  gyf  se  dema  dis  ge-acsa)),  Ave 
laeraj)  hyne,  and  gedojj  eow  sorhlease. 

15  Da  onfengon  hig  dfes  feos,  and 
dydon,  eallswa  hig  geleerede  weeron. 
And  dis  word  wses  gewidmsersod  mid 
ludeum,  od  disne  andweardan  daeg.''" 

j6  Dt!  ferdon  da  endlufen  leomiing- 
cnihtas  on  done  munt,  dser  se  Heelend 
heom  dihte. 

1 7  And  hyne  dter  gesawon,  and  hig  to 
him  ge-eadmeddon  ;  witodlice  sume  hig 
tweonedon. 

18  Da  genealeehte  se  Haelend,  and 
sprsec  to  hym  das  jsing,  and  dus  cwoe}^, 
Me  is  geseald  eelc  anweald,  on  heofonan 
and  on  eorjjan. 

19  Fara}i  witodlice  and  Isera]?  ealle 
jjeoda,  and  fulligea]?  hig  on  naman 
Ffeder,  and  Suna,  and  das  Halgan 
Gastes ; 

20  And  IseraJ)  dset  hig  healdon  ealle 
da  J>ing,  de  ic  eow  behead ;  and  ic  beo 
mid  eow  ealle  dagas,  od  worulde  ge- 
endunge.     Amen. 


XXVIIT.  8-20.]    WYCLIFFE,i389. 

Galilee  ;  there  5c  schuleu  se  liim.     Lo  ! 
I  haue  bifore  seid  to  5011. 

8  And  ^larie  ^Mawdcleyn,  and  another 
Marie  wenten  out  soonc  fro  the  biuyel, 
with  dredc  and  greet  ioye,  rennyugc 
for  to  telle  his  disciplis. 

9  And  lo  !  Jhesus  ran  a5ens  liem,  scy- 
inge,  Ileil  -^e.  Forsothe  thei  eamen  to, 
and  heelden  his  feet,  and  worschipiden 
him. 

10  Thanne  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  Nyle 
5c  drede  ;  go  56,  telle  50  to  my  britheren, 
that  thei  go  in  to  Galilee;  there  thei 
schulen  se  me. 

1 1  The  whichc  -wlianne  thei  haddcn 
gon,  loo  !  summe  of  the  keperis  camen 
in  to  the  cytee,  and  tolden  to  the  princes 
of  prestis  alle  thingis  that  wcren  don. 

1 2  And  thei  gedrid  to  gidre  -with  the 
eldere  men,  a  counceil  takun,  5aue  to  the 
ku3-5tis  plenteuous  money, 

13  Seyinge,  Seie  je,  for  his  disciplis 
camen  by  ui5tej  and  ban  stolen  him,  vs 
slepinge. 

14  And  if  this  be  herd  of  the  pre- 
sedent,'*'  we  schulen  conceile  him,  and 
make  50U  sikir. 

15  And  the  money  takun,  thei  dideu, 
as  thei  wereu  tau5t.  And  this  word  is 
pupplissid  at  the  Jewis,  til  in  to  this 
day. 

J  6  Forsothe  enleuene  disciplis  wcnten 
in  to  Galilee,  in  to  an  hil,  where  Jhesus 
hadde  ordeyned  to  hem. 

17  And  thei  seynge  him,  worschip- 
iden  ;  sothli  summe  of  hem  doutiden. 

18  And  Jhesus  comynge  to,  spak  to 
hem,  seyinge,  Al  power  is  3ouun  to  me, 
in  heuene  and  in  erthe. 

1 9  Therfore  50  goynge  teche  allc  folkis, 
cristenynge  hem  in  the  name  of  the 
Fadir,  and  of  the  Sone,  and  of  the 
Hooly  Gost ; 

20  Techinge  hem  for  to  kepe  alle 
thingis,  what  eucre  thingis  I  haue  com- 
aundid  to  50U ;  and  lo  !  I  am  with  50U 
in  alle  dayes,  til  the  endyng  of  the  world. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


IGl 


into  Galilc;  there  ye  shall  so  hym.    Lo  ! 
I  have  tolde  you. 

8  And  they  departed  quickly  from 
the  sopulcre,  with  feare  and  great  joyc, 
and  did  runne  to  bringc  his  disciples 
werdo. 

9  And  as  they  went  to  tell  his  disci- 
ples, beholde  !  Jesus  mett  them,  sayinge, 
God  spede  you.  They  cam,  and  held  hym 
by  the  fete,  and  worshipped  hym. 

10  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  them.  Be 
not  afrayde  ;  go,  and  tell  my  brethren, 
that  they  goo  into  Galile  ;  and  there 
shall  they  se  me. 

1 1  When  they  were  gone,  beholde  ! 
some  of  the  kepers  cam  in  to  the  cite, 
and  shewed  vnto  the  prelattes  all  thinges 
whych  had  hapened. 

12  And  they  gaddered  them  togedder 
with  the  senioures,  and  toke  counsel!, 
and  gave  large  money  vnto  the  souders, 

13  Saynge,  Saj'e,  that  his  disciples 
cam  be  nyght,  and  stoole  hym  awaye, 
whyll  ye  slept. 

14  And  yf  this  come  to  the  rulers 
eares,  we  wyll  pease  him,  and  make  you 
safe. 

15  And  they  toke  the  money,  and  did, 
as  they  were  taught.  And  this  saj-nge 
is  noysed  amonge  the  Jewes,  vnto  this 
daye. 

16  Then  the  xi.  disciples  went  there 
Avaye  into  Galile,  in  to  a  mountayne, 
Avhere  Jesus  had  appoynted  them. 

17  And  when  they  sawe  hym,  they 
worshipped  hym ;  but  some  of  them 
douted. 

18  Jesus  came,  and  spake  vnto  them, 
saynge.  All  i;)owcr  ys  geven  vnto  mc, 
in  hevcn  and  in  erth. 

T  9  Goo  therefore  and  teaehe  all  nacions, 
baptisynge  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  the  Sonne,  and  the  Holy 
Goost ; 

20  Teachinge  them  to  observe  all 
thynges,  whatsoever  I  commaunded  you ; 
and  lo  !  I  am  Avith  you  all  waye,  even 
vutyll  the  ende  off  the  worlde. 


M 


HER  ONGINNEp 

AIWAGGELYO  BMT  GODSPELL 

J)AIRH  ^FTER 

MARKU   ANASTODEIP.         MARCUS  GERECEDNESSE. 


Chap.  I.      i  Anastodeins    aiwaggel- 
yons  iesuis  Christaus,  sunaus  Gu])S. 

2  Swe  gamelijj  "ist  in  Esaiin,  praiifetau, 
Sai !  ik  insandya  aggilu  meinana  faura 
]>us,  saei  gamanwei];  wig  Jjeinaua  faura 

)3US. 

3  Stibna  wopyandins  i'n  auj^idai,  Mau- 
\vei]j  wig  Frauyins,  raihtos  waurkeijj 
staigos  Giijjs  unsaris. 

4  Was  iohannes  daupyands  'in  au|>idai, 
yali  meryands  daupein  idreigos,  du 
aflageinai  frawanrlite. 

5  Yah  usiddyedun  du  imma  all  ludaia- 
land,  yah  lairusaulwraeis  ;  yah  daupidai 
wesun  allai  in  laurdane  awhai  fram 
imma,  andhaitandans  frawaurhtim  sein- 
aim. 

6  Wasul'-I'an  Iohannes  gawasi]3S  tag- 
lam  ulbandaus,  yah  gairda  filleina  bi 
hup  seinana ;  yah  matida  J)i-amsteins, 
yah  milij)  hai{)iwisk, 

7  Yah  merida,  qi};ands,  Qimi]?  swin)?oza 
mis  sa  afai-  mis,  ]?izei  ik  ni  im  Avaii'tjs 
anahneiwands  andbindan  skaudaraip 
skohe  is. 

8  A})}3an  ik  daupya  izwis  in  watin  ;  ij? 
is  daupeijj  izwis  in  Ahmin  Weihamma. 

9  Yah  war|)  in  yainaini  dagam,  qam 
lesus  fram  ISTazaraiJ)  Galeilaias,  yah 
daupijis  was  fram  lohanne  in  laurdane. 

10  Yah  suns  usgaggands  us  J^amma 
watin,  gasawh  usluknandans  himinans, 
yah  Ahman  swe  ahak^  atgaggandan  ana 
iua. 


Chap.  I.     i  Her  ys  godspelles  augyn 
Hselendes  Cristes,  Codes  suna. 

2  Swa  awriten  is  on  dses  witegan  bee 
Isaiam,  Nu !  ic  asende  minne  engel 
beforan  ctinre  ansyne,  se  gogearwaj) 
dinne  weg  beforan  de. 

3  Clypigende  stefen  on  dam  westene, 
Gegearwia])  Drihtnes  weg,  do]?  rihte  his 
sidas. 

4  Iohannes  wpes  on  westene  fulligende, 
and  bodiende  deed-bote  fulwiht,  on  synna 
forgyfenesse. 

5  And  to  him  ferde  eall  ludeisc  rice, 
and  ealle  Hierosolima-ware ;  and  wserou 
fi-am  him  gefullode  on  lordanes  flode, 
hyra  synna  anddetende. 

6  And  Iohannes  wtes  gescryd  mid 
oluendes  heerum,  and  fellen  gyrdel  Avses 
ymbe  his  lendenu ;  and  gserstapan,  and 
wudu  hunig  he  a-t, 

7  And  he  bodode,  and  cw?e)>,  Strengra 
cym])  Eefter  me,  dses  ne  eom  ic  wyrde 
dpet  ic  his  sceona  Jjwanga  bugeude 
uncnytte. 

8  Ic  fulllge  eow  on  wa^tere ;  he  eow 
fulla])  on  Halgum  Caste. 

9  And  on  dam  dagum,  com  se  Hrelend 
fram  Nazareth  Galilee,  and  wa?s  ge- 
fullod  on  lordane  fi-am  lohanne. 

10  And  sona  of  dam  wa^terc,  he  geseah 
opene  heofonas,  and  Haligne  Gast  swa 
culfran  astigende,  and  on  him  wunig- 
ende. 


HERE  BYGTNNETH 

THE    GOSPEL 

OF 

MARK. 


THE    GOSPELL 

OFF 

S.  MARKE. 


Chap.  I.  i  The  bi2:ynnyngc  of  the 
gospel  of  Jhesu  Crist,  the  sone  of  God. 

2  As  it  is  writim  in  Ysaie,  the  pro- 
])hcte,  Lo  !  I  seude  myn  angel  bifore  thi 
lace,  that  schal  make  thi  weye  redy 
bifore  thee. 

3  The  voice  of  oon  cryinge  in  desert, 
Make  56  redy  the  weye  of  the  Lord, 
make  5e  his  patliis  ri5tful. 

4  Jhon  Avas  in  desert  baptisynge,  and 
prechinge  the  baptym  of  peuaunce,  in 
to  remiscioun  of  synnes. 

5  And  alle  men  of  Jerusalem  wenten 
out  to  him,  and  al  the  cuntre  of  Judee  ; 
and  weren  baptisid  of  him  in  the  flood 
of  Jordan,  knowlcchinge  her  synnes. 

6  And  John  was  clothid  with  hecris  of 
camelis,  and  a  girdil  of  skyn  abowte  his 
leendis ;  and  he  ect  locustus,  and  hony 
of  the  Avode, 

7  And  jncchide,  seyingc,  A  strcugcre 
than  I  schal  come  aftir  me,  of  whom  I 
knelingeam  not  worthi  for  to  vndo^  the 
thwong  of  his  sclioon. 

8  I  haue  baptisid  50U  in  water ;  for- 
sotlie  he  shal  baptise  50U  in  the  Holy 
Goost. 

9  And  it  is  don  in  thoo  dayes,  Jhesus 
came  fro  Nazareth  of  Galilee,  and  was 
baptisid  of  Joon  in  Jordan. 

TO  And  anoon  he  styinge  vp  of  the 
water,  say3  heucncs  openyd,  and  the 
Holy  Goost  cummyngc  doun  as  a 
culucre,  and  dwcUynge  in  hym. 


Chap.  I.  i  The  begynnyng  off  the 
gospell  of  Jesu  Christ,  the  sonne  otF 
God. 

2  As  yt  ys  wi-itten  in  the  prophcttes, 
Beliolde  !  I  sende  my  messenger  before 
thy  face,  whych  shall  prepare  thy  waye 
before  the. 

3  The  voyce  of  won  that  cryeth  in  the 
wildernes,  Prcpai'e  ye  the  waye  ofl;'  the 
Lorde,  make  his  pathes  streyght. 

4  Jhon  did  baptise  in  the  wyldcrnes, 
and  preache  the  baptini  of  repentaunce, 
for  the  remission  of  synnes. 

5  And  all  the  londe  off  lewry,  and 
they  of  Jerusalem  went  out  vnto  hym  ; 
and  were  all  baptised  of  hym  in  the 
ryver  Jordan,  knowledgynge  theire 
synnes. 

6  Jhon  was  clothed  with  cammylles 
heer,  and  wyth  a  gerdyll  off  a  bocstes 
skyn  about  hys  loynes ;  and  he  ate 
locustes,  and  wylde  hony, 

7  And  preached,  saynge,  A  stronger 
then  I  commcth  after  me,  whos  shue 
latchett  I  am  not  worthy  to  stoupe 
doune  and  vnlose. 

8  I  have  baptised  you  with  water ; 
but  he  shall  baptise  you  with  the  Holy 
Goost. 

9  And  yt  cam  to  passe  in  those  dayes, 
that  Jesus  cam  from  Nazareth  a  cite 
of  Gallic,  and  was  baptised  of  Jhon  in 
Jordan. 

10  And  iramediatly  he  cam  out  of  the 
water,  and  sawe  the  hevens  open,  and 
the  Holy  Goost  desccndinge  vppon  hym 
lyke  a  dove. 

u  2 


104  GOTHIC,  36o. 

1 1  Yah  stibna  qam  us  himinam,  pu  'is 
sunus  meins  sa  liuba,  iu  J;uzei  Availa 
galeikaida. 

12  Yah  suns  sai  Ahma  "ina  ustauh  'in 
an|nda. 

13  Yah  was  in  |nzai  aul>idai  dage 
fidwor  tiguns,  fraisans  fram  Satanin,  yah 
was  ml))  diuzam,  yah  aggileis  anbahti- 
dedun  imma. 

14  Ij)  afar  ))atei  atgibans  wai')?  Johan- 
nes, qam  lesus  in  Galeilaia,  meiyands 
aiwaggelyon  ))iudangardyos  Guj^s, 

15  Qi})ands,  patei  usfuUnoda  |iata  mel, 
yah  atnewhida  sik  jjiudangardi  GuJjs  ; 
idreigoj),  yah  galaubei])  in  aiwaggelyon. 

16  Yah  wharbonds  faur  marein  Galei- 
laias,  gasawh  Seimonu,  yah  Andraian 
bvo|?ar  is,  ]>\s  Seimonis,  wairpandans 
nati  in  marein  ;  wesun  auk  iiskyans. 

17  Yah  qaj)  im  Icsus,  Hiryats  afar 
mis;  yah  gatauya  igqis  wairj^an  nutans 
manne. 

18  Yah  suns  afletandans  J)0  natyascina, 
laistideduu  afar  imma. 

19  Yah  yaiujjro  inngaggands  framis 
leitihita,  gasawh  lakobu  ]?ana  Zaibai- 
daiaus,  yah  lohanne,  bro))ar  is,  yah  Jjans 
in  skipa  manwyandans  natya. 

20  Yah  suns  haihait  ins  ;  yah  aflet- 
andans attan  seinana,  Zaibaidaiu,  in 
})amma  skipa  mi])  asnyam,  galijjun  afar 
imma. 

21  Yah  gah})un  in  Kafarnaum,  yah 
suns  sabbato  daga  galei[mnds  in  swn- 
agogen,  laisida  ins. 

2  2  Yah  usfihnans  Avaurjjun  ana  jjizai 
laiseinai  is  ;  unte  was  laisyands  ins,  swe 
Avaldufni  habands,  yah  ni  swaswe  Jjai 
bokaryos. 

23  Yah  was  in  |)izai  swnagogen  ize 
manna  in  unhrainyamma  ahmin,  yah 
ufhropida, 

24  Qi))ands,  Fralet,  wha  uns  yah  })us, 
lesu  JSTazorenai  1  qamt  fraqistyan  uns  1 
kann  };uk  whas  pu  is,  sa  weiha  Gu])S. 


25  Yah  andbait  ina  lesus,  qi))ands, 
pahai,  yah  usgagg  ut  us  jjamma^  ahma 
unhrainya. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

1 1  And  da  waes  stefn  of  heofenum 
geworden,  Dii  eart  min  gehifoda  sunu, 
on  de  ic  gehcode. 

12  And  s5na  Gast  hine  on  Avesten 
genydde. 

13  And  he  on  westene  wses  feowertig 
daga  and  feowertig  nihta,  and  he  wses 
fram  Satane  gecostnod,  and  he  mid  wild- 
deorum  wres,  and  him  englas  jjenodon. 

14  Syddan  lohaunes  geseakl  wses,  com 
se  Hselend  on  Galileam,  Godes  rices 
godspell  bodigende, 

15  And  dus  cwedende,  Witodlice  txl  is 
gefylled,  and  heofena  rice  genealsec)) ;  d6\> 
dsed-bote,  and  gelyfa])  dam  godspelle. 

16  And  da  he  ferde  wid  da  Gallleiscan 
See,  he  geseah  Simonem,  and  Andream, 
his  brodor,  hyra  nett  on  da  sse  Icetende  ; 
sojjHce  hi  wseron  fisceras. 

17  And  da  cw£e])  se  Hgelend,  CumaJ) 
fefter  me  ;  and  ic  do  inc  dset  gyt  beo]) 
sawla  onfoude. 

18  And  hi  da  hrsedhce  him  fyligdon, 
and  forleton  heora  nett. 

19  And  danon  hwon  agan,  he  geseah 
lacobum  Zebedei,  and  lohannes  his 
brodor,  and  hi  on  heoi'a  scype  heora 
nett  logodon. 

20  And  he  hi  sona  clypode  ;  and  hi 
heora  freder,  Zebedeo,  on  scipe  forleton 
mid  hyrliugum, 

2 1  And  ferdon  to  Cafarnaura,  and  sona 
reste-dao'um  he  Iserde  hi,  on  gesamnunge 
ingangende. 

2  2  And  hi  wundredon  be  his  lare ; 
s6|)lice  he  wa^s  hi  Isereude,  swa  se  de 
anweald  hsefj),  uses  swa  boceras. 

23  And  on  heora  gesamnunge  wses 
sum  man  on  unclscnum  gaste,  and  he 
hrymde, 

24  And  cwse}),  Eala  Nazarenisca  Heel- 
end,  hwpet  is  us  and  de  1  com  du  us 
to  forspillanne?  ic  wat  du  eart  Godes 
halga. 

25  Da  cidde  se  Hselend  him,  and  cwsej), 
Adumba,  and  ga  of  disum  men. 


1. 1 1-25.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

11  And  a  voys  is  maad  fro  hcueiics, 
Tlioii  art  my  soiic  loueil,  in  tlicc  I  liauc 
plosiil. 

1 2  And  anon  tlie  Si)iiit  puttide  liym 
in  to  desert. 

1 3  And  ho  was  in  desert  fourty  dayes 
and  fourty  ni5tis,  and  was  temptid  of 
Sathanas,  and  was  with  beestis,  and 
angeh's  niynystriden  to  hyni. 

14  Forsotlic  after  that  Joon  Avas  taken, 
Jhesus  came  in  to  Galilee,  prechinge 
the  gospel  of  the  kyngdam  of  God, 

15  And  sciynge.  For  tymc  is  fulfillid, 
and  the  kyngdam  of  God  shal  come 
ni5  ;  forthinke  566,^  and  bileue  jee  to 
the  gosjiel. 

16  And  ho  passynge  bisidis  the  see  of 
Galilee,  say  Symont,  and  Andrew,  his 
brother,  seudynge  nettis  in  to  the  see ; 
sothely  thei  weren  fishers. 

17  And  Jhesus  seide  to  hem.  Come 
5ee  after  me ;  I  shal  make  30U  to  be 
maad  fishei's  of  men. 

18  And  anoon  the  nettis  forsaken,  thei 
sued  en  hym. 

19  And  he  gon  forth  thennes  a  litil, 
say  James  of  Zebede,  and  Joon,  his  bro- 
ther, and  hem  in  the  boot  makynge 
nettis. 

20  And  anoon  he  elepide  hem  ;  and 
Zebede,  her  fadir,  left  in  the  boot  with 
hirid  seruauntis,  thei  sueden  hym. 

21  And  thei  wcnten  forth  in  to  Cafar- 
nauni,  and  anoon  in  the  sabotis  he  gon 
yn  into  the  synagoge,  tau3te  hem. 

22  And  thei  wondreden  on  his  tech- 
ynge  ;  sothely  he  Avas  techynge  hem,  as 
hauynge  power,  and  not  as  scribis. 

23  And  in  the  synagoge  of  hem  was  a 
man  in  an  vnclene  spirit,  and  he  criede, 

24  Seyinge,  What  to  vs  and  to  thee, 
thou  Jliesu  of  Nazareth?  haste  thou 
cuninien  bifore  the  tyine  for  to  dcstroic 
vs  ?  Y  woot  that  thou  art  the  holy  of 
God. 

25  And  Jhesus  thretenyde  to  hym, 
seyinge,  Wexe  dowmb,  and  go  out  of 
the  man. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


165 


IX  And  there  cam  a  voyce  from  hcven, 
Thou  arte  my  derc  sonne,  in  whom  I 
dclite. 

12  And  immediatly  the  Sprcte  drave 
hym  into  a  wilderncs. 

13  And  he  was  there  in  the  wildernes 
xl.  dayes,  and  was  tempted  off"  Satan, 
and  Avas  Avith  Avyldc  beestes,  and  the 
angels  ministred  vnto  hym. 

1 4  After  that  Jhon  Avas  taken,  Jesus 
cam  in  to  Galilc,  preachyngc  the  gospell 
off"  the  kyngdom  of  God, 

15  And  saynge,  The  tymc  ys  ful  come, 
and  the  kyngdom  of  God  is  even  att 
honde ;  repent,  and  belcA^e  the  gospell. 

1 6  As  he  Avalked  by  the  see  of  Galile, 
he  sawe  Simon,  and  Andrewe,  his  bro- 
ther, castinge  nettes  in  to  the  see ;  for 
they  Avere  fysshers. 

17  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  FoloAve. 
me  ;  and  I  Avyll  make  you  to  be  fysshers 
of  men. 

18  And  they  strayght  Avaye  forsoke 
their  nettes,  and  folowed  him. 

19  And  Avhen  he  had  gone  a  lytell 
further  thens,  he  sawe  James  the  sonne 
off  Zebede,  and  Jhon,  his  brother,  ca'cu 
as  they  Avere  in  the  shippe  dressynge 
their  nettes. 

20  And  anon  he  called  them ;  and 
they  leeft  their  father,  Zebede,  in  the 
shij)pe  AA'ith  his  heyred  servauntes,  and 
Avent  their  Avaye  after  hym. 

21  And  they  entred  in  to  Capernaum, 
and  streight  Avaye  on  the  sabot  dayes  he 
entred  in  to  the  sinagogge,  and  taught. 

22  And  they  mervelled  att  hys  learn- 
inge  ;  for  he  taught  them,  as  Avon  Avhych 
had  poAver  Avith  him,  and  not  as  the 
scrybes  did. 

23  And  there  Avas  in  the  sinagogge  a 
man  vexed  Avith  an  vnclene  spirite,  and 
he  crycd, 

24  Sayinge,  Lett  me  a  lone,  Avhat  have 
Ave  to  do  Avith  the,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ? 
arte  thou  come  to  dcstroic  vs?  I  knowc 
Avhat  thou  arte,  thou  arte  that  holy  man 
promyscd  of  God. 

25  And  Jesus  rebuked  him,  saynge, 
FToolde  thy  pace,  and  come  out  of  the 
man. 


IGG 


GOTHIC,  360. 


26  Yali  taliicla  ina  alima  sa  unhrainya, 
yah  lu-opyands  stibnai  mikilai,  uskldya 
lis  i'mma. 

27  Yah  afslau])nocIeckin  allai,  silda- 
leikyandans,  swaei  sokidedun  mi|j  sis 
misso,  qi}nuidans,  Wha  siyai  })ata  1  Avho 
so  laiseino  so  niuyo  1  ei  mi})  waldufnya 
yah  ahmam  |)aim  unhrainyam  anabiud- 
ib,  yah  ufhausyand  imma. 

28  Usiddya  jjan  merijia  is  suns  and 
aUans  bisitands  Galeilaias. 

29  Yah  suus  us  jjizai  swnagogen  us- 
gaggandans  qemun  in  garda  Seimonis 
yah  Andraiins,  mij>  lakobau  yah  lo- 
hannen. 

30  1])  swaihro  Seimonis  lag  in  brinnon  ; 
yah  suns  qe})uu  imma  bi  iya. 

31  Yah  duatgaggands,  urraisida  jjo, 
undgreipands  handu  izos,  yah  aflailot 
])0  so  brinuo  suns,  yah  andbahtida  im. 

32  Andanahtya  l)an  waurfianamma,  Jjan 
gasaggq  sauil,  bcrun  du  imma  allans 
jjans  ubil  habaudans,  yah  unhuljjons 
habandans. 

33  Yah  so  baurgs  alia  garuunana  was 
at  daura. 

34  Yah  gahailida  raanagans  ubil  hab- 
andans missaleikaim  sauhtim,  yah  un- 
hul[)ons  manages  uswarp,  yah  ni  fralailot 
rodyan  J'os  unhuljjons,  unte  kun|)edun 
ina. 

35  Yah  air  uhtwon  usstandands,  usid- 
dya, yah  galaij)  ana  aujjyana  sta]?,  yah 
yainar  ba]?. 

36  Yah  galaistans  waurKin  imma  Sei- 
mon,  yah  })ai  mi])  imma. 

37  Yah  bigitandans  ina,  qejjun  du  im- 
ma, patei  allai  j^uk  sokyand. 

38  Yah  qa|)  du  im,  Gaggam  du  [jaim 
bisunyane  hainiom  yah  baurgim,  ei  yah 
yainar  meryau,  unte  du];e  qam. 

39  Yah  was  meryands  in  swnagogim 
ize,  and  alia  Galeilaian,  yah  unhuljjons 
uswairpands. 

40  Yah  qam  at  imma  )n'utsfill  habands, 
bidyands  ina,  yah  kniwam  kuussyands, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

26  And  se  unclsena  gast  hine  slitende, 
and  mycelre  stefne  clypigende,  him  of 
code. 

27  Da  wundredon  hi  ealle,  swa  dset  hi 
betwux  him  cwsedon,  HAvaet  ys  dis  ? 
hwset  is  deos  niwe  lar  1  dset  he  on 
anwealde  uncleenum  gastum  bebyt,  and. 
hi  hyrsumiajj  him. 

28  And  sona  ferde  his  hlisa  to  Galilea 
rice. 

29  Hrpedlice  of  hyra  gesamnunge  hi 
comon  on  Simonis  and  Andreas  hus, 
mid  lacobe  and  lohanne. 

30  S5]jlice  da  SJet  Simonis  sweger 
hri|;igende  ;  and  hi  him  be  hyre  ssedon. 

31  And  genealsecende,  he  hi  up-ahof, 
hyre  handa  gegripenre,  and  hrajdlice  se 
fefer  hi  forlet,  and  heo  J^enode  him. 

32  Sol^liee  da  hit  wses  sefen  geworden, 
da  sunne  to  setle  code,  hi  brohton  to 
him  ealle  da  unhalan,  and  da  de  w5de 
wseron. 

33  And  call  seo  burh-waru  wses  ge- 
gaderod  to  dsere  duran. 

34  And  he  manega  gehslde  de  mis- 
senlicum  adlum  gedrehte  wserou,  and 
manega  deofol-seoenyssa  he  iit-adnif, 
and  hi  sprecan  ne  let,  fordam  hi  wiston 
dpet  he  Crist  wa^s. 

35  And  swide  ser  arisende,  he  ferde  on 
weste  stowe,  and  hine  dar  gebsed. 

36  And  him  fyligde  Simon,  and  da  de 
mid  him  wserou. 

37  And  da  hi  hine  gemetton,  hi  ssedon 
him,  Eall  dis  folc  de  sec]?. 

38  Da  cw£e))  he.  Fare  we  on  gehende 
tunas  and  ceastra,  da3t  ic  dar  bodige, 
witodlice  to  dam  ic  com. 

39  And  he  wses  bodigende  on  heora 
gesamnungum,  and  ealre  Galilea,  and 
deofol-seocnessa  ut-adrifende.''" 

40  And  to  him  com  sum  hreofla,  hine 
biddende,  and  geblgedum  cneowum^  him 


I.  26-40.]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

26  Ami  the  vnclcne  goost  dcbrckyngc 
hyin,  and  eryiiige  with  gretc  vois,  ■\veiite 
uwey  fro  h}'ni. 

27  Aud  alle  men  wondridon,  so  that 
thei  soi^tcn  togidre  ainongo  hem,  sey- 
inge,  ^Vhat  is  tliis  thinge  .'  what  is  this 
iiewe  techyng  1  for  in  i)owcr  he  com- 
aundith  to  vnclenc  spiritis,  aud  thei 
obeyeu  to  hyin. 

28  And  the  tale^  of  hym  wente  forth 
auoon  in  to  al  the  cuntree  of  Galilee. 

29  And  anoon  thei  goynge  out  of  the 
synagoge  camen  in  to  the  hous  of  Sy- 
niont  and  Andrew,  with  James  and 
Joon. 

30  Sothely  and  the  modir  of  Symontis 
wif  sik  in  foueris  restide  ;'•'  and  anoon 
thei  seien  to  hym  of  hir. 

31  And  he  cinumynge  to,  reride  hir 
vp,  the  liond  of  hir  taken,  and  anoon 
the  feuere  left  hire,  and  she  mynystridc 
to  hem. 

32  Forsothc  the  euenynge  maad, 
whenne  the  sone  wente  doun,  thei 
brou^tcn  to  hym  alle  hauynge  yuel, 
and  hauynge  deuelis. 

33  And  al  the  cite  was  gaderid  at  the 
9ate. 

34  And  he  helide  many  that  Averen 
traueilide  with  dyuers  soris,  and  he 
•castide  out  many  deuelis,  aud  he  suffridc 
hem  nat  for  to  speke,  for  thei  knewen 
hym. 

35  And  in  the  morewynge  ful  erly  he 
rysynge,  gon  out,  Avente  in  to  desert 
place,  and  preiede  there. 

36  And  tSymont  suede  hym,  and  thei 
that  weren  with  hym. 

37  And  whanne  thei  liadden  founden 
hym,  thei  seiden  to  hym,  For  alle  men 
seeken  thee. 

38  And  he  seith  to  hem,  Go  we  in  to 
the  ncxte  townes  and  citees,  that  and 
there  I  prcche,  for  to  this  thing  I 
came. 

39  And  he  was  prcchyngc  in  the  syna- 
gogis  of  licm,  and  in  alle  Galilee,  and 
castyngc  out  fendis. 

40  And  a  leprous  man  cam  to  hym, 
bisecliA-nge  hym,  and,  the  knee  folden, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


107 


26  Aud  the  vnclene  spirite  tai*e  him, 
crycd  out  with  a  lowde  voyee,  and  cam 
out  of  him. 

27  And  they  were  all  aniased,  in  so 
moche  that  they  demauuded  won  off 
another  a  monge  them  selves,  saying, 
AVhat  thinge  ys  thys  1  what  ncwc  doc- 
trine is  thys  1  for  he  conimaundeth  the 
foule  spirites  with  powei',  and  they 
obeyc  him. 

28  Anon  his  name  spreed  abroade 
throughoutc  all  the  region  borderyuge 
on  Galile. 

29  And  immediatly  as  sonne  as  they 
were  come  out  of  the  sinagogge  they 
cntred  in  to  the  housse  of  iSymon  and 
Andrew,  Avith  James  and  J  lion. 

30  Symones  motherelawe  lay  sickc  of 
a  tiver ;  and  annou  they  told  hym  of 
her. 

31  And  he  cam,  and  toke  her  ])y  the 
lionde,  and  lifte  her  vppe,  and  the  fiver 
forsoke  her  by  and  by,  and  she  ministrcd 
vnto  them. 

32  And  at  even,  when  the  sun  was 
doune,  they  brought  vnto  him  all  that 
Avere  diseased,  and  them  that  Avcre  pos- 
sessed Avith  devyls. 

33  And  all  the  cite  gaddred  togcdder 
at  the  dore. 

34  And  he  healed  many  that  Avere 
syckc  of  dyvers  deseascs,  and  he  cast 
out  many  devyls,  and  suflered  not  the 
dcA^yls  to  speaks,  because  they  kncAve 
him. 

35  And  in  the  moorninge  A'cry  erly 
Jesus  arose,  and  Avent  out  in  to  a  solitary 
place,  and  there  prayed. 

36  And  Simon  and  they  that  Avcrc 
Avith  hym  folowed  after  hym. 

37  And  Avhen  they  had  founde  liim, 
they  sayde  vnto  him.  All  men  sekc  for 
the. 

38  And  he  sayd  vnto  them.  Let  vs  go 
in  to  the  next  tonnes,  that  Y  mayc 
preache  there  also,  for  truly  I  cam  out 
for  that  ])urpose. 

39  And  he  preached  in  their  sina- 
gogges,  throughout  all  Gallic,  and  cast 
devyls  out. 

40  And  there  cam  a  leper  to  him,  be- 
scchingc   him,  and  kncled  doune  vnto 


ins 


GOTHIC,  360. 


yah  qifjiinds  du  'irnma  j^atei,  Yabai  wilcis, 
magt  mik  g-ahrainyan. 

41  1\)  iiesus,  iiifeinands,  ufrakyands 
handu  seina,  attaitok  'imnia,  yah  qa]j 
"imma,  AVilyau,  -svairl)  hrains. 

42  Yah  l)i]3e  qa])  ])ata  lesus,  suns  |-ata 
]?i-utsfill  aflaijj  af  imma,  yah  hrains  Avar]). 

43  Yah  gawhotyands  imma,  suns  us- 
sandida  ina, 

44  Yah  qajj  du  imma,  Saiwh,  ei  mann- 
hun  ni  qi))ais  waiht ;  ak  gagg,  jjuk  silban 
ataugyau  gudyin,  yah  atbair  fram  ga- 
hraineinal  );einai  ]iatei  anabau])  Moses, 
du  Aveitwodijjai  im. 

45  Ij)  is,  usgaggands,  dugann  meryan 
fiki,  yah  usqijmn  })ata  waurd,  swaswe  is 
yujjan  ni  mahta  andaugyo  in  baurg 
galeijjan,  ak  uta  ana  aujiyaim  stadim 
■was  ;  yah  iddycduu  du  imma  alla|)ro. 


Chap.  II.  i  Yah  galai})  aftra  in 
Kafarnaum,  afar  daoans.  Yah  gafrehuu, 
I^atei  in  garda  ist, 

2  Yah  suns  gaqemun  managai,  swaswe 
yu}>an  ni  gamostedun,  nih  at  daura. 
Yah  rodida  im  waurd. 


3  Yah  qemun  at  imma  uslij^an  bair- 
andans,  hafanaua  fram  fldworim, 

4  Yah  ni  magandans  newha  qiman 
imma  faura  manageim,  andhulidedun 
hrot,  l^arei  was  lesus ;  yah  usgraband- 
ans,  insaihdedun  J^ata  badi,  yah  fra- 
lailotun,  ana  jjammei  lag  sa  uslijja. 

5  Gasaiwhands  J'an  lesus  galaubeinize, 
qaj)  du  Jjamma  uslijjin,  Barnilo,  aflet- 
anda  )jus  fraAvaurhteis  peinos. 

6  AVesunuh  )'an  sumai  |)ize  bokarye 
yainar  sitandans,  yah  J;agkyandans  sis 
in  hairtam  seinaim, 

7  Wha  sa  swa  rodeij^  naiteinins?  Whas 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

to  cwsejj,  Drihten,  gif  du  Avylt,  du  miht 
geclsensian  me. 

41  S5|5Hce  se  Hselend  him  miltsode, 
and  his  hand  aj^enode,  and  hine  a^t-hrin- 
ende,  and  dus  cw0e}>,  Ic  wylle,  beo  du 
geclaensod. 

42  And  da  he  dus  cwEe|>,  sona  sec 
hreofnes  him  fram  gewut,  and  he  wses 
geclsensod. 

43  And  sona  he  bead  him,     .... 

44  And  cwa?]j,  Warna,  dset  du  hit  nan- 
um  men  ne  secge  ;  ac  ga,  and  eetyw  de 
dara  sacerda  ealdre,  and  bring  for  dinre 
clsensunga  dtet  Moyses  behead,  him  on 
gewitnesse. 

45  And  he,  da  utgangende,  ongan 
bodian,  and  widmsersian  da  sprsece,  swa 
dset  he  ne  mihte  openHce  on  da  ceastre 
gan,  ac  beon  ute  on  westum  stowum ; 
and  hi  eeghwanon  to  him  comon. 


Chap.  II.      i  And  eft  pefter  dagum, 
he  eode  into  Cafarnaum.     And  hit  wses 
gehyred,  dtet  he  wfes  on  huse, 
2  And  manega  togsedere  comon, 

And  he  to 

heom  sprsec. 


3  And  hi  comon  anne  laman  to  him 
berende,  done  feoAver  men  bseron. 

4  And  da  hi  ne  mihton  hine  in-bring- 
an  for  dsere  nijenigeo,  hi  openodou  done 
hr5f,  dar  se  HEelend  AA^ses  ;  and     . 

hi  da  in-asendou 

dtet  bed,  de  se  lama  on-lpeg. 

5  Sojjlice  da  se  Hcelend  geseah  heora 
geleafan,  he  CAVse)?  to  dam  laman,  Sunu, 
de  synt  dine  synna  forgifene. 

6  Dar  AVEeron  sume  of  dam  bocerum 

sittende,  and  on  heora  heortan  })encende, 

7  Havi  spycjj  des  dus  1     He  dysega)? ; 


I.  4I.-II.  7]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

seide,  3if  thou  wolt,  thou  maist  dense 
me. 

41  Forsothe  Jhcsus,  hauynge  mercy 
on  hym,  strci;5t  out  his  lioiul,  anil,  toueh- 
yn!:;c  hyni,  soith  to  hyni,  I  wolc,  be  thou 
maail  olene. 

42  And  whanne  he  haddc  scido,  anoon 
the  leprc  partide  awcy  fro  hyni,  and  he 
is  clensid. 

43  And  he  thrctenyde  to  hym,  and 
anoon  he  putte  hym  out, 

44  And  seith  to  hym,  Se  thou,  seie  to 
no  man  ;  but  go,  shewe  thee  to  the 
pvincis  of  prestis,  and  oftVe  for  thi  clens- 
ynge  tlio  thingis  that  IMoyscs  badde,  in 
to  witnessynge  to  hem. 

45  And  he,  gon  out,  biganne  to  preche, 
and  dift'ame^  the  word,  so  that  nowe  he 
mi5te  nat  opynly  go  in  to  the  citee,  but 
be  with  out  forth  in  deserte  phicis  ;  and 
thei  camen  to  gidre  to  hym  on  alle 
sydis. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


ir,9 


Chap.  II.  1  And  eft  he  entride  in 
to  Capharnaum,  after  ei5te  days.  And 
it  is  herd,  that  he  was  in  an  hous, 

2  And  many  camen  togidre,  so  that 
it  tok  nat,  nether  at  the  jate.  And  he 
spac  to  hem  a  Avord. 


3  And  there  camen  to  hym  men  bryng- 
ynge  a  man  sike  in  palesie,  the  whiche 
was  boiim  of  fonre. 

4  And  whanne  thei  mi3te  nat  offre  hym 
to  hym  fur  the  campanye  of  peplc,  tliei 
maden  the  roof  nakid,  wher  he  was  ; 
and  makynge  opyn,  thei  scnten  doun  the 
bedd,  in  whiche  the  sike  man  in  palasie 

hiV. 

5  Sothely  whanne  Jhcsus  say  tlie  feith 
of  hem,  he  seith  Anito  tlie  sike  man  in 
palasie,  Sone,  thi  synnes  ben  forjoucn 
to  thee. 

6  Forsothe  there  weren  summc  of  the 
sci-ibis  sittynge,  and  thenkynge  in  her 
hertis, 

7  "What  spekith    he   thus?     lie  blas- 


him,  and  saydc  vnto  him,  Yf  thou  wylt, 
thou  arte  able  to  make  me  clene. 

41  Josus  had  comjiassion  on  him,  and 
put  forth  his  hondc,  touched  him,  and 
saydc  vnto  him,  I  will,  be  cicue. 

42  And  as  sone  as  he  had  spoken, 
immediatly  the  leprosy  departed  from 
liim,  and  he  was  clensed. 

43  And  he  charged  hym,  and  sent  him 
awaye  forthwith, 

44  And  sayd  vnto  him,  Se  that  thou 
tell  no  man  ;  but  gctt  the  hence,  and 
shewe  thy  sylfe  to  the  prcste,  and  offer 
for  thy  clensynge  those  thinges  which 
Moses  commaundcd,  for  a  testimonial! 
vnto  them. 

45  But  he,  as  sone  as  he  was  departed, 
began  to  tell  many  thinges,  and  to  pub- 
lyshe  the  dede,  in  so  moche  that  Jesus 
coulde  no  more  openly  entre  in  to  the 
cite,  but  was  out  in  desert  places ;  and 
they  cam  to  him  from  every  quarter. 


CiiAP.  II.  I  After  a  feawe  dayes,  lie 
entred  into  Capernaum  againe.  And  it 
was  noysed,  that  he  was  in  a  housse, 

2  And  anon  many  gaddered  togcdder, 
in  so  moche  that  nowe  there  was  no 
roume  to  receave  them,  no  nott  in  places 
about  the  dore.  And  he  preached  vnto 
them. 

3  And  there  cam  vnto  hym,  that 
brought  wone  sieke  off  the  palsey,  borne 
off  fower  men. 

4  And  be  cause  they  coulde  not  com 
nye  vnto  hym  for  preace,  they  opened 
the  rofe  of  the  housse,  where  he  was ; 
and  when  they  had  broken  yt  open,  they 
lett  doune  the  beed,  where  in  the  sicke 
of  the  palsey  ley. 

5  When  Jesus  sawe  their  fayth,  lie 
sayde  to  the  sicke  of  the  palsey,  Sonne, 
thy  synnes  are  forgeven  the. 

6  There  were  certeyne  of  the  scrybes 
sittinge,  and  reasoninge  in  their  hertes, 

7  Howe  doeth  thys  felowe  blaspheme  ? 


170  GOTHIC,  36o. 

nia'4-    aflotan     frawaurlitins,    niba    ains 
Guf  I 

S  Yah  suns  ufkunnands  lesus  ahmin 
seinamma,  jnitei  swa  ])ai  mitodeduu  sis, 
qaJ5  du  im,  Duwhe  mitoj)  Jjata  iu  hairt- 
aai  izwaraim  1 

9  Whajjar  'ist  azetizo  du  ql})an  j^iamma 
usli[)in,  Afletanda  |)us  fvawaurhteis  ))einos, 
j)au  qi|)an,  Urreis,  yah  nim  J»ata  badi 
jjeiiiata,  yah  gagg  1 

10  A])})au  ei  witeijj  jjatei  waldufui 
habai})  sunus  maus  ana  airj^ai  afletan 
irawaurhtius,  qajj  du  ])amma  uslij)in, 

1 1  pus  qi|'a,  urreis,  uimuh  })ata  badi 
J)ein,  yah  gagg  du  garda  ))einamma. 

12  Yah  urrais  suns,  yah,  ushafyands 
badi,  us'iddya  faura  andwairj^ya  allaize, 
swaswe  usgeisnodedun  allai  yah  liauh- 
idedun,  niikilyandans  Gu)',  qi|)andans, 
patei  aiw  swa  ni  gascwhun. 

13  Yah  galai)>  aftva  faur  marein,  yah. 
■all  manageius  iddyedun  du  imma;  yah 
laisida  i'ns. 

14  Yah  whai'bonds,  gasawh  Laiwwi 
jjana  Alfaiaus  sitandan  at  raotai,  yah 
qa)>  du  imma,  Gagg  afar  mis.  Yah 
usstandauds  iddya  afar  "imma. 

15  Yah  war)),  bij)e  is  anakumbida  in 
garda  is,  j-ah  managai  motaryos  yah 
frawaurhtai  mijjanakumbidedun  lesua 
jah  si]:)onyam  is ;  wesuu  auk  managai 
jah  iddyedun  afar  imma. 

16  Yah  t^^ai  bokaryos  yah  Fareisaieis 
gasaiwhandans  ina  matyandan  mi}>  );aim 
motaryam  yah  frawaurhtaim,  qe|)un  du 
jjaim  siponyam  is,  Wha  ist  J^atei  mi[j 
motaryam  yah  frawaurhtaim  matyijj  yah 
driggki|)  ? 

T  7  Yah  gahausyands  lesus,  qa]j  du  im, 
Ni  ]?aurbuu  swinj^ai  lekeis,  ak  }5ai  ub- 
ilaba  habandans ;  ni  qam  lajjou  us- 
waurhtans,  ak  frawaurhtans. 

18  Yah  wcsun  siponyos  lohannis  ^-ah 
Fareisaieis  fastaudans  ;  yah  atiddyedun, 
jah  qejjun  du  imma,  Duwlie  siponyos 
lohannes  yali  Fareisaieis  fastand,  i{?  ])ai 
])einai  siponyos  ni  fastand  1 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

hwa   mseg   synna  forgyfan,  buton   God 
ana  1 

8  Da  se  Hselend  ctset  on  his  gaste 
oncneoAV,  dset  hi  swa  betwux  him  })oht- 
on,  he  cwse])  to  him,  Hwi  Jjence  ge  das 
jjing  on  eowrum  heortum  1 

9  Hwfeder  is  edre  to  secgenne  to  dam 
laman,  De  synd  dine  synna  forgifene, 
hwseder  de  ewedan,  A'ris,  nim  din  bed, 
and  ga  1 

10  Dfet  ge  soj)lice  witon  daet  mannes 
sunu  hsefj)  anweald  on  eorjian  synna  toi 
forgyfanne,  he  cwas})  to  dam  laman, 

1 1  De  ic  secge,  aris,  nim  din  bed,  and 
ga  to  diuum  huse. 

12  And  he  s5na  aras,  and,  [underleat 
bere,]  beforan  him  eallum  eode,  swa 
dajt  ealle  wundredon. 

.     .     and  dus  cwsedon,  Najfre  we  ser 
dyllic  ne  gesawon. 

13  Eft  he  ut-eode  to  dsere  siv,  and  eall 
sec  msenigeo  him  to  com  ;  and  he  hi 
laerde. 

14  And  da  he  for])-eode,  he  geseah 
Lenin  Alphei  sittende  set  hys  cep-setle, 
and  he  cwcejj  to  him,  Folga  me.  Da 
tiras  he  and  folgode  him. 

15  And  hit  gcwearj),  da  he  sret  on  his 
huse,  divt  manega  miinfulle  .  .  .  sseton 
mid  dam  Hselende  and  his  leorning- 
cnihtum  ;  s5];lice  manega,  da  de  him 
fyligdon,  wseron 

16  Boceras  and  Fai-isei,  and  cwsedon, 
Witodlice  he  ytt  mid  munfullum  and 
synfullum,  and  hi  cwpedon  to  liis  leorn- 
ing-cnihtum,  Hwi  ytt  eower  lareow  and 
drinc))  mid  manfullum  and  synfullum  ? 

17  Da  se  Hgelend  dis  gehyrde,  he  saede 
him,  Ne  bejiurfon  na  da  halan  leeces,  ac 
da  de  untrume  synt ;  ne  com  ic  na  daat 
ic  clypode  rihtwise,  ac  synfulle. 

18  And  da  Wceron  lohannes  leorning- 
cnihtas  and  Pharisei  fsestende  ;  and  da 
comon  hi,  and  ssedon  him,  Hwi  ftestajj 
lohannes  leorning-cnihtas  and  Pharis- 
eorum,  and  dine  ne  fiesta])  ? 


II.  8-1 8.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

fcmetb  ;   ■who  may  foi^cue  syuucs,  no 
■but  God  alone? 

8  The  whiche  thing  anoon  knowon  by 
the  Holy  Goost,  for  thei  thoii5ten  so 
with  inne  hem  self,  Jhesus  seith  to  hem, 
What  thenkcn  jee  these  thingis  in  50ure 
liertis  ? 

9  What  is  li^tere  for  to  seic  to  the  sike 
man  in  palasie,  Synnes  ben  for5oucn  to 
thee,  or  for  to  seie,  Kyse,  take  thi  bed, 
and  walke  1 

10  Sothely  that  566  wite  that  manncs 
sone  hath  powere  in  erthe  to  for5eue 
s}Tines,  he  seith  to  the  sike  man  in 
palasie, 

11  I  seie  to  thee,  ryse  vp,  take  thi 
bed,  and  go  in  to  thin  hous. 

12  And  auoon  he  rocs  \-p,  and,  the 
bed  taken  vp,  he  wentc  bifore  alle  men, 
so  that  alle  men  ■wondrideu,  and  houour- 
iden  God,  seyinge,  For  we  sayen  neuer 
so. 

13  And  he  -wente  out  eftsone  to  the 
see,  and  al  the  cumpauye  oi  peple  cam 
to  hym  ;  and  he  tau5te  hem. 

14  And  whenue  he  passide,  he  say 
Leui  Alfey  sittynge  at  the  tolbothe,  and 
be  seith  to  hym,  Sue  thou  me.  And  he 
rysynge  suede  hym. 

15  And  it  is  don,  whenne  he  sat  at 
the  mete  in  his  hous,  many  puplicanys 
and  synful  men  saten  togidre  at  the 
mete  with  Jhesu  and  his  disciplis  ; 
sothely  there  wereu  manye  that  folew- 
eden  hym. 

16  And  .scribis  and  Pharisees  seeyinge, 
for  he  eet  Avith  puplicanys  and  synful 
men,  seiden  to  his  disciplis,  Whi  5oure 
maister  etith  and  driukith  with  pupli- 
canys and  synners  1 

17  This  thing  herd,  Jhesus  3eith  to 
hem,  Hoole  men  ban  no  nede  to  a  leche, 
but  thei  that  ban  yuele  ;  forsotbe  I  cam 
not  for  to  clepe  iuste  men,  but  synners. 

18  And  disciplis  of  Joon  and  the  Pha- 
risees wercn  fastynge ;  and  thei  cameu, 
■and  seien  to  hym,  Whi  disciplis  of  Joon 
and  of  Pharisees  fasten,  but  thi  disciplis 
fasten  nat  ? 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


171 


Who    can    forgeve    synnes,    bat    God 
only  ? 

8  And  imraediatly  when  Jesus  per- 
ceaved  in  his  sprete,  that  they  so  rea- 
soned in  them  selves,  he  eayde  vnto 
them.  Why  thynke  ye  sochc  thinges  in 
youre  hcrtes  1 

9  AVhethcr  ys  it  casycr  to  sayc  to  the 
sicke  of  the  palsey,  Thy  synnes  ar  for- 
geven  the,  or  to  saye,  Aryse,  take  vppe 
thy  beed,  and  walke  1 

10  That  ye  maye  knowe  that  the  sonne 
of  man  hath  power  in  crth  to  forgeve 
sinues,  he  spake  vnto  the  sicke  of  the 
palsey, 

III  sayc  vnto  the,  aryse,  and  take  vp 
thy  beed,  and  get  the  hens  in  to  thyne 
awne  housse. 

12  And  by  and  by  he  arose,  toke  vji 
hys  beed,  and  went  forth  befoi-e  them 
all,  in  so  moche  that  they  were  all 
amased,  and  glorified  God,  sayinge.  We 
never  sawe  it  on  thys  fassion. 

13  And  be  went  out  agayne  vnto  the 
see,  and  all  the  people  resorted  vnto 
hym  ;  and  be  taught  tliem. 

14  And  as  Jesus  passed  by,  he  sawe 
Levy  the  sonne  of  Alphey  sytt  att  the  re- 
ceyte  of  custome,  and  sayde  vnto  him,Fol- 
owe  me.    And  be  arose  and  folowed  hym. 

15  And  3't  cam  to  passe,  as  Jesus  sate 
att  meate  in  his  housse,  many  pubpli- 
cans  and  synners  sate  att  meate  also 
with  Jesus  and  his  disciples  ;  for  there 
were  many  that  folowed  him. 

16  And  when  the  scribs  and  Pharises 
sawe  him  eate  with  publicans  and  syn- 
ners, they  sayde  vnto  his  disciples,  Howe 
is  it  that  he  eateth  and  drynketb  with 
publicans  and  synners  ? 

17  When  Jesus  had  herde  that,  be 
sayd  vnto  them,  The  whole  have  no  node 
of  the  visicion,  but  the  sicke  ;  I  cam  to 
cal  the  sinners  to  repentauuce,  and  not 
the  iuste. 

18  And  the  disciples  of  Jhon  and  of 
the  Pharises  did  faste  ;  and  they  cam, 
and  sayde  vnto  him,  Why  do  the  dis- 
ciples of  Jhon  and  oft"  the  Pharises  faste, 
and  thy  disciples  fast  nott  1 


172 


GOTHIC,  360. 


19  Yah  qa|)  im  lesus,  Ibai  magun 
sunyns  bru|)faclis,  unci  jjatei  mi[j  'im  ist 
brulifajjs,  fastan  1  Swa  lagga  wlieila  swe 
mij)  sis  habaucl  bruj^fad,  iii  magun 
fastan. 

20  A}5))an  atgaggancl  dagos,  Jjan  af- 
nimada  af  im  sa  bru)jfa])S,  yah  J^an  fast- 
and  in  yainamma  daga. 

2 1  Ni  manna  plat  fanins  niuyis  siuyi}) 
ana  snagan  fairnyana,  ibai  afnimai  fullon 
af  jiamma  sa  niuya  jjamma  fairnyin,  yah 
wairsiza  gataura  wair))i]?. 

22  Ni  manna  giuti))  wein  yuggata  in 
balgins  fairnyans,  ibai  aufto  distairai 
wein  ]?ata  niuyo  Jjans  balgins.  yah  wein 
usgutni]?,  yah  j^ai  balgeis  fraqistnand. 
Ak  Avein  yuggata  in  balgins  niuyans 
giutand. 

23  Yah  Avarjj,  ]?airhgaggan  imma  sab- 
bato  daga  jiairh  atisk,  yah  dugunnun 
siponyos  is  skewyandans,  raupyan  ahsa. 


24  Yah  Fai^eisaieis  qe|)un  du  imma, 
Sai  I  wha  tauyand  siponyos  J)einai  sab- 
batim,  jjatei  ni  skuld  ist. 

25  Yah  is  qa]?  du  im,  Niu  ussuggwujj 
aiw  wha  gatawida  Daweid,  J)an  ]>aurfta, 
yah  gredags  was  is,  yah  ]jai  mi]?  imma  1 


26  Whaiwa  galai)j  in  gard  Gujjs,  uf 
Abiajjara,  gudyin,  yah  hlaibans  faur- 
lageinais  matida,  |;anzei  ni  skuld  ist 
matyan,  niba  ainaim  gudyam,  yah  gaf 
yah  |)aim  mi])  sis  wisandam. 

27  Yah  qajj  im,  Sabbato  in  mans  war]? 
gaskapans,  ni  manna  in  sabbato  dagis  ; 

28  Swaei  frauya  ist  sa  sunus  mans  yah 
Jjamma  sabbato. 


Chap.  Ill,  i  Yah  galai})  aftra  in 
swnagogen,  yah  was  yainar  manna  ga- 
])aursana  habands  handu. 

2  Yah  witaidedun  imma,  hailidediu  sab- 
bato daga,  ei  wrohidedeina  ina. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

19  Da  cwsey  se  Hselend,  CAvede  ge 
sccolon  dses  brydguman  cnihtas  ftiestan, 
swa  lange  swa  se  brydguma  mid  him  is  1 
Ne  magon  hi  fsestan,  swa  lange  tide  swa 
hi  done  brydguman  mid  him  habba)). 

20  S5]jlice  da  dagas  cuma}),  donne  se 
brydguma  him  bij)  fram  acyrred,  and 
donne  hi  faestaj>  on  dam  dagum. 

21  Nan  man  ne  siwaj)  niwne  scyp  to 
ealdum  reafe,  elles  he  afyr])  done  niwan 
scyp  of  dam  ealdan  reafe,  and  bij^  mare 
slite. 

22  And  nan  man  ne  dejj  niwe  win  on 
ealde  bytta,  elles  dajt  win  tobryc])  da 
bytta,  and  daet  win  h\\>  ligoten,  and  da 
bytta  forwurda);.  Ac  niwe  win  sceal  beon 
gedon  on  niwe  bytta,  donne  beo])  butu 
gehealden. 

23  Eft  woes  geworden,  da  he  reste- 
dagum  |)urh  seceras  eode,  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  ongunnon  da  ear  pluccigean. 


24  Da  cwsedon  Pharisei  to  him,  Loca 
nu  !  hwset  dine  leorning-cnlhtas  doj), 
da^t  him  alyfed  uses  on  reste-dagum. 

35   Da   ssede  he  hym,   Ne  reedde  ge 

nfefre  hwast  dyde  Dauid, 

.  da  hine  hingrode,  and  da  de 
mid  him  WEeron  1 

26  Hu  he  in  Godes  huse  eode,  under 
Abiathar,  dara  sacerda  ealdre,  and  he  set 
da  offrung-hlafas,  de  him  ne  alyfed'e 
nseron  to  etanne,  biiton  sacerdum  anum, 
and  he  sealde  dam  de  mid  him  wseron. 


27  And  he  ssede  him,  Eeste-dseg  wses 
geworht  for  dam  men,  ntes  se  man  for 
dam  reste-dfege  ; 

28  Witodlice  drihten  is  mannes  sunu 
eac  swylce  reste-cheges. 


Chap.  III.  i  And  eft  he  eode  on 
gesomnunge,  and  dar  waes  an  man  for- 
scruncene  hand  hsebbende. 

2  And  hi  gymdon,  hwfeder  he  on  reste 
dagum  gehselde,  dset  hi  hine  gewregdon. 


IT.  ip.-III.  2.]  ^VYCLIFFE,I389. 

19  Aiul  Jliosus  Rcith  to  hem,  Wlietlier 
the  soniiys  of  wocUlynrris  mown  fastc,  as 
long  as  the  spouse  is  with  horn  I  llou 
longe  tymc  thci  han  the  spouse  Avith 
hem,  thoi  mowe  nat  taste. 

20  Forsothe  daycs  shulen  come,  whenne 
the  spouse  shal  be  taken  awcy  from 
hem,  and  thaune  thei  shulen  faste  in 
thoo  days. 

21  No  man  seweth  a  pacche  of  rude^ 
clothe  to  an  old  clothe,  cllis  he  takith 
awey  the  newe  supplement,^  and  a  more 
brekynge  is  maad. 

22  xViul  no  man  sendith  newe  wyn  in 
to  oold  botelis,^  ellis  the  wyn  shal  bcrste 
the  wyn  vesselis,  and  the  wyn  shal  be 
held  out,  and  the  wyne  vesselis  shulen 
perishe.  But  newe  wyn  shal  be  scut  in 
to  newe  Avj-n  vesselis. 

23  And  it  is  don  eftsoonc,  whanne  the 
Lord  walkide  in  the  sabothis  by  the 
cornes,  and  bis  disciplis  bigunnyn  to 
passe  forth,  and  plucke  ei-is. 

24  Sothly  the  Pharysees  seiden,  Loo! 
what  don  tlii  disciplis  in  sabotis,  that  is 
nat  leeucful. 

25  And  he  seith  to  hem,  Radde  500 
neuere  what  Dauyth  dide,  whanne  he 
badde  neede,  and  he  hungride,  and  thei 
that  wcren  with  hym  1 

26  Hon  he  wcnte  in  into  the  hous  of 
God,  vndir  Abiathar,  prince  of  prestis, 
and  eete  loouys  of  ])roposicioun,  the 
whiche  it  was  nat  leeful  to  ete,  no  but 
to  prestis  alone,  and  he  5aue  to  hem 
that  weren  with  hym. 

27  And  he  seidc  to  hem,  The  sabote  is 
maad  for  man,  and  nat  a  man  for  the 
sabote ; 

28  And  so  mannys  sone  is  loi'd  also 
of  the  saboth. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


173 


Cn.\p.  III.  I  And  he  entride  eft- 
soone  in  to  the  synagoge,  and  ther  was 
a  man  hauynge  a  dryc  bond. 

2  And  thei  aspiedcn  hym,  5if  lie  helide 
in  sabothis,  for  to  accuse  hym. 


19  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Can 
the  chyldren  of  a  weddingc  faste,  wliils 
the  brydgrome  is  with  them  1  As  longe 
as  they  have  the  bi-ydgrome  with  them, 
they  cannot  faste. 

20  Butt  the  dayes  wyll  come,  when  the 
bryde  grorae  shalbe  taken  from  them, 
and  then  shall  they  faste  in  thoose 
dayes. 

2 1  Also  no  man  soweth  a  pece  of  newe 
cloth  vnto  an  olde  garment,  for  then 
taketh  he  awaye  the  newe  j)ece  from  the 
olde,  and  so  is  the  rent  worsse. 

22  In  lyke  wyse  no  man  jioureth  newe 
wyne  in  to  olde  vesscUes,  for  yf  he  do 
the  newe  wyne  breakcth  the  vesselles, 
and  the  wyne  runneth  out,  and  the 
vessels  are  marde.  Butt  newe  wyne 
must  be  poured  in  to  newe  vesselles. 

23  And  it  chaunsed,  that  he  went 
thorowe  the  corne  feldes  on  the  sabboth 
daye,  and  his  disciples  as  they  went  on 
their  waye,  began  to  plucke  the  eares 
of  corne. 

24  And  the  Pharises  sayde  vnto  him, 
Take  hede  !  why  do  they  on  the  sabboth 
daye,  that  which  is  vnlaufuU. 

25  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Have  ye 
never  redde  what  David  did,  when  he 
had  nede,  and  was  anhongred,  bothe  he 
and  they  that  were  with  him  1 

26  Howe  they  went  into  the  housse  of 
God,  in  the  dayes  of  Abiathar,  the  hye 
preste,  and  ate  the  halowed  loves,  which 
is  not  laufuU,  but  for  the  prestcs  only, 
to  eate,  and  gave  also  to  them  Avhich 
were  with  him. 

27  And  he  sayde  to  them,  The  saboth 
daye  was  made  for  man,  and  nott  man 
for  the  saboth  daye  ; 

28  Wherfore  is  the  sonne  of  man  lorde 
even  of  the  saboth  daye. 


Chap.  III.  i  And  he  entred  agaync 
into  the  synagog,  and  there  was  a  man 
which  had  a  widdred  honde. 

2  And  they  watched  him,  to  so  yf  he 
wolde  hcale  him  on  the  saboth  daye, 
that  they  myght  accuse  byni. 


174 


GOTHIC,  360. 


3  Yali  qa)j  tlu  }>amma  maun  ]jamma 
ga|-aur.sana  habandin  lianclu,  Urrels  in 
micliimai. 

4  Yali  qa|>  du  'im,  Skuldu  ist  in  sab- 
batini  jnu}?  tauyan,  aijj])au  un})iu{)  tauyanl 
saiwala  nasyan,  aiJ))Jau  usqistyan  ?  I]j 
eis  )  aliuidedun. 

5  Yah  ussaiwhands"  ins  mi]j  moda, 
^aurs  iu  daubijjos  hairtins  I'ze,  qa|j  du 
}>annna  mann,  Ufrakei  ])0  bandn  )?eina. 
Yah  ufrakida,  yah  gasto]>  aftra  so 
handus  is. 

6  Yah  gaggandans  })an  Farelsaieis  suns- 
aiw,  m\\>  )aim  Herodianum,  garuni  ga- 
tawidedun  bi  ina,  ei  imma  usqemeina. 

7  Yah  lesus  aflaij)  mi|>  siponyam  sein- 
aini  du  marein  ;  yah  fihi  manageins  us 
Galeilaia  laistidedun  afar  amnia  yah  us 
ludaia, 

8  Yah  us  lairusaulwmim,  yah  us  I- 
dumaia,  yah  hindana  laui'danau?,  j'ah 
)  ai  1)1  Twra  yah  Seidona,  manageins  fihi, 
galiausyandans  whan  filu  is  tawida, 
qemuu  at  annua. 

9  Yah  qa];  ]jaim  siponyam  seinaim,  ei 
skip  habaij?  wesi  at  imma,  in  ))izos 
manageins,  ei  ni  Jjraiheina  ina  ; 

10  Managans  auk  gahailida,  swaswe 
drusun  ana  ina,  ei  imma  attaitokeina. 
Yah  swa  managai  swe  habaidedun  -v^oind- 
ufnyos, 

1 1  Yah  ahmans  unhrainyans,  |iaih  ])an 
ina  gascwhun,  drusun  du  imma,  yah 
hropidedun,  qij>andans,  patei  ])U  is  sun- 
us  Gu|)S. 

1 2  Yah  fiki  andbait  ins,  ei  ina  ni  ga- 
s\vikun])idedeina. 

13  Yah  ustalg  in  fairguni,  yah  athai- 
bait  })anzei  wilda  is ;  yah  gali])un  du 
imma. 

14  Yah  gawaurlita,  t\yalif  du  wisan  mi|> 
sis,  yah  ei  insandidedi  ins  meryan. 

15  Yah  liaban  -wakkifni  du  hailyan 
sauhtlns,  yah  uswairpan  unhuljjons. 

iC)  Yali  gasatida  Seimona  namo  Pai- 
trus, 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

3  Da  cwse)j  he  to  dam  men  de  for- 
scruncene  hand  hsefde,  A'ris  gemang 
him. 

4  Da  cwsejj  he,  A'lyfj?  reste-dagum  wel 
to  ddnne,  hwseder  de  yfele  ?  sawla  ge- 
hcelan,  hwseder  de  forspillan  1  And  hi 
suwodon. 

5  And  hi  besceawigende  mid  yrre,  ofer 
bjTa  heortan  bHndnesse  ge-unret,  c\vDeJ> 
to  dam  men,  A\>ene  dine  hand.  And 
he  a|ienede  hi,  da  wear]?  his  hand  ge- 
hseled  sona. 

6  Da  Pharisei  mid  Herodianiscum  ut- 
gangende,  })eahtedon  ongen  bine,  hii  hi 
hine  fordon  mihton. 

7  And  da  ferde  se  Hselend  to  da?re  sse 
mid  his  leorning-cnihtum ;  and  mycel 
menigeo  him  fyligde  fi*am  GaUlea  and 
ludea, 

8  And  Hierusalem,  and  fram  Idumea,"'' 
and  begeondan  lordane,  and  to  him  com 
mycel  menegeo  ymbe  Tirum  and  Sidone^ 
gehyreude  da  j)ing  de  he  worhte. 


9  And  be  cwsejj  to  his  cnihtum,  dset  hi 
him  on  scipe  jjenodon,  for  da^i'C  men- 
igum,  dset  hi  hine  ne  ofjjrungon  ; 

10  S6|)lice  manega  he  gehselde,  .     .     . 

swa  daet 

hi  jet-hrinon  his.     And  swa  fela  swa  un- 
trumnessa, 

1 1  And  unclsene  gastas  hsefdon,  da  hi 
hine  gesawon,  hi  totoran  him  astrehton,. 
and  dus  cwedende,  clypedon,  Du  eart 
Godes  sunu. 

1 2  And  he  him  s-\vyde  forbead,  dset  hi 
hine  ne  geswutelodon. 

13  And  on  unne  munt  he  ferde,  and  to 
him  geclypode  da  de  he  wolde ;  and  lu 
to  him  comon. 

14  And  be  dyde,  dset  hi  twelfe  mid 
him  WEeron,  and  he  hi  asende  godspell 
to  bodigenne. 

15  And  he  him  an  weald  sealde  un- 
trumnessa  to  hselanne,  and  deofol-seoc- 
nessa  ut  to  ridrifanne. 

1 6  And  he  nemde  Simon  Petrum, 


III.  3-16.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

3  Ami  lie  seith  to  the  man  liauynge  a 
drye  hoiul,  Eyse  in  to  the  inydil. 

4  And  he  scith  to  hem,  Is  it  Iceueful 
to  do  wel  in  the  sabothis,  oi'  yuelc  1  for 
to  make  a  soule  saaf,  whethei*  to  lose  ? 
And  thci  weren  stille. 

5  And  he  biholdynge  hem  aboute  with 
wrathe,  hauynge  sorwe  vpon  the  blynd- 
nesse  of  lier  herte,  scith  to  the  man, 
Hoklc  fortli  thin  honde.  And  he  helde 
forth,  and  the  honde  is  rcstorid  to  hym. 

6  Sothcly  Pharisees  goynge  out  anoon, 
maden  a  counseil  with  Herodyans  a^eins 
hym,  hou  thei  shuklen  Icse  hym. 

7  Forsotlie  Jhesus  with  his  disciplis 
wente  to  the  see  ;  and  myche  cumpanye 
^om  Galilee  and  Judee  suede  hym, 

8  And  fro  Jerusalem,  and  fro  Ydume, 
and  bi5endis  Jordan,  and  thei  that  aboute 
Tyre  and  Sydon,  a  grete  multitude,  heer- 
ynge  the  thingis  that  he  dide,  camen  to 
hym. 

9  And  Jhesus  seith  to  his  disciplis, 
that  the  litil  boot  shulde  serue  hym,  for 
the  cumpanye  of  peple,  lest  thei  oppres- 
siden  hym  ; 

10  Sothely  he  helide  many,  so  that 
thei  felden  fast  to  hym,  that  thei  shulden 
touche  hym.  Foi'sothe  hou  many  euere 
haddcn  soris,^ 

1 1  And  vnclene  spiritis,  whenne  thei 
seieu  hym,  felden  down  to  hym,  and 
crieden,  seyinge,  Thou  art  the  sone  of 
God. 

12  And  gretely  he  manasside  hem,  that 
thei  shulden  nat  make  hym  opyn.''' 

13  And  he  styinge  in  to  an  liil,  clepide 
to  hpii  whom  he  wolde  ;  and  thci  camen 
to  hym. 

14  And  he  made,  that  there  weren 
twelue  with  hjTii,  and  that  he  shulde 
sende  hem  for  to  pi'eche. 

15  And  he  5aue  to  hem  power  of  heel- 
ynge  sikuessi.s,  and  of  castynge  out 
fendis. 

16  And  to  Symount  he  putte  name 
Petre, 


TYNDALE,  1^26. 


i7r> 


3  And  he  saide  vnto  the  man  Mhyih 
had  the  widdred  honde,  Aryse  and 
stondc  in  the  middes. 

4  And  he  sayd  to  them.  Whether  ys  it 
lauiull  to  do  a  good  dcde  on  the  saboth 
daye,  or  an  evyll  ]  to  save  a  manncs  life, 
or  to  kyll  1  Butt  they  helde  their  peace. 

5  And  he  loked  i-ounde  aboute  on  them 
angrely,  mornynge  on  the  blindnes  of 
their  herttes,  and  sayd  to  the  man, 
Stretch  forth  thyne  honde.  And  he 
stretched  it  forth,  and  the  honde  was 
restored  even  as  whole  as  the  other. 

6  The  Pharises  departed,  and  streyght 
waye  gaddred  a  counseil  with  thein  that 
belonged  to  Herode  agaynst  hyni,  that 
they  myglit  destroye  him. 

7  And  Jesus  avoyded  with  his  disciples 
to  the  see ;  and  a  greate  multitude 
folowed  him  from  Galile  and  from 
Jewr3% 

8  And  from  Hierusalem,  and  from 
Idumea,  and  from  beonde  Jordane,  and 
they  that  dwelled  about  Tyre  and  Sidon, 
a  greate  multitude,  which  when  they 
hade  herde  Avhat  thynges  he  did,  cam 
vnto  him. 

9  And  he  comaunded  his  disciples, 
that  a  shippe  slmlde  waytc  on  him,  be- 
cause off"  the  people,  leste  they  shulde 
throunge  hym  ; 

10  For  he  had  healed  many,  in  so 
moche  that  they  preased  apon  him,  for 
to  touche  him.     As  many  as  had  plages, 

1 1  And  when  the  vnclene  sprites  sawe 
him,  they  fell  doune  before  him,  and 
cryed,  sayinge,  Thou  arte  the  sonne  of 
God. 

12  And  he  sti'eyghtly  charged  them, 
that  they  shulde  not  vtter  him. 

13  And  he  went  vppe  into  a  moun- 
tayne,  and  called  vnto  him  whom  he 
wolde  ;  and  they  cam  vnto  him. 

14  And  he  ordeined  the  twelve,  that 
they  shulde  be  Avith  him,  and  that  he 
myght  sende  them  to  preache. 

15  And  that  they  might  liave  power 
to  heale  .syknesses,  and  to  cast  out 
devylles. 

16  And  he  gave  vnto  Simon  to  name 
Peter, 


176 


GOTHIC,  360. 


17  Yah  lakobau  ))amma  Zaibaidaiaus 
yah  lohanne,  brol>r  lakobaus,  yah  gasat- 
ida  im  namna  Bauanairgais,  jjatei  ist, 
suuyus  Jjeiwhons ; 

18  Yah  Andraian  yah  Filippu,  yah 
Barjiaulaumaiu  yah  MatJ^aiu,  yah  poman 
yah  lakobu  ]?ana  Alfaiaus,  yah  paddaiu 
yah  Seimona  J^aua  Kananeiten, 

19  Yah  ludan  Iskarioten,  saei  yah 
galewida  ina.    Yah  at'iddyedun  iu  gard, 

20  Yah  ga'iddya  sik  manage!,  swaswe 
ni  mahtedun  nih  hlaif  matyan, 

21  Yah  hausyandans  fram  i'mma  bok- 
aryos  yah  an))arai,  iisiddyeduii  gahaban 
ina  ;  qejiun  auk,  patei  usgaisijjs  i'st. 

2  2  Yah  bokaryos  Jjai  af  lairusauhvmai 
qimandans,  qe]jun,  patei  Baiailzaibul 
habail?,  yali  juitei  in  l)amnia  reikistin 
unhul};ono  uswairpi)?  j^aim  uuhuHjom. 

23  Yah  athaitands  ins  in  gayukom, 
qa})  du  im,  Whaiwa  mag  Satauas  Sat- 
anan  uswairpan  1 

24  Yah  yabai  Jjiudangaixli  wijjra  sik 
gadailyada,  ni  mag  standan  so  J-^iudan- 
gardi  yaina. 

25  Yah  yabai  gards  wijjra  sik  gadail- 
yada, ni  mag  standan  sa  gards  yaius. 

26  Yah  yabai  8atana  ussto))  ana  sik 
silban,  yah  gadailijjs  war]?,  ni  mag  gast- 
andan,  ak  audi  habaij). 

27  Ni  manna  mag  kasa  swin|)is,  galeij)- 
ands  in  gard  is,  wihvan,  niba  faur)?is 
jjana  swin}jan  gabindij),  yah  Jjan  Jjana 
gard  is  diswilwai. 

28  Amen  qijia  izwis,  piatei  allata  aflet- 
ada  jjata  frawaurhte  sunum  manne,  yah 
naiteinos,  swa  manages  swaswe  wayam- 
eryand. 

29  A})|)an  saei  wayamerei}>  Ahman 
Weihana,  ni  habai]?  fralet  aiw,  ak  skula 
ist  aiweinaizos  frawaurhtais. 

30  Unte  qe];un,  Ahnian  unhrainyana 
habai[\ 

31  Yah  qemun  Jjan  ai})ei  is  yah  bro|)i'- 
yus  is,  yah  uta  standandona,  insandi- 
dedun  du  irama,  haitandona  ina. 

32  Yah  setun  bi  ina  managei  ;  qejrnn 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

17  And  lacobum  Zebedei  and  lohan- 
nem,  his  brocJor,  and  him  naman  onsette 
Boanerges,  dset  is,  ))unres  beam  ; 

18  And  Andream  and  Philippum,  and 
Bartholomeura  and  Matheum,  and  Thom- 
am  and  lacobum  Alphei,  and  Taddeum 
and  Simonem  Chananeum, 

1 9  And  ludam  Scarioth,  se  hine  seakle. 


20  And  eft  him  to  com  swa  micel  men- 
igu,  doet  hi  nsefdon  hlaf  to  etanne. 

2  r  And  da  hi  hine  gehyrdon,  hi  ferdon 
dset  hi  hyne  numon ;  and  dus  cwsedon, 
Soplice  he  is  on  hat-heortnesse  gewend. 

22  And  da  boceras  de  wendon  fi-am 
Hierusalem,  cwsedon,  S5))lice  he  hsefjj 
Beelzebub,  and  on  deofla  ealdre  he  deofol- 
seocnessa  ut-adrifjj. 

23  And  he  hi  togsedere  geclypode,  and 
on  bigspellum  him  to  cwee)?,  Hu  mseg 
Satanas  Satanan  lit  adrifan  ] 

24  And  gif  his  rice  on  him  sylfum  by)> 
todseled,  hu  ma3g  hit  standan  1 

25  And  gif  daet  bus  ofer  hit  sylfe  ys 
todaeled,  hu  mseg  hit  standan  1 

26  And  gif  Satanas  win]?  ongen  hine 
sylfne,  he  bij)  todieled,  and  he  standan 
ne  mpeg,  ac  h?ef])  eude. 

27  Ne  mseg  man  done  strangan  his 
ivhta  and  his  fatu  bereafian,  and  on  his 
hus  gan,  biiton  man  done  strangan  serest 
gebinde,  and  donne  hys  hus  reafige. 

28  S5))lice  ic  eow  secge,  dset  ealle  sinna 
synd  manna  bearnum  forgyfene,  and 
bysmeruuga,  dam  de  bi  bysmeria}). 

29  So))lice  ic  eow  secge,  se  done  Hal- 
gan  Gast  bysmera}>,  se  nseff)  on  ecnysse 
forgyfenesse,  ac  bij)  eces  gyltes  scyldig. 

30  Fordam  de  hi  cweedon,  He  haefj) 
unclsenne  gast. 

31  Da  com  to  him  his  modor  and  his 
gebrodra,  and  dar  lite  st5don,  and  to 
him  sendon,  and  to  him  clypedon. 

3  2  And  mycel  menigu  ymb  hine  spet ; 


III.  17-32.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 7  Ami  Jnmcs  of  Zebedo  and  Joon,  the 
brother  of  James,  ami  he  piittc  to  hem 
names  lioonerges,  that  is,  the  sones  of 
thondrynge ; 

18  And  Andrew  and  Philip,  and  Bar- 
tholomewe  and  !Mathew,  and  Thomas 
and  James  Alfey,  and  Thadee  and  Sy- 
luount  Cananee, 

1 9  And  Judas  Scarioth,  that  bitraide 
hym.     And  thci  comen  to  an  hous, 

20  And  the  eumpanye  of  penile  came 
togidre  cftsoone,  so  that  thci  mi5te  not 
nether  etc  breed. 

2  I  And  whanne  his  hjnnesmcn  haddcn 
hcrdde,  thci  -wenten  out  for  to  holde 
hym  ;  sothely  thci  seiden,  for  he  is 
turnyd  in  to  wodenesse. 

2?.  And  the  scribis  that  camen  doun 
fro  Jcsusalem,  seiden,  For  he  hath  Belse- 
bub,  and  for  in  the  prince  of  deuels  he 
castith  out  fendis. 

23  And,  hem  gadrid  togidre,  he  seide 
to  hem  in  parablis,  Hou  may  Sathanas 
caste  out  Sathanas  ? 

24  And  if  a  i-ewmc  be  departide  in 
itself,  the  ilke  rewme  may  not  stonde. 

25  And  if  an  hous  be  disparpoilid  on 
it  self,  thilke  hous  may  not  stonde. 

26  And  if  Sathanas  hath  risen  a3eins 
hym  self,  he  is  disparpoilid,  and  he  shal 
not  mowe  stonde,  but  hath  an  ende. 

27  Xo  man,  gon  in  to  a  stronge  mannes 
hous,  may  take  awey  his  vessels,  no  but 
he  bynde  firste  the  stronge  man,  and 
thanne  he  shal  diuersly  rauyshe  his 
hous. 

28  Trewly  I  seie  to  50U,  for  alle  synnes 
and  blasphemyes,  l^y  whiehe  thei  han 
blasfemed,  shulen  be  for30uen  to  the 
sones  of  men. 

29  Sothely  he  that  shal  blasfcme  a5ein3 
the  Holy  Gost,  shal  not  haue  I'cmissioun 
in  to  with  outen  eend,  but  he  shal  be 
gilty  of  euerlastynge  trespas. 

30  For  thei  seiden,  He  hath  an  unclene 
spirit. 

3 1  And  his  modir  and  bretheren  comen, 
and  thei  stondynge  \ni\\  oute  forth, 
senten  to  hym,  clepjTige  hym. 

32  And  a  cumpauy  sat  aboute  hym; 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


177 


1 7  And  he  called  James  the  sonnc  of 
Zebede  and  Jhon,  James  brother,  and 
gave  them  Bonarges  to  name,  which  is 
to  saye,  the  sonncs  of  thounder  ; 

18  And  Andrewe  and  rhilijipe,  and 
Bartlemewe  and  Mathewe,  and  Thomas 
and  James  the  sonne  of  Alphey,  and 
Taddeus  and  Symon  of  Cane, 

1 9  And_  Judas  Iscarioth,  whiehe  same 
also  betrayed  hym.  And  they  came 
vnto  housse, 

20  And  the  people  assembled  togedder 
agayne,  so  greattly  that  they  had  nott 
leesar  somoclie  as  to  eate  breed. 

21  And  when  they  that  longed  vnto 
hjTii  herde  off  it,  they  went  out  to  holde 
hjTii ;  for  they  sayde,  he  ys  to  fervent. 

22  And  the  scribes  which  came  from 
Jerusalem,  sayde,  He  hath  Beelzebub, 
and  by  the  power  off  the  chefe  devyll 
casteth  out  devylles. 

23  And  he  called  them  vnto  hym,  and 
in  similitudes  sayde  vnto  them,  Howe 
can  Satan  drive  out  Satan  1 

24  And  yf  a  realmc  be  devidcd  ageynste 
it  silfe,  that  realme  cannot  endure. 

25  And  if  a  housse  be  devided  agaynste 
it  silfe,  that  housse  cannot  continue. 

26  So  yf  Satan  make  insurreccion  a- 
gaynste  him  silfe,  and  be  devided,  he 
can  not  continue,  but  hath  an  ende. 

27  No  man  can  entre  into  a  stronge 
mans  housse,  and  take  awaye  hys 
gooddes,  excepte  he  fyrste  bynde  that 
stronge  man,  and  then  spoyle  hys 
housse. 

28  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  all 
synnes  shalbe  forgeven  vnto  mens  chyl- 
dren,  and  blaspheme,  where  with  they 
blaspheme. 

29  But  he  that  blasphemeth  the  Holy 
Goost,  shall  never  have  forgevenes,  but 
is  in  daunger  of  etei*nall  dampnacion. 

30  For  they  sayde,  He  had  an  vnclene 
sjirete, 

3 1  And  there  cam  his  mother  and  his 
brithren,  and  stode  with  oute,  and  sent 
vnto  him,  and  called  hym. 

32  And  the  people  sate  aboute  hym; 

N 


17« 


GOTHIC,  360. 


|)au  du  imma,  Sai !  aij^ei  ]ieina,  yah 
broJ»ryiis  J^einai  yah  swistryus  ]?einos 
uta  sokyand  jjuk. 

33  Yah  andhof  im  qij^ands,  Who  ist  so 
aij>ei  meina  ai})]jau  J^ai  bro}jryus  meinai  1 

34  Yah  bisaiwhands  bisunyane,  Jians 
bi  sik  sitaudans,  qa]?,  Sai !  ai|jei  meina 
yah  jiai  brojjryus  meinai. 

35  Saei  allis  waurkei})  wilyan  Guj^s,  sa 
yah  broj^ar  meins,  yah  swistar,  yah  aijjei 
ist. 


Chap.  IV.  i  Yah  aftra  lesus  dugann 
laisyan  at  marein ;  yah  galesun  sik  du 
'imma  manageins  filu,  swaswe  ina  ga- 
leijiandauin  skip,  gasitan  in  marein,  yah 
aUa  so  managei  v/ijjra  marein,  ana  staj^a 
was. 

2  Yah  laisida  ins  in  gayukom  manag. 
Yah  qa]j  im  in  hxiseinai  seinai, 

3  Hauseijj.  Sai !  urrann  sa  saiands  du 
saian  fraiwa  seinamma. 

4  Yah  war])  mijjj^anei  saiso,  sum  raihtis 
gadraus  faur  wig,  yah  qemun  fuglos,  yah 
fretun  J^ata. 

5  An]5aru}v|>an  gadraus  ana  stainaham- 
ma,  ]>arei  ni  habaida  air]ja  managa  ;  yah 
suns  urrann,  in  }>izei  ni  habaida  diupaiz- 
os  air}jo3. 

6  At  sunnin  Jian  urrinnandin,  ufljrann, 
yah  uute  ni  habaida  waurtius,  gajjaurs- 
noda. 

7  Yah  sum  gadraus  in  Jiaurnuns,  yah 
ufarstigun  ]?ai  ])aurnyus,  yah  afwhapided- 
un  ])ata,  yah  alcran  ni  gaf. 

8  Yah  sum  gadraus  in  air|>a  goda,  yah 
gaf  akran,  urrinnando,  yah  wahsyando  ; 
yah  bar  ain  .1.  yah  aiu  .y.  yah  ain  .r. 


9  Yah  qaj),  Saei  habai  ausona  hausyand- 
ona,  gahausyai. 

10  1})  bij^e  war])  sundro,  frehun  ina  ])ai 
bi  ina  mi})  ]iaini  twalibim  })izos  ga}aik- 
ous. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Makk 

and  to  him  cwcedon.  Her  is  din  mcdor, 
and  dine  gebrodra  ute  and  seca})  de. 

33  He  da  him  andswarode  and  cwse}), 
Hwylc  is  min  modor  and  mine  ge- 
brodru  1 

34  And  he  cwee}),  da  behealdende,  de 
him  abuton  seetou,  Her  is  min  modor 
and  mine  gebr5dru. 

35  So])lice  se  de  de))  Godes  willau,  se 
is  min  modor,  and  min  brodor,  and 
swustor. 


Chap.  IV.  i  And  eft  he  ongan  hi 
set  daere  sse  leeran  ;  and  him  wees  my  eel 
menegu  to  gegaderod,  swa  dset  he  on 
scip  eode,  and  on  dsere  sse  wses,  and 
eall  SCO  menegu  ymbe  da  sse  waes,  on 
lande. 

2  And  he  hi  fela  on  bigspellum  Iserde. 
And  him  to  cwaej)  on  hys  lare, 

3  GehyraJ).'''    U't    eode  se   ssedere   his 
ssed  to  sawenne. 

4  And  da  he  sew,  sum  feoU  wid  done 
weg,  and  fugelas  comon,  and  hit  freeton. 


5  Sum  feoll  ofer  stan-scyh"gean,  dar 
hit  nsefde  mycele  eor])an  ;  and  suna  up- 
e5de,  fordam  de  hit  ntefde  eorj^an  J)icc- 
nesse. 

6  Da  hit  up-eode,  seo  sunne  hit  for- 
swselde,  and  hit  forscranc,  fordam  hit 
wyrtruman  nsefde. 

7  And  sum  feoll  on  ])ornas,  da  stigon 
da  ])ornas,  and  for])rysmodon  dset,  and 
hit  wsestm  ne  bser. 

8  And  sum  feoll  on  god  land,  and  hit 
sealde,uppstigende,  and  wexende,  wsestm ; 
and  an  brohte  ])ritig-fealdne,  sum  syxtig- 
fealdne,  sum  hund-fealdne. 

9  And  he  cwse]),  Gehyre,  se  de  earan 
hsebbe  to  gehyranne. 

10  And  da  he  ana  wa^s,  hine  axodon 
djet  bigspell  da  twelfe  de  mid  him 
wseron. 


III.  33.-IV.  10.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

and  tliei  seieii  to  hyiii,  Lo !  tin  modir, 
auJ  tliei  brctbercu  •with  outcu  forth 
sekeu  thee. 

,^_^  Autl  he  answeiynge  to  hem  seitb, 
^^'ho  is  my  modir  and  my  bretheren  ? 

34  And  biboldyncje  hem  abonte,  that 
saten  in  the  cumpas  of  bym,  be  seitb, 
Lo  !  my  modir  and  my  bretheren. 

35  Foi-sotb  who  that  doth  the  will  of 
God,  he  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister, 
and  modir. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


170 


Chap.  IV.  1  And  eft  Jbesus  bigan 
for  to  teche  at  the  see ;  and  myche 
oumpany  of  peple  is  gedrid  to  hym,  so 
that  he  styinge  in  to  a  boot,  sat  in  the 
see,  and  al  the  cumpany  of  pei)le  was 
aboute  the  see,  on  the  lond. 

2  And  he  tau3te  hem  in  parablis  many 
thingis.  And  he  seide  to  hem  in  his 
techyuge, 

3  Heere  5ee.  Loo !  a  man  sowynge 
goth  out  for  to  sowe. 

4  And  the  while  he  sowith,  an  other 
seed  felde  aboute  the  wey,  and  briddis 
of  heuene"*^  camen,  and  eeten  it. 

5  Forsothe  an  other  felde  doun  on 
stony  placis,  wher  it  had  nat  myche 
erthe ;  and  anoon  it  sprong  vp,  for  it 
hadde  nat  depnesse  of  erthe. 

6  And  whenne  the  sunne  rose  ^'p,  it 
welwide  for  beete,  and  it  dried  vj),  for 
it  hadde  not  roote. 

7  And  an  other  felde  doun  into  thornes, 
and  thornes  stieden  vp,  and  stx'angliden 
it,  and  it  5aue  not  fruyt. 

8  And  an  other  felde  doun  in  to  good 
lond,  and  5aue  fruyt,  styinge  vp,  and 
wexinge  ;  and  oon  brou3te  thritty  fold, 
and  oon  sixt3fold,  and  oon  an  hundrid- 
fold. 

9  And  he  seide,  He  that  bath  eris  of 
hceryng,  heere. 

10  And  whenne  he  was  singuler,^  the 
twelue  that  weren  with  hym  axiden  hym 
for  to  expowue  the  parable. 


and  sayde  vnto  hym,  Beholde  !  thy 
mother,  and  thy  brethren  scke  for  the 
with  out. 

33  And  be  answered  them  saynge, 
Who  ys  my  mother  and  my  brethren  ? 

34  And  be  lokcd  roundc  about  on  bis 
disciples,  which  sate  in  compasse  about 
hym,  and  sayde,  Beholde  !  my  mother 
and  my  brethren. 

35  For  who  soever  doeth  the  will  off 
God,  he  is  ray  brother,  my  syster,  and 
mother. 


Chap.  IV.  i  And  he  began  agayne 
to  teache  then  by  the  see  syde ;  and 
there  gadcred  to  gedder  vnto  hym  moche 
people,  so  greatly  that  be  entred  in  to 
a  shippe,  and  sate  in  the  see,  and  all 
the  people  was  by  the  see  syde,  on  the 
shoore. 

2  And  he  taught  them  many  thynges 
in  similitudes.  And  sayde  vnto  them 
in  his  doctrine, 

3  Herken  to.  Beholde  1  the  sower 
went  forth  to  sowe. 

4  And  it  fortuned  as  be  sowed,  that 
some  fell  by  the  waye  syde,  and  the 
fowles  off  the  ayre  cam,  and  devoured 
it  vppe. 

5  Some  fell  on  a  stony  grounde,  where 
it  had  not  moche  erth  ;  and  by  and  by 
sprange  vppe,  because  it  bad  not  deepth 
of  erth. 

6  And  as  sone  as  the  sun  was  vppe,  it 
caught  beet,  and  because  it  had  nott 
rotynge,  it  wyddred  awayc. 

7  And  some  fell  amonge  the  thornes, 
and  the  thornes  grewe  vppe,  and  choked 
it,  so  that  it  gave  no  frute. 

8  And  some  fell  apon  good  grounde, 
and  did  yelde  frute,  that  spronge,  and 
gi-ewe ;  and  brought  forthe  some  thirty 
folde,  some  fourty  folde,  and  some  an 
hundred  folde. 

9  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  He  that 
hath  eares  to  heare,  lett  bym  heare. 

10  When  he  was  alone,  they  that  were 
aboute  bym  with  the  twelve  axed  bym 
of  the  similitude. 

X  2 


180 


GOTHIC,  c;6o. 


II  Yah  qa])  im,  Izwis  atgiban  ist  kun- 
nan  runa  jjiudangardyos  Gujjs.  I])  yain- 
aim  J)aim  uta,  in  gayukon  allata  wair]?i]?, 


12  El  saiwliandans  saiwhaina,  yah  ni 
gaumyaina,  yah  hausyandans  hausyaina, 
yah  ni  fraj)yaina ;  nibai  whan  gawand- 
yaina  sik,  yah  ailetaindau  im  frawaurht- 
eis. 

13  Yah  qa|)  du  im,  Wi  ^Y\tl'l])  J)0  ga- 
jTikou  1  yah  Avhaiwa  alios  ])0S  gayukons 
kunnei|)  ? 

14  Sa  saiyands,  wam'd  saiyi]?. 

15  A})]jan  jjai  wijjra  Avig  sind,  Jjarei 
saiada  J^ata  waiird  ;  yah  ]jan  gahausyand 
unkaryans,  suns  qimij;  Satanas,  yah  us- 
nimi])  waui'el  ])ata  iusaiano  in  hairtam 
ize. 

16  Yah  sind  samaleiko  J)ai  ana  stain- 
ahamma  saianans,  jjaiei  y^n  hausyand 
))ata  waurd,  suns  mi])  fahedai  nimand 
ita ; 

17  Yah  ni  haband  wfiuvtlns  in  sis,  ak 
wheilawhairbai  sind  ;  Jjajjroh  bijje  qimi]) 
agio,  aijjjjau  wrakya  in  jjis  waurdis,  suns 
gamarzyanda. 

18  Yah  Jjai  sind  jjai  in  |)aurnuns  saian- 
ans ;  jjai  waurd  hausyandans, 

19  Yah  sauvgos  |jizos  libainais,  yah 
afmai'zeins  gabeins,  yah  ]?ai  bi  J^ata  an))ar 
histyus  innatgaggandans,  afwhapyand 
I'ata  waui'd,  yah  akranalaus  Avair|)i|>. 

20  Yah  |)ai  sind  ]>&{  ana  air))ai  ])izai 
godon  saianans,  jiaiei  hausyand  j;ata 
Avaurd,  yah  andnimand,  yah  akran  bair- 
and,  ain  .1.  yah  ain  .y.  yah  ain  .r. 

21  Yah  qajj  du  im,  Ibai  lukarn  qimij?, 
du])e  ei  ut'  melan  satyaidau,  aij^jjau  un- 
dai'  ligr  1  niu  ei  ana  lukarnasta]^an  sat- 
yaidau 1 

22  Nih  allis  ist  wha  fulginls,  J^atei  ni 
gabairhtyaidau  ;  nih  wai'|>  analaugn,  ak 
ei  swikunj)  waii-j^ai. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Mark 

1 1  And  he  ssede  him,  Eow  is  geseald 
to  witanne  Godes  rices  gerlnu.  Dam  de 
ute  synd,  ealle  ]>u\g  on  bigspellum  ge- 
wurdajj. 

12  Bset  hi  geseonde  geseon,  and  na  ne 
geseon,  and  gehyrende  gehyron,  and  ne 
ongyton ;  cte-lses  hi  hwrenne  syn  ge- 
cyrede,  and  him  sin  hyra  synna  for- 
gyfene. 

13  Da  ssede  he  him,  Ge  nyton  dis 
bigspell  1  and  hu  mage  ge  ealle  bigspell 
witan  1 

14  Se  de  SEew}',  word  he  sa-w)?. 

15  S5])lice  da  synd  wid  done  weg,  dar 
dfet  word  is  gesawen  ;  and  donne  hi  hit 
gehyra|>,  s5na  cymj)  Satanas,  and  afyrj) 
dajt  word  de  on  heora  heortan  asawen 

ys- 

16  And  da  synd  gelTce  de  synd  ofer  da 
stan-scylian  ges;'iAven,  sona  danme  hi 
daet  word  gehyra)),  and  dset  mid  blisse 
onfojj  ; 

17  And  hi  nabba|)  wyrtruman  on  him, 
ac  beo|)  unstadolfa^ste ;  and  syddan 
upcymj)  deofles  costnung,  and  his  ehtnys 
for  dam  Avorde, 

18  Hi  synd  on  jjornum  gesawen  dtet 
synd  ;  da  de  da^t  word  gehyra}?, 

19  And  of  yrmjje,  and  swicd5me 
Avorold-Avelena,  and  odra  gewilnunga, 
dpet  Avord  of-))rysmia]),  and  synd  buton 
Avsestme  gewordene. 

20  And  da  de  gesaAvene  synd  ofer  dset 
gode  land,  da  synd  de  dset  Avord  ge- 
hyrap,  and  onfo]),  and  wsestm  bringa]', 
sum  jjritig-fealdne,  sum  syxtig-fealdne, 
and  sum  hund-fealdne. 

21  He  ssede  him,  Cwyst  du  eyni]>  dset 
leoht-fset,  dset  hit  beo  under  bydene 
aset,  odde  under  bedde  1  Avite  geare,  dtet 
hit  sy  ofer  candel-stsef  aset  1 

22  Soj^lice  nis  nan  )'ing  behydd,  de  ne 
sy  geswiitelod ;  ne  nis  digle  gCAA'orden, 
ac  dset  hit  ojieulice  cume. 


lY.  11-22.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1  AikI  he  seitlc  to  hem,  To  ;oii  it 
is  50iion  for  to  kuowc  the  mystcric^  of 
the  kyngdam  of  God.  8othely  to  liem 
that  beii  with  oute  forth,  alle  thingis  beu 
maad  in  parablis, 

12  Tliat  tliei  scynge  se,  and  se  nat, 
and  thei  heerynge  hcere,  and  vnder- 
stonde  not ;  that  sum  tyme  thei  be  con- 
ucrtid,  and  synnes  be  for30uen  to  hem. 


13  And  lie  scith  to  hem,  ^Yiten  not 
5ee  this  ])arable  1  and  howe  3ee  shulden 
knowe  alle  parablis  1 

14  lie  that  sowith,  sowith  a  word. 

15  These  sothly  ben  that  aboute  the 
weye,  where  the  word  is  sowun  ;  and 
whenne  thei  ban  herd,  anoon  conieth 
Sathanas,  and  takith  awey  the  word 
that  is  sowun  in  lier  hertis. 

16  And  also  these  ben  that  ben  sown 
on  a  stoon,  the  whiche  whanne  thei  ban 
herd  the  word,  anoon  taken  it  with 
ioye  ; 

1 7  And  thei  ban  nat  roote  in  hem  silf, 
but  thei  ben  temporal ;''"  afterward  tri- 
bulacioun  sprongen  vp,  and  persecucioun 
for  the  word,  anoon  thei  ben  sclauudrid. 

1 8  And  there  ben  other  that  ben  sowun 
in  thornis ;  these  it  ben,  that  heeren 
the  word, 

19  And  myseiste  of  the  world,  and 
disseit  of  richessis,  and  other  charge  of 
coueitise  entrynge  ynne,  strangulcn  the 
word,  and  it  is  maad  with  outen  fruyt. 

20  And  these  it  ben  that  ben  sowun 
on  good  lond,  the  whiche  heren  the 
word,  and  taken,  and  maken  fruyt,  oon 
thritti  fold,  oon  sixti  fold,  and  oon  an 
hundrid. 

2  I  And  he  seidc  to  hem,  Wher  a  lantcrne 
come,  that  it  be  put  vndir  a  bushcH 
wher  not,  that  it  be  put  vpon  a  candil 
stike  1 

22  Forsothe  ther  is  no  thing  hid,  that 
shal  not  be  maad  opyn  ;  nether  ony 
thing  is  jireuy,  the  whiche  shal  not  come 
in  to  apert. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


181 


1 1  And  lie  saide  vnto  them,  To  you  it 
is  geven  to  knowe  the  misteiy  of  the 
kyngdom  of  God.  lUit  vnto  them  that 
are  with  out,  shall  all  thinges  be  done  in 
similitudes, 

1 2  That  when  they  so  they  shall  se, 
and  not  disccrne,  and  when  they  heare 
they  shall  heare,  and  not  vnderstonde ; 
leste  at  any  tyme  they  shulde  tourne, 
and  their  synnes  shulde  be  foryeven 
them. 

13  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Perceave 
ye  not  this  similitude  ?  and  howe  ye 
shall  knowe  all  similitudes'? 

14  The  sower  soweth  the  worde. 

15  These  be  they  whiche  are  by  the 
Avayes  syde,  Avhcre  the  worde  is  sowen  ; 
to  whom  as  sone  as  they  have  herde  itt, 
commeth  the  devyll,  and  takith  awaye 
the  worde  that  w'as  sowen  in  their 
hertes. 

16  And  these  also  are  they  that  are 
sowen  on  the  stony  grounde,  Avhich 
when  they  have  herde  the  worde,  att 
once  they  receave  it  with  ioye  ; 

17  Yett  have  no  rote  in  themselves, 
and  so  endure  but  for  a  season  ;  after- 
warde  as  sone  as  eny  trouble  or  perse- 
cucion  ariseth,  for  the  Avordes  sake, 
anon  they  tall. 

18  And  these  are  they  that  are  sowen 
amonge  the  thonies  ;  which  heare  the 
worde  of  God, 

19  And  the  care  of  this  worlde,  and 
the  disseytfulnes  of  ryches,  and  the 
lustes  of  other  thynges  entre  in,  and 
choocke  the  worde,  and  it  is  made  vn- 
frutfull. 

20  And  these  are  they  that  are  sowen 
in  good  grounde,  which  heare  the  worde, 
and  receave  it,  and  brynge  forth  frute, 
some  thirty  folde,  some  sixty  folde, 
some  an  hundred  folde. 

21  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Is  the 
candle  lighted,  to  be  put  vnder  a 
busshell,  or  vnder  the  borde  1  ys  it  not 
therfore  lighted,  that  it  shulde  be  put 
on  a  candclsticke  ? 

22  For  there  is  no  thinge  so  prevy, 
that  shall  nott  be  opened  ;  nether 
so  secreet,  butt  that  it  shall  come 
abroade. 


182 


GOTHIC,  360. 


23  Yabai  wlias  liabai  ausona  liausyand- 
ona,  orahausyai. 

24  Yah  qa])  du  im,  Saiwhi]?  wlia  liaus- 
el}).  In  })izaiei  mita])  miti]?,  mitada 
izwis,  yah  biaukada  izwis  Jjaim  galaub- 
yandam. 

25  Unte  ])is\vhammeh  gaei  habaij),  gib- 
ada  imma,  yah  saei  ni  ]iabai]j,  yah  Jjatei 
habai}),  afnimada  imma. 


26  Yah  qa\->,  Swa  ist  Jjiudangardi  Gul^s, 
swasAve  yabai  manna  wairpij?  fraiwa  ana 
aiv'pii, 

27  Yah  slepi]?,  yah  m'reisi]>  naht  yah 
daga,  yah  J^ata  fraiw  keini]?,  yah  liudij), 
swe  ni  wait  is. 

28  Silbo  auk  aivjja  aki-an  bairi}),  frum- 
ist  gras,  Jjajjroh  ahs,  ]jaJ>roh  fulleij)  kaurn- 
is  in  l^amma  ahsa. 

29  panuli  bi])e  atgibada  akran,  suns 
insandeijj  gilj^a,  unte  atist  asans. 

30  Yah  qii]>,  Whe  galeikom  |)iudan- 
gardya  GuJ^s  ]  ai]3j)au  in  whileikai  ga- 
yukon  gabaivam  \)0  1 

31  Swe  kaurno  sinapis,  patei  j^an  saiada 
ana  airjja,  minnist  ahaize  fraiwe  ist  Jjize 
ana  air];ai ; 

32  Yah  }>an  saiada,  urrinni]?,  yah  wairjj- 
i]j  allaize  grase  maist ;  yah  gatauyi]> 
astans  mikilans,  swaswe  magun  uf  skad- 
au  is  fuglos  himinis  gabauan. 

33  Yah  swaleikaim  managaira  ga- 
yukom  rodida  du  im  ];ata  waurd,  swa- 
swe mahtedun  hausyon  ; 

34  1])  inuh  gayukon  ni  I'odida  im.  Ip 
sundro  siponyam  seinaim  andband  al- 
lata. 

35  Yah  qa})  du  im,  in  yainamma  daga, 
at  andanahtya  Jjan  Avaurjjanamma,  Us- 
lei])am  yainis  stadis. 

36  Yah  afletandans  ])0  mauagein,  and- 
nemun  ina,  swe  was  in  ski  pa ;  yah  ]>an 
anjjara  skipa  wesun  mi]?  imma. 

37  Yali  war])  skura  windis  mlkila,  yah 
wegos  waltidedun  in  skip,  swaswe  ita 
yujjan  gafullnoda. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

23  Gehyre,  gif  hwa  earan  hsebbe  to 
gehyranne. 

24  And  he  c\vse]>  to  him,  Warnia]> 
hwset  ge  gehyron.  And  on  dam  gemete 
de  ge  meta]',  eow  bi])  gemeten,  and  eow 
bijj  ge-ict. 

25  Dam  bi])  geseald  cle  ho3%  and  dam 
de  naef}',  eac  dset  he  heefj?,  him  bi]? 
£et-broden. 


26  And  he  cwsej),  Godes  rice  ys,  swylce 
man  wurpe  god  seed  on  his  land,  and 
sawe, 

27  And  arise  da?ges  and  nihtes,  and 
dset  ssed  growe,  and  wexe,  donue  he  nat. 

28  S6))hce  sylf-willes  seo  eorjse  wsestm 
bera]j,  serest  gsers,  syddan  ear,  syddan 
fulne  hwsete  on  dam  eare. 

29  And  donne  se  wrestm  hine  for})- 
bringj),  scna  he  sent  his  sicol,  fordam 
dset  rip  set  is. 

30  And  eft  he  cwsej'.  For  liwam  ge- 
anhcie  we  heofena  rice  1  odde  hwylcum 
bigspelle  widmete  we  hit  1 

31  Swa  swa  senepes  sted,  donne  hit 
bi[)  on  eor}5an  gesawen,  hit  is  ealra  seeda 
Isest  de  on  eorjjan  synd  ; 

32  And  donne  hyt  asawen  bi]?,  hit 
astih]?,  and  bi])  eah-a  wyrta  msest ;  and 
hsef[j  swa  mycele  bogas,  dset  heofenes 
fugelas  eardian  magon  under  his  sceade. 

33  And  manegum  swylcum  bigspellum 
he  spragc  to  him,  dset  hi  mihton  ge- 
hyran; 

34  Ne  spsec  he  na  butan  bigspelle. 
Eall  he  his  leorning-cnihtum  asundron 
rehte. 

35  And  ssede  him,  donne  sefen  bi]?, 
Uton  faran  agen. 

36  And  da  menigu  foi'lsetende,  hi  on- 
fengon  hine,  swa  he  on  scipe  avsbs  ;  and 
odre  scipu  wseron  mid  him. 

37  And  da  Avses  mycel  yst  windes 
geworden,  and  j])a  he  awearp  on  dtet 
scyp,  dset  hit  gefylled  wses. 


IV.  23-37]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

23  If  ony  man  haue  ecris  of  heryng, 
hccre  lie. 

24  And  he  seide  to  bcm,  Se  566  wliat 
500  hecren.  In  what  mcsure  5ee  meten, 
it  shal  be  meten  to  30U,  and  be  kast  to 
50U. 

25  Sothely  it  shal  be  5ouen  to  hym 
that  hath,  and  it  slial  be  taken  aAvey 
from  hym  that  hath  not,  also  that  that 
he  hath. 

26  And  he  scido,  So  the  kingdom  of 
God  is,  as  if  a  man  caste  seed  in  to  the 
erthe, 

27  And  it  slope,  and  rvse  vp  in  ni3t 
and  day,  and  brynge  forth  seed,  and 
wcxe  faste,  the  while  he  wote  not. 

28  Fovsothe  the  erthe  by  his  owne 
worchynge  makith  fruyt,  first  an  erbe,''" 
afterward  an  eere,  afterward  ful  fruyt  in 
the  ere. 

29  And  whanne  of  it  silf  it  hath  brou5t 
forth  fruyt,  auoon  he  sendith  a  sikil,^  for 
rype  corn  cometh. 

30  And  he  seide,  To  Avhat  thing  shulden 
we  likcne  the  kyugdom  of  God  1  or  to 
what  parable  shulen  wc  comparisoune  it  1 

31  As  a  corn  of  seneueye,  the  which 
whann  it  is  sowun  in  the  erthe,  is  lesse 
than  alle  seedis  that  ben  in  erthe  ; 

32  And  whanne  it  is  bredd,''"  it  sty5eth 
vp  in  to  a  tree,  and  is  maad  more  than 
alle  wortis  ;■*■  and  it  shal  make  grete 
braunchis,  so  that  briddis  of  hcuene 
mowe  dwelle  vndir  the  shadewe  ther  of. 

33  And  in  many  siche  parablis  he  spac 
to  hem  a  woi'd,  as  thei  mi5ten  beer ; 

34  Sothely  he  spak  not  to  hem  with 
outen  parable.  Forsothe  he  expounyde 
to  his  disciplis  alle  thingis  on  sidis 
liond.+ 

35  And  he  scith  to  hem,  in  that  day, 
whennc  euenyng  was  maad,  Passe  we 
a5einward. 

36  And  thei  Iceuyuge  the  cumpanye 
of  peple,  taken  hym,  so  that  he  was  in 
the  boot ;  and  other  bootis  wcren  with 
hym. 

37  And  a  greet  storme  of  wynd  is 
maad,  and  sente  wawis  iu  to  the  boot, 
so  that  the  boot  was  ful. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


183 


23  Yf  cny  man  have  cares  to  hcare, 
lett  him  heare. 

24  And  he  sayd  vnto  them.  Take  hede 
what  ye  heare.  With  what  measure  ye 
mete,  with  the  same  shall  it  be  measured 
vnto  you  agaync. 

25  And  vnto  you  that  have  shall  more 
be  geven,  for  vnto  hym  that  hath  shall 
it  be  geven,  and  from  hym  that  hath 
nott,  shall  be  taken  awayc,  even  that  he 
bathe. 

26  And  he  sayd,  So  is  the  k^^lgdoIn 
of  God,  even  as  yf  a  man  sliukle  sowe 
seede  in  the  grounde, 

27  And  shuld  slepe,  and  rise  vp  night 
and  daye,  and  the  seede  shulde  springe, 
and  growe  vppe,  whyll  he  is  not  ware. 

28  For  the  erth  bryugeth  forthe  frute 
off  her  silfe,  first  the  blad,  then  the 
cares,  after  that  full  corne  in  the  eares. 

29  As  sone  as  the  frute  is  brought 
forth,  anon  he  throusteth  in  the  sykcll, 
be  cause  that  hervest  is  come. 

30  And  he  sayde,  Where  vnto  shall  vce 
lykcn  the  kyugdom  off"  God?  or  with 
what  compareson  shall  we  compare  it  1 

3 1  It  is  lyke  a  grayne  off"  mustardseed, 
which  when  it  is  sowen  in  the  ertli,  is  the 
leest  of  all  seedes  that  be  in  the  erth  ; 

32  And  after  that  it  is  sowen,  it  grow- 
eth  vppe,  and  is  greatest  of  all  yerbes ; 
and  bereth  greate  braunciies,  so  that 
the  fowles  off'  the  ayrc  maye  dwell  vnder 
the  shadowe  of  it. 

33  And  with  many  soche  similitudes 
he  preached  the  Avorde  vnto  them,  after 
as  they  myght  heare  it ; 

34  And  with  out  similitude  spake  he 
nothinge  vnto  them.  But  Avhen  they 
were  a  parte  he  expounded  all  thinges 
to  his  disciples. 

35  And  the  same  daye,  when  even  was 
come,  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Lett  vs  passe 
over  into  the  other  .syde. 

36  And  they  late  the  people  departe, 
and  toke  him,  even  as  he  was  in  the 
shippe  ;  thei'e  were  also  with  him  other 
shippes. 

37  And  there  arose  a  great  storme  of 
wynde,  and  dasshed  the  waves  into  the 
shippe,  so  that  it  was  full. 


184 


GOTHIC,  360. 


38  Yali  was  is  ana  notin,  ana  wagg- 
aiya  slcpancls.  Yah  urraisidedun  ina, 
yah  qc})Un  du  imma,  Laisari,  niu  kara 
j)uk,  jjizci  fraqistnani  1 

39  Yah  uiTcisands,  gasok  winda,  yah 
qa]j  du  marcin,  Gaslawai,  afdumbn.  Yah 
auasilaida  sa  Avinds,  yah  warj)*wis  mikil. 

40  Yah  qa])  du  ini,  Duwhe  faurhtai 
siyuj)  swa  ?  "Whalwa  ni  nauh  habaijj 
galaubeiu  1 

41  Yah  ohtcdun  sis  agis  mikil,  yah 
qclmn  du  sis  raisso,  Whas  jsannu  sa 
siyai  ]  unte  yah  winds  yah  marci  iii'- 
hausyand  imma. 


Chap.  V.     i  Yah  qcmun  hindar  mar- 
ein  in  landa  Gaddarenc. 

2  Yah  usgaggandin  imma  us  skipa, 
suns  gainotida  imma  manna  us  aui'ah- 
yom  in  ahmin  unhrainyamma. 

3  Saei  bauain  habaida  in  auvahyom, 
yah  ni  naudibandyom  eisarneinaim  man- 
na mahta  ina  gabindan. 

4  Unte  is  ufta  cisavnam  bi  fotuns 
gabuganaim  yah  naudibandyom  eisarn- 
einaim gabundans  was,  yah  gahmsida 
af  sis  ])os  naudibandyos,  yah  |)0  ana 
fotum  eisarna  gabrak,  yah  manna  ni 
mahta  ina  gatanij-an. 

5  Yah  sinteino,  nahtam  yah  dagam,  in 
aurahyom  yah  in  fairgunyani,  was  hroj)- 
yands,  j'ah  bliggwauds  silc  stainam. 

6  Gasaiwhands  fan  lesu  fairraJTO,  rann, 
yah  inwait  ina. 

7  Yah  hropj-ands  stibnai  mikihii,  qa]), 
"Wlia  mis  yah  l)us,  lesu,  sunau  Gujjs  |)is 
hauhistins  1  Biswara  Jjuk  bi  Gujja,  ni 
balwyais  mis. 

8  Unte  qaj)  imma,  Usgagg,  ahma  un- 
hrainya,  us  j^amma  maun. 

9  Yah  frah  ina,  Wha  namo  j^ein  1  Yali 
qa])  du  imma,  Xarao  mein  laigaion;  unte 
managai  siyum. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Makk 

38  And  he  wa3S  on  scipe,  ofer  bolster 
sla])ende.  And  hi  awchton  bine,  and 
cwajdon,  Ne  belimp])  to  de,  doet  we 
forweorda])  1 

39  And  he  aras,  and  dam  winde  be- 
head, and  cwce])  to  da^re  S'J^,  Suwa,  and 
gestil.  And  se  wind  geswac  da,  and 
wear])  mycel  smyltnes. 

40  And  he  ssede  him,  Hwi  synd  ge 
forhte  1     Gyt  ge  nabba})  geleafan  1 

41  And  hi  micclum  ege  him  ondredon, 
and  cwfedon  selc  to  odrum,  Hwiiet  wenst 
dii,  hwivt  is  des  ?  dset  him  windas  and 
sx  hyrsumia]). 


CllAP,  ¥.■*■    I  Da  comon  hi  ofer  djBre 
sses  mujjan  on  da^t  rice  Ilierasenorum. 

2  And  hym  of  scipe  gangendum,  him 
s5na  agen  arn  an  man  of  dam  byrgcnum 
on  unclcEnum  gaste. 

3  Se  hajfde  on  byrgeuum  scrajf,  and 
hine  nan  man  mid  I'acenteagum  ne 
mihte  gebindan. 

4  Fordam  he  oft  mid  fot-copsum  and 
racenteagum  gebiinden,  toslat  da  racet- 
eaga,  and  da  fot-copsas  tobrsec,  and  hine 
nan  man  gewyldau  ne  mihte. 

5  And  symle,  dreges  and  nihtes,  he 
wa^s  on  byrgenum  and  on  muntum, 
hrymende,  and  hine  sylfue  mid  stunum 
ccorfende. 

6  S5])licc  da  he  done  Heelend  feorran 
geseah,  he  arn,  and  hine  gebasd. 

7  And  mycelre  stemne  hrymende,  and 
dus  cw£e]),  Eala  msera  Hselend,  Godes 
sunu,  hwa^t  is  me  and  de  1  Ic  lullsige 
de  ])urh  God,  da^t  dii  me  ne  })reage. 

8  Da  cw?e|)  se  Hrelend,  Eala  unclsena 
gast,  ga  of  dysum  men. 

9  Da  rdisode  he  hyne,  Hwa^t  is  din 
nama?  Da  cwa3j>  he,  Min  nama  is 
legio ;  fordam  we  manega  synd. 


^IV.  38.-V.  9.]  AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

38  And  he  was  in  the  hyndir  part  of 
the  boot,  slepynge  on  a  pilewe.  And 
tliei  roysen  hym,  and  seien  to  hyni, 
!Maistre,  pertencth  it  nat  to  thee,  that 
we  perisheu  ? 

39  And  he  rysynge  v]\  niauasside  to 
the  wyntl,  and  seide  to  the  see,  Be  stillc, 
■\vexe  doumb.  And  the  wynd  ceeside, 
and  tjreet  pesiblenesse  is  maad. 

40  And  he  seith  to  hem.  What  dreden 
jee  ?    Nat  jit  han  5ee  feith  1 

41  And  thei  dreddenwith  fjreete  dreed, 
and  soiden  to  cchc  other,  AVho,  rjessist 
thou,  is  this  ?  for  the  "wynd  and  the  see 
obeyshen  to  hym. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


185 


Chap.  V.  i  And  thei  camen  ouer 
the  wawe  of  the  see  into  the  cuntrec 
of  Genazareth. 

2  And  anoon  a  man  in  vnclene  spirit 
ran  out  of  a  biryel,  to  hym  goynge  out 
of  the  boot. 

3  The  ■\vhiche  man  hadde  au  hous  in 
graues,'''  and  nether  with  chaynis  now 
mijte  eny  man  bynde  hym. 

4  For  oft  tymes  he  bounden  in  stockis 
and  chayncs,  hadde  broken  the  chaynes, 
and  hadde  brokuu  the  stockis  to  smale 
gobetis,  and  no  man  mi5te  dauute''' 
hym. 

5  And  euer  more,  nijt  and  day,  in 
biriels  and  hillis,  he  was  cryinge,  and 
betynge  hym  silf  Avith  stooncs. 

6  Sothely  he  seynge  Jhesus  afcr,  ran, 
and  worshipide  hym. 

7  And  he  cryinge  with  greet  voice, 
seide,  What  to  me  and  to  thee,  thou 
Jhesu,  the  sone  of  God  hieste "?  I  con- 
ioure  thee  bi  God,  that  thou  tourmente 
not  me. 

8  Forsothe  Jhesus  seide  to  hym,  Thou 
vnclene  spirit,  go  out  fro  the  man. 

9  And  Jhesus  axide  hym,  What  name 
is  to  thee  i  And  he  seith  to  hym,  A 
legioun  is  name  to  me ;  for  we  ben 
manye. 


38  And  he  was  in  the  sterne,  a  slepc 
on  a  pelowe.  And  they  awoke  hym, 
and  sayde  vnto  hym,  jNIaster,  carest 
thou  uott,  that  we  pcrisshe  1 

39  And  he  rose  vjipe,  and  rebuked  the 
wynde,  and  sayde  vnto  the  sec.  Peace, 
and  be  still.*  And  the  wynde  alaycd, 
and  there  folowed  a  greate  calme. 

40  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Why 
are  ye  fearfull  1  Howe  is  it  that  ye 
have  no  fayth  1 

41  And  they  feared  excedingly,  and 
sayde  won  to  an  other,  What  felowe  is 
this  1  for  booth  wynde  and  see  obey 
hym. 


Chap.  V.  i  And  they  cam  over  to 
the  other  syde  off  the  see  in  to  the 
countre  of  the  Gaderens. 

2  And  when  he  was  come  out  of  the 
shippe,  anon  mett  hym  out  of  the  graves 
a  man  posscssyd  of  an  vnclene  sprete. 

3  Which  had  his  abydinge  amonge  the 
graves,  and  no  man  coulde  byudc  hym 
with  cheynes. 

4  Be  cause  that  Avhen  he  was  often 
bounde  Avith  fetters  and  cheynes,  he 
plucked  the  chayncs  asundre,  and  brake 
the  fetters  in  peces,  nether  coulde  eny 
man  tame  him. 

5  And  alwayes,  boothe  uyght  and  daye, 
he  cryed,  in  the  mountaynes  and  in  the 
graves,  and  bet  hym  silfe  with  stones. 

6  When  he  had  spied  Jesus  afarre  of, 
he  ranne,  and  worshipped  him. 

7  And  cryed  Avith  a  lowde  voyce,  and 
sayde,  What  have  I  to  do  Avith  the, 
Jesus,  the  sonne  of  the  nioost  hyest 
God?  I  requyre  the  in  the  name  of 
God,  that  thou  torment  me  nott. 

8  For  he  had  sayd  vnto  hym.  Come 
forthe  of  the  man,  thou  foAvle  sprete. 

9  And  he  axed  hym.  What  is  thy 
name?  And  he  anslnvered  hym,  My 
name  is  legion ;    for  Ave  arc  many. 


18G 


GOTHIC,  360. 


10  Yali  ba])  iua  filu,  ei  ni  usdvebi  im 
us  lauda. 

IT  Wasuli  |jan  yainar  hau'da  sweine 
lialdana  at  J>amma  fairgunya. 

12  Yah  bedun  'ina  alios  Jjos  unhuljjons, 
qijjandeins,  Insaudei  unsis  iu  Ipo  sweina, 
ei  "in  ]?o  galeijjaima. 

1 3  Yah  uslaubida  im  lesus  suns.  Yah 
usgaggandans  ahmans  j^ai  unhi-ainyans 
galijjim  in  |)0  sweina,  yah  rann  so  hair- 
da  and  driuson  in  marein,  wesunujj-jjan 
swe  twos  Jjusundyos,  yah  afwhapnodedun 
in  marein. 

14  Yah  Jjai  haldandans  |50  sweina,  ga- 
jjlauhun,  yah  gataihun  in  baurg,  yah  in 
haimom  ;  yah  qemun,  saiwhan  wha  wesi 
Jjata  waurjjano. 

15  Yah  atiddyedun  du  lesua,  yah  ga- 
saiwhand  Jjana  Avodan,  sitandan  yah 
gawasidana,  yah  frajjyandan,  |>ana  saei 
habaida  laigaion ;    yah  ohtedun. 

16  Yah  spillodcdun  im,  Jjaiei  gase- 
whun,  whaiwa  warjj  bi  pana  wodan,  yah 
bi  ])0  sweina. 

J  7  Yah  dugunnnn  bidyan  ina,  galeijjan 
hindar  markos  seinos. 

18  Yah  inngaggandan  ina  in  skip,  ba]j 
ina  saei  Avas  wods,  ei  mi]?  imma  wesi. 

19  Yah  ni  iailot  ina,  ak  qa]?  du  imma, 
Gagg  du  garda  Jjeinamma  du  Jjeinaim, 
yah  gateih  im,  whan  filu  Jjus  Frauya  ga- 
tawida,  yah  gaarmaida  })uk. 


20  lah  galai}),  yah  dugann  meryan  in 
Daikapaulein,  Avhan  filu  gatawida  imma 
lesus  ;  yah  allai  sildaleikidedun. 

21  Yah  uslei|)andin  lesua  in  skipa 
aftra  hindar  marein,  gaqemun  sik  man- 
ageins  filu  du  imma,  yah  was  faura 
marein. 

22  Yah  sai,  qimi]?  ains  ])ize  swnagoga- 
fade,  namin  Yaeirus,  yah  saiwhands  ina, 
gadraus  du  fotum  lesuis, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Makk 

10  And  he  hlne  SAvyde  bsed,  dset  he 
hine  of  dam  rice  ne  nydde. 

11  Dar  wpes  embe  done  munt  mycel 
swyna  heord  Iseswigende. 

12  And  da  uncleenan  gastas  hyne 
bcedon,  and  cwsedon.  Send  us  on  das 
swyu,  da^t  we  on  hi  gegan. 

13  And  da  lyfde  se  Hselend  sona.  And 
da  eodon  da  unclaenan  gastas  on  da 
syvjn,  and  on  myclum  hryre  seo  heord 
wear})  on  sse  bescofen,  tAva  Jjusendo,  and 
Avurdon  adruncene  on  dsere  sae. 

14  S5l'lice  da  de  hi  heoldon,  flugon, 
and  cyddon  on  dsere  ceastre,  and  on 
lande  ;  and  hi  ut-eodon,  dcct  hi  gesavv^on 
hAvset  dar  gedon  wsere. 

15  And  hi  comon  to  dam  Hselende, 
and  hi  gesawon  done  de  mid  deofle 
gedreht  yvses,  gesciydne  sittan,  and  hales 
m5des  ;  and  hi  him  ondredon. 

16  And  hi  rehton  him,  da  de  hit  ge- 
saAvon,  hu  hit  gedon  AA'ses  be  dam  de 
deofol-seocnesse  htefde,  and  be  dam 
swynum. 

17  And  hi  bsedon,  dset  he  of  hyra 
gem^mm  fore. 

18  Da  he  on  scip  eode,  hine  ongan 
biddan,  se  de  ser  mid  deofle  gedreht 
wses,  dtet  he  mid  him  Avsere. 

19  Him  da  se  Hselend  ne  getidode,  ac 
he  saede  him,  Ga  to  dinum  huse  to 
di'num  hiwum,  and  cyjj  him,  hii  mycel 
Drihten  gedyde,  and  he  gemiltsode  de. 


20  And  he  da  ferde,  and  ongan  bod- 
igean  on  Decapolim,  hu  fela  se  Hselend 
him  dyde ;  and  hig  ealle  dses  Avund- 
redon. 

21  And  da  se  Haelend  eft  on  scype 
ferde  ofer  done  muj^an,  him  com  to 
mycel  menigu,  and  wa?s  ymbe  da  sse. 

22  And  da  com  sum  of  heah-gesam- 
nungum,  lairus  hatte,  and  dil  he  hyne 
geseali,  he  astrehte  hiue  to  his  fotum, 


V.  10-22.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

10  Ami  lie  preido  liym  mychc,  that 
he  shulde  iiat  put  hym  out  of  the 
cuntreic. 

1 1  Forsothc  there  was  there  aboute 
the  hill  a  lloek  of  hoggis  Icsewynge  in 
feeldis. 

12  And  the  spiritis  preieden  Jhesu, 
seyingc,  Scnde  vs  into  hoggis,  that  we 
cutre  into  hem. 

13  And  anoon  Jhcsus  grauntide  to 
hem.  And  the  vnolene  spiritis  entrideu 
in  to  the  hoggis,  and  with  greet  bire^ 
the  Hoc  was  east  doun  in  to  the  see,  to 
tweyne  thousynde,  and  thci  l)en  strau- 
gelid  in  the  see. 

14  Sotliely  thei  that  fedden  hem,  fled- 
den,  and  tolden  in  to  the  citee,  and  in 
to  the  feeldis  ;  and  thei  wenten  out,  for 
to  see  what  was  don. 

15  And  thei  camen  to  Jhesu,  and  thei 
seen  hym  that  was  traueilid  of  the  fend, 
sittyngc  clothid,  and  of  hoole  mynde ; 
and  thei  dredeu. 

16  And  thei  tolden  to  hem,  that  sayen, 
hou  it  was  don  to  hym  that  hadde  a 
fend,  and  of  the  hoggis. 

17  And  thei  bygunnen  for  to  preie 
hym,  that  he  shulde  go  awey  fi"o  her 
coostis. 

18  And  when  he  stiede  in  to  a  boot,  he 
that  was  traueilid  of  the  deuel,  bygan  to 
preye  hym,  that  he  shulde  be  with  hym. 

19  Sothly  Jhesus  resceyued  hym  nat, 
but  seith  to  hym.  Go  thou  in  to  thin 
hous  to  thine,  and  telle  to  hem,  hou 
many  thingis  the  Lord  hath  don  to  thee, 
and  hadde  mercy  of  thee. 

20  And  he  wente  forth,  and  bigan  for 
to  preclie  in  Decapoly,^  liou  manye 
thingis  Jhesus  hadde  don  to  hym  ;  and 
alle  men  wondriden. 

21  And  whanne  Jhesus  hadde  stiede 
in  to  the  boot  eftsoone  oner  the  see, 
rayche  eumpanye  of  peple  cam  togidre 
to  hym,  and  was  aboute  the  see. 

22  And  oon  of  the  princis  of  synagogis, 
by  name  Ja}Tus,  cam,  and  seyinge  hym, 
fel  douu  at  his  feet, 


TYNDALE,i526. 


187 


10  And  he  prayd  hym  instantly,  that 
he  wolde  nott  sende  them  awaye  out  of 
that  region. 

1 1  Tliero  was  there  nye  vnto  the 
mountayns  a  greate  hecrd  of  sw}ne  fed- 
inge. 

12  And  all  the  devyls  besought  hym, 
sayngc,  Sende  vs  in  to  the  hecrdc  off 
swyne,  that  we  maye  enter  in  to  them. 

13  And  anon  Jesus  gave  them  leave. 
And  tlie  vnclene  spretes  went  out  and' 
entred  in  to  the  swyne,  and  the  hecrd 
stavteled  and  ran  hcdlyng  into  the  see, 
they  were  a  bout  ij  M.  swyne,  and  they 
were  drouned  in  the  see. 

14  And  the  swyne  heerdes  fleed,  and 
tolde  it  in  the  cite,  and  in  the  couutre  ; 
and  they  cam  out,  for  to  see  what  had 
hapened. 

15  And  they  cam  out  to  Jesus,  and 
they  sawe  h}Tn  that  was  vexed  with  the 
fende  and  had  the  legion,  sytt  both 
clothed,  and  in  his  right  mynde ;  and 
were  a  frayed. 

16  And  they  that  sawe  it,  tolde  them, 
howe  it  had  hapened  vnto  hym  that  was 
possessed  ofi'  the  dev}ll,  and  also  of  the 
swyne. 

1 7  And  they  began  to  praye  hj-m,  that 
he  wolde  departe  fi'om  their  coostes. 

18  And  when  he  was  come  in  to  the 
shippe,  he  that  had  the  devyll,  prayed 
hym,  that  he  myght  be  with  hym. 

19  Jesus  wolde  not  soffre  him,  but 
sayde  vnto  him,  Goo  home  in  to  thyne 
awne  housse  and  to  thy  frendes,  and 
shewe  them,  what  thinges  the  Lorde 
hath  done  vnto  the,  and  howe  he  had 
compassion  on  the. 

20  And  he  departed,  and  began  to 
publisshe  in  the  ten  cites,  what  thinges 
Jesus  had  done  vnto  hym  ;  and  all  men 
did  merveyle. 

21  And  when  Jesus  was  come  over 
agayne  in  the  shippe  vnto  the  other 
syde,  moehe  people  gaddered  vnto  hym, 
and  he  was  nye  vnto  the  see. 

22  And  beholde,  there  cam  vnto  hym 
won  of  the  rulers  of  the  sinagogge, 
whose  name  was  Jairus,  and  when  he 
sawe  hym,  he  fell  doune  att  his  fete, 


11 


GOTHIC,  360. 


23  Yah  ba]j  ina  filu,  qij^ands,  patei 
dauhtar  meiua  aftumist  habaij) ;  ei  qim- 
ands,  lagyais  ana  ]>o  handuns,  ei  ganisai, 
yah  libai. 

24  Yah  galaijj  mi]?  imma,  yah  iddyedun 
afar  imma  manageins  filu,  yah  Jjraihun 
ina. 

25  Yali  qinono  suma  Avisandei  in  runa 
blojjis  yera  twaUf, 

26  Yah  manag  gajjulandei  fram  manag- 
aim  lekyam,  yah  fraqimandei  allamma 
seinamma,  yah  ni  Avaihtai  botida,  ak 
mais  Avairs  habaida, 

27  Gahaus3'andei  bi  lesu.  atgaggandei 
in  managein  aftana,  attaitok  Avastyai  is. 

28  Unte  qa]j,  patei  yabai  Avastyom  is 
atteka,  ganisa. 

29  Yali  sunsaiw  ga])aiirsnoda  sa  brun- 
na  blo])is  izos,  yali  ufkunjja  ana  leika 
Jjatei  gahailnoda  af  Jjamma  slaha. 

30  Yah  sunsaiw  lesus  uflvunjia  in  sis 
silbin  })0  us  sis  niaht  usgaggandein,  ga- 
AA'andyands  sik  in  managein,  qa]?,  Wlias 
mis  taitok  AA'astyom  ? 

31  Yah  qe|jun  du  imma  siponyos  is, 
SaiAA'his  |)0  managein  ])i-eihandein  ])uk, 
yah  qi])is,  Whas  mis  taitok  1 

32  Yah  Aviaitoda,  saiAA'han  ]>o  jjata 
tauyandein. 

33  I]>  so  qino  ogaudei  yah  reirandei, 
"witandei  |)atei  Avav]?  bi  iya,  qam,  yah 
draus  du  imma,  yah  qa]>  imma  alia  ]>o 
sunya. 

34  Ij)  is  qa])  du  izai,  Dauhtar,  galaubeins 
Jjeina  ganasida  ])uk  ;  gagg  in  gaAvair]>i, 
yah  siyais  haila  af  Jjamma  slaha  J^einam- 
ma. 

35  I^auh]7anuh  imma  rodyandin,  qem- 
un  fram  Jjamma  SAA'nagogafada,  qij^aud- 
ans,  patei  dauhtar  J^eina  gaswalt ;  Avha 
]>anamais  draibeis  J^aua  laisari  ? 

36  I})  lesus,  sunsaiw  galiausyands  Jjata 
AA'aurd  rodi]?,  qab  du  |>amma  swnagoga- 
fada,  Ni  faurhtei,  J;ataiuei  galaubei. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

23  And  hine  SAvyde  bsed,  and  he  CAVfe}), 
Min  dohtor  is  on  ytemestum  s:de ; 
cum,  and  sete  dine  hand  ofer  hi,  dtet 
heo  hal  sy,  and  lybbe. 

24  Da  ferde  he  mid  him,  and  him 
fyligde  mycel  menigeo,  and  jjrungon 
hine. 

25  And  da  da?t  Avif  de  on  blodes  ryne 
twelf  AA^nter  Avses, 

26  And  fram  manegum  leecum  fela 
])inga  }5olode,  and  dselde  call  doet  heo 
ahte,  and  hit  naht  ne  fremode,  ac  Avtes 
de  Avyrse, 

27  Da  heo  be  dam  Hselende  gehyrde, 
heo  com  Avid-seftan  da  menigu,  and  his 
reaf  sset-ln-an. 

28  Sojjlice  heo  CA\"se|),  Gif  ic  furdon  his 
reafes  set-hrine,  ic  beo  hal. 

29  And  dii  sona  AvearJ?  hyre  blodes 
ryne  adruwod,  and  heo  on  hire  gefredde 
dset  heo  of  dam  yvite  gehseled  AA'ses. 

30  And  da  se  Hselend  oncneoAA''  on  him 
silfum  dtet  him  msegen  of  code,  he 
cwa?)>,  beAvend  to  dtere  menigu,  HAva 
set-hnin  mines  reafes  1 

31  Da  cwsedon  his  leoi'ning-cnihtas, 
Dii  gesyhst  das  menigu  de  jn-ingende, 
and  du  CAvyst,  HAva  set-hran  me  1 

32  And  da  beseah  hine,  diet  he  gesaAve 
dsene  de  dset  dyde. 

33  Dat  Avif  da  ondrjedende  and  forht- 
igende, 

.    com,  and   astrehte   hi   beforan 
him,  and  ssede  him  call  dast  riht. 

34  Da  cwae)5  se  Hselend,  Dohtor,  din 
geleafa  de  hale  gedyde ;  ga  de  on  sibbe, 
and  beo  of  disum  hal. 

35  Him  da  gyt  sprecendum,  hi  comon 
fram  dam  heah-gesamnungum,  and  cwsed- 
on, Din  dohtor  is  dead ;  hAvi  drecst  dii 
leng  done  lareoAV  ? 

36  Da  he  gehyrde  dset  Avord,  da  CAA'se]) 
se  Haelend,  Ne  ondreed  du  de,  gelyf 
for  an. 


V.  23-36.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

23  Ami  preicde  hym  myclic,  scyincfe, 
For  will  my  ilou-jter  is  in  the  lastc 
thiiiLcis  ;  come  thou,  putte  thin  liond  on 
hire,  that  she  be  saat",  and  lyue. 

24  And  lie  wcntc  forth  with  hym,  and 
myche  cumpanye  of  peple  suede  hym, 
and  oppresside  hym. 

25  And  a  womman  that  was  in  the 
flux  of  blood  twelue  5ere, 

26  And  haddc  sulTridc  many  thincjis 
of  ful  many  Icchis,  and  spendid  alle  hir 
thingis,  and  no  thing  prophitide,  but 
more  hadde  worse, 

27  Whanne  she  haddc  herd  of  Jhcsu, 
she  cam  in  the  cumpanye  byhynde,  and 
touchide  his  cloth. 

28  Sothly  she  seide,  For  if  I  shal 
touche  or  his  cloth,  I  shal  be  saaf. 

29  And  auoon  the  welle  of  blood  is 
dried  vp,  and  she  felide  in  body  that 
she  was  helid  of  the  wound.* 

30  And  anoon  Jhesus  knowynge  in 
hym  silf  the  vertu  that  was  gon  out  of 
hym,  he,  turned  to  the  cumpeuye,  seith, 
Who  touchede  my  clothis  1 

31  And  his  discipHs  seiden  to  hyin, 
Thou  seest  the  cumpenye  pressinge  thee, 
and  seist  thou,  Who  touchide  me  1 

32  And  Jhesus  lokide  aboute,  for  to 
see  hir  that  hadde  don  this  thing. 

33  FoiMothe  the  womman  drcdinge 
and  quakynge,  witynge  that  it  was  don 

I   in  hir,  cam,  and  fel  down  bifore  him, 
'    and  seide  to  hym  al  trcuthe. 

34  Forsothe  Jhesus  seide  to  hir,  D0U5- 
tir,  thi  feith  hath  maad  thee  saf ;  go  in 
pees,  and  be  saf  fro  thi  sykenes. 

35  5it  him  spekynge,  messageris  caraen 
to  the  prince  of  a  synagoge,  seyinge. 
For  thi  doujtir  is  deed  ;  what  traueilist 
tliou  the  maistir  ferthere  ? 

36  Forsothe  the  word  herd  that  was 
seide,  Jhesus  seith  to  the  prince  of  the 
synagoge,  Nyle  thou  drede,  oonly  byleue 
thou. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


189 


23  And  1)esought  hym  greatly,  sayngc. 
My  doughtor  lyith  att  poynt  of  dceth  ; 
I  woldo  thou  woldcst  come,  and  ley  thy 
honde  on  her,  that  she  myght  be  safe, 
and  live. 

24  And  he  went  with  liym,  and  moche 
people  folowed  hym,  and  thronge  hym. 

25  And  there  was  a  woman  whiche  was 
diseased  off  an  yssue  off  blonde  twelve 
yeres, 

26  And  had  suffered  many  thingcs  of 
many  fisicions,  and  had  spent  all  that 
she  had,  and  felte  none  amendment  at 
all,  but  Avcxed  worssc  and  "worsse, 

27  When  she  had  herde  off  Jesus,  she 
cam  into  the  preace  behynde  hym,  and 
tewched  hys  garment. 

28  For  she  sayde,  Yf  I  maye  butt 
tewche  his  clothinge,  I  shall  be  whole. 

29  And  streyght  Avaye  her  fountayne 
of  bloude  was  dreyed  vppe,  and  she  felt 
in  her  body  that  she  was  healed  off  the 
plage. 

30  And  Jesus  immediatly  felt  in  him 
silfe  the  vertue  that  went  out  off  hym, 
and  tourned  hym  ronnde  aboute  in  the 
preace,  and  sayde,  Who  tewched  my 
clothes  ? 

31  And  his  disciples  sayde  vnto  hym. 
Thou  seist  the  people  thrustinge  the  on 
every  syde,  and  yet  sayest,  Who  did 
tewche  me  1 

32  And  he  loked  round  about,  ffor  to 
se  her  thatt  had  done  that  thinge. 

33  The  woman  feared  and  trembled,  for 
she  knewe  what  Avas  done  with  in  her, 
and  she  cam,  and  fell  doune  before  hym, 
and  tolde  hym  the  tructh  of  every  thinge. 

34  And  he  sayde  vnto  her.  Dough ter, 
thy  fayth  hath  saved  the  ;  goo  in  peace, 
and  be  whole  off  thy  plage. 

35  Whyll  he  yet  spake,  there  cam  from 
the  ruler  of  the  synagogis  housse  cer- 
tayne,  which  sayde,  Thy  doughter  is 
deed ;  why  descasest  thou  the  master 
eny  further  ? 

36  As  sone  as  Jesus  herde  thatt  worde 
spoken,  he  sayde  vnto  the  ruler  of  the 
synagoge,  Be  not  afrayed,  only  beleve. 


190 


GOTHIC,  360. 


37  Yali  ni  fralailot  ainoliun  ize  mi]? 
.sis  afargag,:,fan,  nibai  Paitru,  yah  la- 
kobu,  yah  lohannen,  brojsar  lakobis. 

38  Yah  galai]>  in  garcl  ]jis  swnagoga- 
fadis.  Yah  gasawh  auhyodu,  yah  gret- 
andans  yah  wairfairwhyandaus  filu. 

39  Yah  innatgaggands,  qa}j  du  im, 
Wha  auhyojj,  yah  gretijj  1  pata  barn  ni 
gadaujjnoda,  ak  slepij). 

40  Yah  bihlohun  ina.  1\>  is,  uswairp- 
ands  allaim,  ganimij?  attan  J)is  barnis 
yah  aij^ein,  yah  Jjans  mi]?  sis,  yah  galaijj 
inn^  ]?aiei  was  J)ata  barn  ligando. 

41  Yah  fairgraip  .bi  handau  Jjata  barn, 
qaj)uh  du  izai,  Taleijja,  kumei,  jjatei  ist 
gaskeirijj,  Ma\\'ilo,  du  J)us  qij^a,  urreis. 

42  Yah  suns  urrais  so  mawi,  yah  id- 
dya ;  Avas  auk  yere  twalibe.  Yah  usgeis- 
nodedun  faurhtein  mikilai. 

43  Yah  auabau}>  im  fiki,  ei  manna  ni 
fun|)i  Jjata.  Yah  haihait  izai  giban 
matyan. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Yah  usstolj  yainjjro,  yah 
qam  in  landa  seinamma ;  yah  laisti- 
dedun  afar  imma  siponyos  is, 

2  Yah  bijje  war])  sabl:)ato,  dugann  in 
SAvnagoge  laisyan.  Yah  managai  haus- 
yaudans  sildaleikidedun,  qijjandans,  Wha- 
jjro  J)amma  J^atal  yah  who  so  handugeino 
so  gibano  imma,  ei  mahteis  swaleikos 
|?airh  handuns  is  wairjjand  ? 


3  Niu  ]jata  ist  sa  timrya,  sa  sunus 
Maryins,  i]>  bro])ar  lakoba  yah  luse  yah 
ludins  yah  Seimonis  ?  yah  niu  sind 
swistrjais  is  her  at  unsis.  Yah  gamarz- 
idai  waurjjun  in  {lamma. 

4  Qa])  ))an  im  lesus,  patei  nist  praufet- 
us  unswers,  niba  in  gabaurjjai  seinai, 
yah  in  ganijjyam,  yah  in  garda  seinam- 
ma. 

5  Yah  ni  mahta  yainar  ainohun  mahte 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

37  And  he  ne  let  him  Eenig  ne  fyhg- 
ean,  buton  Petrum,  and  lacobum,  and 
lohannem,  lacobes  brottor. 

38  And  hi  comon  on  daes  heah-ealdres 
bus.  And  he  geseah  mycel  gehlyd, 
wepende  and  geomriende. 

39  And  da  he  in-eode,  he  cwae}?,  Hwl 
synd  ge  gedrefede,  and  wepa]?  1  Nis 
ctis  mcfcden  na  dead,  ac  heo  slsep|>. 

40  Da  tteldon  hi  hine.  He  da,  ealhim 
ut-adrifenum,  nam  dses  maedenes  [feder 
and]  m5der,  and  da  de  mid  him  waeron, 
and  inn-eodon  suwiende,  dar  dset  mseden 
wses. 

41  And  hire  hand  nam,  and  cwse\>, 
Thalimtha,  cumi,  dset  is  on  ure  ge|)eocte 
gereht,  Mseden,  de  ic  secge,  aris. 

42  And  heo  sona  aras,  and  eode ; 
s5})lice  heo  wses  twelf  winti-e.  And  ealle 
hi  wundredon  myceh-e  WTindrunge. 

43  And  he  him  Jjearle  behead,  dset  hi 
hyt  nanum  men  ne  ssedon.  And  he  het 
hire  etan  syllan. 


Chap.  VI.  i  And  da  he  danun  eode, 
he  ferde  on  his  edel ;  and  him  folgodon 
his  leorning-cnihtas. 

2  And  gewordenum  reste-dsege,  he  on- 
gan  on  gesamnunge  leeran.  And  man- 
ege gehyrdon  and  wundredon  on  his 
Itire,  and  cwsedon,  Hwanon  synd  dys- 
sum  ealle  das  j^ing?  and  hwast  is  se 
Avisdom  de  him  geseald  is,  and  swylce 
mihta  de  Jsm-li  his  handa  gewordene 
synd? 

3  Hu  nys  [dys]  se  smijj,  Marian  sunu, 
lacobes  brodor  and  losepes  and  lude 
and  Simonis  1  hu  ne  synd  his  swustra 
her  mid  us  ?  And  da  A\Tirdon  hi  ge- 
drefede. 

4  Da  cwse]>  se  Hselend,  SoJjHce  nis  nan 
witega  biiton  -wurjjscipe,  buton  on  his 
edele,  and  on  his  msegjje,  and  on  his 
huse. 

5  And  he  ne  mihte  dar  senig  msegen 


V.37--VI.  5-]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

37  And  lie  rcsceyuede  not  ony  man  to 
sue  lihn,  no  but  Pctrc,  and  Janacs,  and 
John,  the  brother  of  James. 

38  And  thoi  camen  in  to  the  lious  of 
the  prince  of  tlie  synagoge.  And  lie  si5 
noyse,  and  men  wepiuge  and  weilinge 
moche. 

39  And  he  gon  yn,  seith  to  liem,  What 
ben  5ee  troublid,  and  wepyn  1  The 
venche  is  not  deed,  but  slcpith. 

40  And  thei  scorncden  him.  Forsothe 
alle  kast  out,  he  takith  the  fadir  and 
modir  of  the  wenche,  and  hem  that 
wercn  with  him,  and  thei  entren  yn, 
where  the  wenche  lay. 

41  And  he  holdinge  the  bond  of  the 
wenche,  seith  to  hir,  Tabita,  cumy,  that 
is  intcrpretid,^  Wenche,  to  thee  I  seie, 
rise  thou. 

42  And  anon  the  wenche  roos,  and 
walkide  ;  sothly  she  was  of  twelue  5eer. 
And  thei  weren  abaischt  with  greet 
stoneyiugc. 

43  And  he  comaundide  to  hem  greetly, 
that  no  man  schulde  wite  it.  And  he 
comaundide  to  3iue  to  hir  for  to  ete. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


191 


Chap.  VI.  i  And  Jhesus  gon  out 
thennis,  wente  in  to  his  owne  cuntree ; 
and  his  disciplis  folwiden  him. 

2  And  the  saboth  maad,  Jhesus  bigan 
for  to  teche  in  a  synagoge.  And  manye 
heeringe  wondriden  in  his  techinge, 
scyinge,  Of  whennis  to  this  alle  these 
thingis  ?  and  what  is  the  wysdom  that 
is  5ouun  to  him,  and  suche  vertues  the 
whiche  ben  maad  by  his  bond  ? 

3  Wher  this  is  not  a  smyth,'''  the  sone 
of  Marie,  the  biother  of  James  and 
Joseph  and  Judas  and  Symound  ?  Avlier 
and  his  sistris  ben  nat  here  with  vs  1 
And  thei  weren  sclaundrid  in  him. 

4  And  Jhesus  seide  to  hem.  For  a  pro- 
phete  is  not  with  outeu  honour,  no  but 
in  his  owne  cuntree,  and  in  his  hows, 
and  in  his  kyn. 

5  And  he  my5te  not  make  there  ony 


37  And  he  suffrod  no  man  to  folowc 
hym,  moo  then  Peter,  and  James,  and 
Jhon,  James  brother. 

38  And  he  cam  vnto  the  houssc  of  the 
ruler  off  the  synagoge.  And  sawc  the 
wondrynge,  and  them  that  wepte  and 
wayled  greatly. 

39  And  he  went  in,  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  Why  make  yc  this  adoo,  and 
Avepe?  The  maydcn  is  not  deed,  but 
slcpith. 

40  And  they  lawght  hym  to  scorne. 
Then  he  put  them  all  out,  and  toke  the 
father  and  the  mother  oft"  the  mayden, 
and  them  that  were  with  hym,  and 
entred  in,  Avhere  the  mayden  laye. 

41  And  toke  the  mayden  by  the  honde, 
and  sayde  vnto  her,  Tabitha,  cumi,  which 
is  by  interprctacion,  Mayden,  I  sayc  vnto 
the,  aryse. 

42  And  strcight  the  mayden  arose,  and 
went  on  her  fete ;  for  she  was  of  the 
age  of  twelve  yeres.  And  they  were 
astonied  at  it  out  of  measure. 

43  And  he  charged  them  straytely, 
that  no  man  shulde  knowe  off"  it.  And 
commaunded  to  ^eve  her  meate. 


Chap.  VI.  i  And  he  departed  thens, 
and  cam  in  to  his  awne  countre  ;  and 
his  disciples  folowed  hj-m. 

2  And  when  the  saboth  daye  was  come, 
he  began  to  teache  in  the  synagoge.  And 
many  thatt  hcrde  hym  were  astonyed, 
and  sayde.  From  whens  hath  he  these 
thinges  1  and  what  wysdom  is  this  that 
is  geven  vnto  him,  and  suche  vertues 
that  are  wrought  by  his  hondes  1 

3  Ys  not  this  that  car])enter,  Maiys 
Sonne,  the  brother  off"  James  and  Joses 
and  Juda  and  Simon  ?  and  arc  not  his 
sisters  here  with  vs  ?  And  they  were 
hurt  by  the  reason  of  him. 

4  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  A  pro- 
phet is  not  dcspysed  but  in  his  awne 
countre,  and  amongc  his  awne  kynne, 
and  amonge  them  that  arc  of  the  same 
houssholde. 

5  And  he  coulde  there  shcwe  no  myra- 


192 


GOTHIC,  360. 


gatauyan,  niba  fawaim  siukaim  lianduns 
gala,!]:yands,  gabailida. 

6  Yah  sildaleikida  in  ungalaubeinais 
ize.  Yab  bitauli  weihsa  bisunyane, 
laisyands. 

7  Yah  athaihait  Jjans  twalif,  yah  du- 
gann  ins  insandyan  twans  whanzuh  ;  yah 
gaf  im  Avaldufni  ahmane  unhrainyaize, 

8  Yah  faurbau]?  im,  ei  waiht  ni  nem- 
eina  in  wig,  niba  hrugga  aina,  nih 
matibalg,  nlh  hlaif,  nih  in  gairdos  aiz, 

9  Ak  gaskohal  sulyom,  yah  ni  v/asyaij) 
twaini  paidom. 

TO  Yah  qa])  du  im,  piswhaduh  })cl  gagg- 
ai]>  in  gai'd,  ]jar  salyaijj,  unte  usgaggai]? 
yain}'ro. 

1 1  Yah  SAva  managai  swe  ni  andnim- 
aina  izwis,  ni  hausjaina  izwis,  nsgagg- 
andana  yainjjro  ushrisyaij)  mulda  ]>o 
undaro  fotnm  izwaraim,  du  Aveitwodi})ai 
ira.  Amen  qi}a  izwis,  sutizc  ist  Sau- 
daumyani  ai}'|iau  Ganmauryam  in  daga 
stauos,  ])au  ])izai  banrg  yainai. 

12  Yah  usgaggandans,  nieridedun,  ei 
idreigodedeina. 

13  Yah  unhuljjons  manages  nsdribun, 
yah  gasalbodedun  alewa  managans  siuk- 
ans,  yah  gahailidedun. 

14  Yah  gahausida  piudans  Herodes, 
swikun])  allis  war])  namo  is,  yah  qa)), 
patei  lohannis  sa  Daupyands  us  dau|)- 
aim  urrais,  du])J)e  waurkyand  ])0S  mahteis 
in  imma. 

15  AnJ)arai  ])an  qe])un,  patei  Helias 
ist ;  an)iarai  jmn  qe^un,  patei  praufetes 
ist,  swe  ains  i>ize  praufete. 

16  Gahausyands  J)an,  Herodes  qa|), 
patei  I'ammei  ik  haubi]?  afmaimait, 
lohanne,  sa  ist  sah  urrais  us  dauj^aim. 

17  Sa  auk  raihtis  Herodes  insandyands, 
gahabaida  lohannen,  yah  gaband  ina  in 
karkarai,  in  Haii-odiadins,  qenais  Filip- 
paus,  broj-n's  seinis ;  unte  |;o  galiugaida. 

18  Qa))  auk  lohannes  du  Heroda,  patei 
ni  skukl  ist  pus,  haban  qen  brojjrs 
])einis. 

19  I|)  so  Herodia  naiw  imma,  yah 
wilda  imma  usqiman,  yah  ni  niahta. 


A^GLO-SAXON",  ggs-     [St.  Mark 

wyrcan,  buton  feawa  untrume,  on-aset- 
tum  his  handum,  he  geheekle. 

6  And  he  wundrode  for  heora  unge- 
leafan.  He  da  iBerende  da  castel  beferde. 

7  And  him  twelfe  to  geclypode,  and 
agan  hi  sendan  twam  and  twam ;  and 
him  anweaki  seakle  unclsenra  gusta, 

8  And  him  behead,  dtet  hi  naht  on 
wege  ne  namon,  buton  gyrde  ane,  ne 
codd,  ne  hlaf,  ne  feoh  on  heora  gyrdUmi, 

9  Ac  gesceode  mid  calcum,  and  dret  hi 
mid  twam  tunecum  gescrydde  nccron. 

10  And  he  cw^b])  to  him,  Swa  hwylr 
hus  swa  ge  in-ga)>,  wunigaj)  dar,  od 
dtet  ge  ut-gan. 

1 1  And  swii  hwylce  swa  eow  ne  ge- 
hyra]),  donne  ge  danon  ut-ga})  jisceaca]) 
dtet  dust  of  eowi'um  fotum,  him  on  ge- 
witnesse 


12  And  ut-gangcnde,  hi  bodedon,  doet 
hi  djed-bote  dydon. 

13  And  hi  manega  deofol-seocnessa  ut- 
adrifon,  and  manega  untrume  mid  ele 
smyredon,  and  gehajldon. 

14  And  da  gehyrde  Herodes  se  cyng, 
dset  s5))Hce  his  nama  wres  SA^nitol  ge- 
worden,  and  he  cwse)),  Witodl'ce  Joh- 
annes se  Fulluhtere  of  dea))e  aras,  and 
on  him  synd  fordam  niEegenu  geworht. 

15  Sume  cwsedon,  He  is  Elias  ;  sume 
cwsedon.  He  is  witega,  swylce  an  of 
dam  witegum. 

16  Da  Herodes  dset  gehyrde,  he  cw?e)), 
Se  lohannes,  de  ic  beheafdode,  se  aras 
of  deajie.'*' 

17  S6))lice  Herodes  sende,  and  het 
lohannem,  gebindan  on  cwerterne,  for 
dtere  Herodiadiscan,  his  brodor  lafe, 
Philippus;  fordam  de  he  nam  hi. 

1 8  Da  saede  lohannes  Herode,  N"ys  de 
alyfed,  to  hsebbenne  dines  broder  wif. 

19  Da  syrwde  Herodlas  ymbe  hine, 
and  wolde  hyne  ofslean,  and  heo  ne 
mihte. 


VI.  6-19.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

vcftu,  no  but  licclulc  a  fewe  sikc  men,  ' 
the  hoiulis  put  to. 

6  Aud  he  woniliiile  for  the  vubilouc  of 
hem.  And  he  wcnte  aboute  castelic  in 
cnuyrown,  tcchinii^e. 

7  And  he  clcpido  tweluc,  and  bigan 
foi"  to  sonde  hem  bi  twovne  ;  and  ^af  to 
hem  jiowcr  of  vnclone  spiritis, 

8  And  comaundidc  hem,  tliat  thci 
schulde  not  take  ony  tiling  in  the  wcyo, 
no  but  a  !;erd  oonly,  not  a  scri])pe,  not 
bred,  neither  money  in  the  girdil, 

9  But  schoon  with  saudalies,^  and  that 
thei  weren  not  clothid  Avith  twcic  cootis. 

10  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Whidir  euere 
5ee  schulen  cntre  in  to  an  hous,  dwelle 
5e  there,  till  5e  gon  out  thcnnis. 

1 1  And  who  euei'e  schulen  not  resseyue, 
ne  heere  50U,  50  goynge  out  fro  thennes 
shake  awey  the  powdre  fro  joure  feet, 
in  to  witnessinjre  to  hem. 


12  And  thei  goynge  out,  prechiden, 
that  men  schulden  do  penaunce. 

13  And  thei  castideu  out  many  fendis, 
and  anoyntiden  with  oyle  manye  syke 
men,  and  thei  weren  heelid. 

14  And  kyng  Eroude  herdc,  forsothe 
his  name  was  maad  opyn,  and  he  seide, 
For  Johne  Baptist  hath  risun  a3en  fro 
deed  men,  and  thcrfore  vertues  worchen 
in  hym. 

1 5  Sothely  othere  seiden,  For  it  is  Ely ; 
but  othere  seiden.  For  it  is  a  prophcfcfi, 
as  oon  of  prophetis. 

16  The  whiche  thing  herd,  Eroude 
seith,  "Whom  I  haue  bihedid,  John,  this 
liath  risun  fro  deed  men. 

17  Forsothe  the  ilke  Eroude  sente, 
and  held  Joon,  and  bond  him  in  to  y.i- 
soun,  for  Erodias,  the  wyf  of  Philip,  his 
brother ;  for  he  haddc  weddid  hir. 

18  Sothly  Johne  seide  to  Eroude,  It 
is  not  Iccfful  to  thee,  for  to  haue  the 
wyf  of  thi  brothel". 

1 9  Erodias  forsothe  leide  aspies  to  him, 
and  wolde  sle  him,  and  mi5te  not. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


193 


cles,  butt  loyd  his  hondes  apon  a  feawe 
sieke  foolkc,  and  healed  them. 

6  And  he  merveyled  at  their  vnbclefc. 
And  he  went  aboute  by  the  tonnes  that 
lye  in  circuitc,  teachynge. 

7  And  he  called  the  twelve,  and  began 
to  sende  them  two  and  two  ;  and  gave 
them  power  over  vnclene  sjnetes, 

8  And  commaunded  them,  that  they 
shulde  take  notthinge  vnto  their  iorney, 
save  a  rodde  only,  nether  scrippe,  nether 
breed,  nether  mony  in  their  ])ourses, 

9  Butt  shouldc  be  shood  with  sandals, 
aud  that  they  shulde  not  put  on  tAvo 
coottes. 

10  And  sayd  vnto  them,  Whersoever 
ye  entre  into  an  houssc,  there  abyde, 
tyll  ye  departe  theus. 

1 1  And  whosoever  shall  nott  receave 
you,  nor  heare  you,  when  ye  departe 
thens  shake  of  the  duste  that  is  vnder 
youre  fete,  for  a  rcmembraunce  vnto 
them.  I  saye  verely  vnto  you,  itt  shalbe 
casyer  for  Zodom  and  Gomor  att  the 
daye  off  iudgement,  then  for  that  eite. 

12  And  they  went  out,  and  preached, 
that  they  shulde  repent. 

13  And  they  caste  out  many  devylles, 
and  they  annoynted  many  that  were 
sicke  with  oyle,  and  healed  them. 

14  And  kynge  Herode  herde  of  him, 
for  his  name  was  si)rced  abroade,  and  he 
said,  Jhon  Baptiste  is  risen  agayne  from 
deeth,  aud  ther  fore  myracles  worke  in 
hym. 

1 5  Wother  sayd,  It  is  Helyas ;  and 
some  sayde.  It  is  a  prophet,  or  as  Avon 
of  the  prophcttes. 

16  But  Avhen  Herode  herde  of  him,  he 
sayd,  It  is  Jhon,  Avhom  I  beheded,  he 
ys  risen  from  deeth  agayne. 

17  For  Herode  him  silfe  had  sent  forth, 
and  had  taken  Jhon,  and  bounde  him 
and  cast  him  into  prcson,  for  llerodyas 
sake,  Avhich  Avas  hys  brother  I'liilippcs 
Avyfe  ;  for  he  had  maried  her. 

I  8  Jhon  said  vnto  Herode,  It  is  not 
laufull  for  the,  to  have  thy  brothers 
Avyfe. 

19  Herodias  layd  AA-aite  for  him,  and 
wolde  have  killed  him,  butt  she  coulde 
not. 

o 


ii/4 


GOTHIC,  360. 


20  Unte  Herodis  ohta  sis  lohannen, 
kunnands  iua  wair  garaihtana  yah  weih- 
ana,  yah  witaida  imma.  Yah  haus- 
yands  imma,  manag  gatawida,  yah  ga- 
bauryaba  imma  andhaiisida. 

2 1  Yah  waurjians  dags  gatils,  jjan  Herod- 
is mehi  gabaui-jjais  seinaizos  nahtamat 
Avaurhta  jjaim  maistam  seinaize,  yah 
])usundifadim,  yah  Jjaim  frumistam  Gal- 
eihiias. 

22  Yah  atgaggandein  inn  dauhtar 
Herodiadins,  yah  pliiisyandein,  yah  ga- 
leikandehi  Heroda,  yah  \>a\m  mi]?ana- 
kumbyandam,  qa])  J^iudans  du  ])izai  maii- 
yai,  Bidei  mik  |)iswhizuh  ))ei  wileis,  yah 
giba  })us. 

23  Yah  swor  izai,  patei  |)iswhah  ))ei 
bidyais  mik,  giba  ])us,  imd  halba  Jjiud- 
angardya  meina. 

24  I])  si,  usgaggandei,  qa|)  du  aij^ein 
seinai,  Whis  bidyau  1  1]>  si  qa]),  Haub- 
idis  lohannis  J'is  Daupyaudins. 

25  Yah  atgaggandci  sunsaiw  sniumun- 
do  du  Jjamma  biudana,  ba)?,  qi}:andei, 
Wilyau  ei  mis  gibais  ana  mesa  haubi]) 
lohannis  J^is  Daupyandins. 

26  Yah  gaurs  waurjjans  sa  ]jiudans  in 
)iize  a\]>e,  yah  in  ]jize  mij^anakumbyand- 
ane  ni  wikla  izai  ufbrikan  ; 

27  Yah  suns  insandyands  sa  })iudans 
spaikulatur,  anabau]>  briggan  haubi])  is. 
I])  is  galei]iands  afmaimait  imma  haubib 
in  karkarai, 

28  Yah  atljar  ]>ata  haubi])  is  ana  mesa, 
yah  atgaf  ita  })izai  mauyai,  yah  so  mawi 
atgaf  ita  aijiein  seinai. 

29  Yah  gahausyandans  siponyos  is, 
qemun,  yah  usnemun  leik  is,  yah  ga- 
lagidedun  ita  in  hlaiAva. 

3c  Yah  gaiddyeduu  apaustauleis  du 
iesua,  yah  gataihun  imma  allata,  yah 
b-\Ta  lilu  swe  gat.'iwide[dun.'i      .... 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

20  So]>lice  Herodes  ondred  lohannem, 
and  wiste  dset  he  \va3S  rihtwTs  and  halig, 
and  he  heold  bine  on  cwerterne.  And 
he  gehyrde  dset  he  fela  wundra  worhte, 
and  he  kifehce  him  hyrde. 

21  Da  se  dseg  com  Herodes  gebyrd- 
tide,  he  gegearwode  mycele  fcorme  his 
eaklormannum,  and  dam  fyrmestum  on 
GaHlea. 

22  And  tta  da  dajre  Herodiadiscan 
dohtor  inn-eode,  and  tumbode,  hit  licode 
Herode,  and  eaUum  dam  de  him  mid 
sseton,  se  cing  cwse])  du  to  dam  mEedene, 
Bide  me  swa  hwset  swa  du  wyllc,  and  ic 
de  sylle. 

23  And  he  swor  hire,  S6l)es  ic  de 
sylle,  swa  hw?et  swa  du  me  bitst,  deah 
du  wylle  healf  min  rice. 

24  Da  heo  ut-eode,  heo  cwre])  to  byre 
meder,  Hw£es  bidde  ic  1  Da  cwsej)  heo, 
lohannes  heafod  dses  Fulluhteres. 

25  S5na  da  heo  mid  ofeste  in  to  dam 
cyninge  code,  heo  ba?d,  and  dus  cwa?]), 
Ic  wylle  dtet  dii  me  hrtedlice  on  anum 
disce  sylle  lohannes  heafod. 

26  Da  wear])  se  cyning  ge-unvet  for- 
dam  ape,  and  fordam  de  him  mid  sseton 
nolde  deah  hi  ge-unretan  ; 

27  Ac  sende  senne  cwellere,  and  behead 
dset  man  his  heafod  on  anmn  disce 
brohte.  And  he  hine  da  on  cwerterne 
beheafdode, 

28  And  his  heafod  on  disce  brohte, 
and  hit  sealde  dam  msedene,  and  diet 
meeden  hit  sealde  hire  meder. 

29  Da  his  cnihtas  d?et  geliyrdon,  hi 
comon,  aud  his  lie  namon,  and  hine  ou 
byrgene  ledou. 

30  S6])lice  da  da  apostolas  togtedere 
comon,  hi  cyddon  dam  Haelende  call, 
diet  hi  dydon,  and  hi  Iserdon. 

3 1  And  he  Scede  him,  Cuma])  and  uton 
gan  on-sundron  on  Aveste  stowe ;  and  lis 
hwon  restan.  S6])lice  mauega  w?eron 
de  comon,  and  {Igen-hwyrfdou,  and  fyrst 
nrefdon  dtet  hi  seton. 

32  And  on  scyp  st'gende,  hi  foron  ou- 
sundron  on  weste  stowe. 


VL  20-32.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

20  Sothly  Eroiule  drede  John,  witini^c 
liiiu  ;i  iiist  man  and  hooly,  and  kejite 
him.  And  him  lierd,  he  dide  many 
thingis,  and  ghidly  hei'dc  hym. 

2 1  And  Avhannc  a  coucnablc  day  haddc 
falhm,  l-^roude  in  his  birthe  day  made  a 
soupcre  to  the  ])rincis,  and  ti'ibunys, 
and  to  the  firste^  of  Galilee. 

22  And  whanne  the  d()U5tcr  of  thilke 
Erodias  haddo  cntrid  yn,  and  lepte,  and 
pleside  to  Erondc,  and  also  to  men  rest- 
ynge,  the  kyng  seidc  to  the  weuche, 
Axe  thou  of  me  what  thou  wolt,  and  I 
schal  5\-ue  to  thee. 

23  And  he  swoor  to  hir,  Foi*  what 
cuere  thou  schalt  axe,  I  schal  5yue  to 
thee,  thou3  the  half  of  my  kyngdom. 

24  The  Avhiche,  whanne  sche  hadde 
gon  out,  seide  to  hir  modir,  What  schal 
I  axe  ?  And  she  seide,  The  heed  of  John 
Baptist. 

25  And  whanne  she  hadde  cntrid  anon 
with  haste  to  the  kyng.  she  axide,  sey- 
inge,  I  wole  that  anoon  thou  5yue  to  me 
in  a  dische  the  heed  of  John  IJaptist. 

26  And  the  kyng  was  sory  for  the 
ooth,  and  for  men  sittinge  to  gidere  at 
mete  he  wolde  not  hir  be  maad  sory ; 

27  But  a  manquellere  sent,  he  co- 
maundide  the  heed  of  John  Baptist  for 
to  be  brou3t.  And  he  bihedide  him  in 
the  prison, 

28  And  brou5te  his  heed  in  a  dische, 
and  5af  it  to  the  wenche,  and  the  wench 
5af  to  hir  modir. 

29  The  which  thing  herd,  his  disciplis 
camen,  and  token  his  body,  and  puttiden 
it  in  a  buriel. 

30  And  apostlis  comjTige  to  gidere  to 
Jhesu,  tolden  to  hym  alle  thingis,  that 
thei  hadden  don,  and  tau3t. 

31  And  he  seith  to  hem,  Come  3e  by 
50U  selue  in  to  a  desert  place ;  reste  5c 
a  lit  el.  Forsuth  there  wcren  nianye 
that  camen,  and  wenten  a5cn,  and  thei 
hadden  not  space  for  to  cte. 

32  And  thei  sti5ynge  in  to  boot,  Aventen 
in  to  a  desert  place  by  hena  selue. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


T95 


20  For  TIerodc  feared  Jhon,  knowynge 
tiiathcwas  iuste  and  holy,  and  gave  him 
reverence.  And  when  he  herde  him,  he 
did  many  thingcs,  and  herde  him  gladly. 

2 1  And  when  a  convcnyent  daye  was 
come,  Herodc  on  hys  birth  daye  made  a 
supjter  to  the  lordes,  eaptayns,  and  chefe 
estates  of  Gallic. 

22  And  the  doughtcr  of  the  same  Plero- 
dias  cam  in,  and  daunsed,  and  ])leased 
Herode,  and  them  that  sate  att  buurde 
also,  then  the  kingc  sayd  vnto  the 
mayden,  Axe  of  me  what  thou  wilt,  and 
I  will  geve  it  the. 

23  And  he  sware  vnto  her,  What  soever 
thou  shalt  axe  of  me,  I  will  geve  it  the, 
even  vnto  the  one  halfe  of  my  kyngdom. 

24  And  she  went  forth,  and  saydc  to 
her  mother,  What  shall  I  axe  1  And  she 
sayde,  Jhon  Baptistes  heed. 

25  And  she  cam  in  streigth  waye  with 
haste  vnto  the  kinge,  and  axed,  sayinge, 
I  wyll  that  thou  geve  me  by  and  b}-  in 
a  charger  the  heed  of  Jhon  Baptist. 

26  And  the  kinge  was  soiye,  yet  for 
hys  othes  sake,  and  for  their  sakes  which 
sate  att  supper  also  he  wolde  not  put 
her  besyde  her  purjjost ; 

27  And  imniediatly  the  kynge  sent  the 
liangman,  and  commaunded  his  heed  to 
be  brought  in.  And  he  went  and  bo- 
hceded  him  in  the  preson, 

28  And  brought  his  heeddc  in  a 
charger,  and  gave  hit  to  the  mayden, 
and  the  mayden  gave  it  to  her  mother. 

2  (J  When  his  disciples  herde  of  it,  they 
cam,  and  toke  vppe  his  body,  and  2)ut  it 
in  a  toumbc. 

30  And  the  apostles  gaddei'ed  them 
selves  to  geddrc  to  Jesus,  and  tolue  hiu". 
all  thynges,  booth  what  they  had  acne, 
and  what  they  had  taught. 

3 1  And  he  sayd  vnto  them,  Come  ye 
aparte  in  to  the  wyldernes  ;  and  rest  a 
wliyle.  For  there  were  many  commcrs, 
and  goers,  and  they  had  no  leasur  wons 
for  to  cate. 

3  2  And  he  went  by  shippe,  asyde  out 
oli'  the  waye  into  a  desertt  place. 

02 


lOG 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Maek 

33  And  gesawon  lii  farende,  and  hi 
gecneowon  manega,  and  gangende  of 
dam  burgum,  dyder  urnon,  and  him 
Leforan  comon. 

34  And  da  se  H^lend  Ctanon  eode  he 
geseah  mycele  menegu,  and  lie  ge- 
miltsode  him,  fordam  de  hi  wseron  swa 
swa  seep  de  nanne  hyrde  nabbajj.  And 
Ii3  ongan  hi  fela  Iseran. 

35  And  da  hit  mycel  ylding  wses,  his 
leorning-cnihtas  him  to  comon,  and 
ewKdon,  Deos  stow  is  weste,  and  tima 
is  for}i-agun ; 

36  Forlset  das  manegu,  dset  hi  faron 
on  gehende  tunas,  and  him  mete  bicgan 
dset  hi  eton. 


37  Da  cwre|j  he,  Sylle  ge  him  etan. 
Da  cwBedon  hi,  Uton  gan  and  mid  twam 
hundred  penegum  hlafas  bicgan,  and  we 
him  etan  syllajj. 

38  Da  cwsejj  he,  Hu  fela  hlafa  hsebbe 
ge  1  Ga]),  and  15cia]).  And  da  hi  wiston, 
hi  cwsedon,  Fif  hlafas,  and  twegen  fixas. 

39  And  da  behead  se  Hftlend,  dset 
da^t  folc  SJete  ofer  dset  greue  hig. 

40  And  hi  da  sseton,  hundredum,  and 
fiftigum. 

41  And  fif  hlafum,  and  twam  fixum 
onfangenum,  he  on  heofon  locode,  and 
hi  bletsode,  and  da  hlilfas  br?ec,  and 
sealde  his  leorning-cnihtum,  dfet  hi 
toforan  him  asetton.  And  twegen  fixas 
him  eallon  dselde ; 

42  And  hi  Eeton  da  ealle,  and  gefyllede 
wurdon. 

43  And  hi  namon  dara  hlafa,  and  fixa 
lafa,  twelf  wilian  fulle. 


])usend 


dara 


44  Sojjlice    fif 
etendra  wseron.'*' 

45  Da  sona  he  nydde  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  on  scyp  stigan,  doet  hig  him 
befcran  foron  ofer  dsene  mujjan  to  Beth- 
siiida,  od  he  dset  folc  forlete. 

46  And    da    he   hi    forlet,   he    ferde 


I 


VI.  33-46.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

33  And  tlici  sy5on  hem  c;oynge  awey, 
and  nianye  knewon,  and  ^nyngc  on  feet 
fi'o  alio  citecs,  thei  runnen  to  giderc 
tliidir,  and  came  biforc  hem. 

34  And  Jhcsus  goyngc  ont  sy3  mochc 
cunijianye,  and  haddc  mercy  on  hem, 
for  thei  weren  as  seheepe  not  hauynge 
a  shepherde.  And  he  bigan  for  to  teche 
hem  manye  thingis. 

35  And  wlianne  moche  onr  was  niaad 
now,  his  disciplis  camen  ny3,  seyingc, 
This  place  is  desert,  and  now  tlie  our 
hath  passid  ; 

36  Leeue  hem,  that  thei  goynge  in  to 
the  nextc  townes  or  vilagis,  bye  to  hem 
metis  whiche  thei  schulen  etc. 

37  And  he  answerynge  seith  to  hem, 
3}'ue  50  to  hem  for  to  ete.  And  thei 
seidon  to  hym,  Goynge  bye  we  loues 
with  two  hundrid  pens,  and  we  schulen 
5yue  to  hem  for  to  ete. 

38  And  he  seith  to  hem,  Hou  many 
loues  han  ^e  1  Go  5e,  and  se.  And 
whannc  thei  hadden  kno\vun,  thei  seien, 
Fyue,  and  two  fyschis. 

39  And  he  comaundide  to  hem,  that 
thei  schulden  make  alle  men  sitte  to 
mete  aftir  cumpenyes,  vpon  greene  hey. 

40  And  thei  saten  down  by  parties,  by 
hundrid  is,  and  fyfties. 

41  And  the  fyue  looues  taken,  and  two 
fyschis,  he  biholdynge  in  to  heuene, 
blesside,  and  brak  luouis,  and  5af  to  his 
disciplis,  that  thei  schulden  putte  bifore 
hem.  And  he  departide  two  fvschis  to 
alle ; 

42  And  alle  ceten,  and  weren  fillid. 

43  And  thei  token  the  relyues  of 
broken  mete,  twelue  coffyns  full,  and  of 
the  fyschis. 

44  Sothli  thei  that  eeten,  were  fyue 
thousynd  of  men. 

45  And  anon  he  constreyncde  his  dis- 
ciplis for  to  sti5e  vp  in  to  a  boot,  that 
thei  schulden  passe  bifore  him  ouer  the 
see  to  Bethsayda,  the  while  he  lefte  the 
pcple. 

46  And  whanne  he  hadde  left  hem,  he 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


lor 


33  And  the  people  spyed  them  when 
they  departed,  and  many  kncwe  him, 
and  tliey  hasted  afote  thetlicr  out  of 
every  cite,  and  cam  thyther  before  them, 
and  cam  togcdder  vnto  hym. 

34  And  Jesus  went  out  and  sawe  mochc 
people,  and  had  compassion  on  them,  be 
cause  they  were  lykc  shei)e  whych  had 
no  sheppherde.  And  he  began  to  teache 
them  many  thinges. 

35  And  when  the  daye  was  nowc  farre 
spent,  his  disciples  cam  vnto  him,  say- 
ingc,  Thys  ys  a  desert  place,  and  nowe 
the  daye  ys  farre  passed  ; 

^6  Lett  them  departe,  that  they  maye 
goo  in  to  the  countrey  roundc  about 
and  in  to  the  tonnes,  and  bye  them 
breed,  for  they  have  nothinge  to  eate. 

37  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Geve  ye  them  to  eate.  And  they  sayde 
vnto  hym.  Shall  Ave  goo  and  bye  ij.  C. 
penyworth  of  breed,  and  geve  them  to 
eate  ? 

38  He  sayde  vnto  them,  Howe  many 
loves  have  ye  1  Goo,  and  loke.  And 
when  they  had  serched,  they  sayde,  v. 
and  .ij.  fysshes. 

39  And  he  commaunded  them,  to  make 
them  all  sytt  doune  by  companyes,  apon 
the  grenc  grasse. 

40  And  they  sate  doune  here  a  rowe 
and  there  aroAve,  by  houndrcdes,  and  by 
fyfties. 

4 1  And  he  toke  the  v.  loves,  and  the 
.ij.  fysshes,  and  loked  vppe  to  heven, 
and  blest,  and  brake  the  loves,  and  gave 
them  to  hys  disciples,  to  put  before 
them.  And  the  ij.  fysshes  he  devyded 
a  monge  them  all  ; 

42  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satis- 
fyed. 

43  And  they  toke  vppe  twelve  baskctes 
full,  oft'  the  gobbettcs,  and  of  the  fysshes. 

44  And  they  that  ate,  were  about  fyve 
thousand  men. 

45  And  streyght  waye  he  caused  hys 
disciples  to  goo  into  a  shippo,  and  to 
goo  over  the  Avater  before  vnto  Beth- 
saida,  Avhill  lie  sent  awaye^the  people. 

46  And  as  sone  as  he  had  sent  them 


198 


GOTHIC,  360. 


.     .     .  yah  duatsniwun. 

54  Yah  nsgaggandam  ini  us  skipa, 
sunsaiw  ufkunnandans  ina. 

55  Birliniaiidans  all  Jjata  gawi,  duguu- 
nuu  ana  badyam  |ians  ubil  habandans 
bairan,  Jjadei  hausidedun  ei  is  wesi. 

56  Yah  Jiiswhaduh  J^adei  iddya  "in 
liaimos  ai]  J^au  baurgs,  ai]i|,iau  in  weilisa, 
ana  gagga  lagidedun  siukans,  yah  bedun 
"ina,  ei  jjuu  skauta  wastyos  is  attaitok- 
eina ;  yah  swa  raauagai  swe  attaitokun 
iiTQraa.  eanesun. 


Chap.  VII.  i  Yah  gaqerr.un  sik  du 
'ir.irea,  Fareisaieis  yah  sumai  jiize  bok- 
arye  qimandans  us  lau'usaulwmim. 

2  Yali  gasaiwliandans  suraans  p>ize  sip- 
onye  is  gamaiuyaim  handuni,  J)at-ist 
ui:|)wahaiiaim,  matyandans  hlaibans. 

3  I]j    Fareisaleis    yah    allai    ludaieis, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

on    done    munt,    and    hine     ana    clar 
gebsed. 

47  And  da  sefen  Avses,  doet  scyp  wses 
on  middre  sae,  and  he  ana  Avses  on 
iande ; 

48  And  he  geseah  hi  on  rewette  swinc- 
eude ;    him    wies     wider- weard     wind. 

,  And  on  niht  embe  da  feorjsan  wwccan, 
he  com  to  him  ofer  da  see  gangende,  and 
Avolde  In  forbugan. 

49  Da  hi  hine  gesawon  ofer  da  sae 
gangende,  hi  wendon  dset  hit  unfsele 
gast  wsere,  and  hi  clypedon  ; 

50  Hi  ealle  hine  gesawon,  and  wurdon 
gedrefede.  And  sona  he  sprsec  to  him, 
and  cw3e|),  Gelyfa}>,  ic  hit  com ;  ne 
|)iu-fon  ge  eow  ondrsedan. 

51  And  he  on  scyp  to  him  code,  and 
se  wind  geswuc.  And  hi  dies  de  ma 
betwux  him  wuudredon ; 

52  Ne  ongeton  hi  be  dam  hlafum ; 
s6j)lice  heora  heorte  waes  ablend. 

53  And  da  hi  ofer-segledon,  hi  comon 
to  Genesaret,  and  dar  wicedon. 

54  And  da  hi  of  scipe  eodon,  sona  hi 
hine  gecneowon. 

55  And  call  dset  rice  befarende,  hi  on 
sseccingiim  bceron  da  untruman,  dar  hi 
hine  gehyrdon, 

56  And  swil  hwar  swa  he  on  wic  odde 
on  tunas  eode,  on  strseton  hi  da  un- 
truman ledon,  and  hine  bsedon,  dset 
hi  huru  his  refes  fna^d  jet-hrinon ;  and 
swii  fela  swa  hine  set-hrinon,  hi  wui'don 
hale. 


Chap.  VII.  i^  Da  comon  to  him, 
Pharisei  and  sume  boceras  cumeude 
fram  Hierusalem. 

2  And  da  hi  gesawon  sume  of  liis 
leorning-cnihtum  besmitenum  haudum, 
doet  is,  un})wogenum  handum,  etan,  hi 
taeldon  hi  and  cwaedon, 

3  Pharisei  and  ealle   ludeas   ne   eta]?. 


VI.  47-VII.  3.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
wcutc  iu  to  an  liil,  foi*  to  prcie. 

47  And  whaune  ciicnyncj  Avas.  tiic 
boot  was  in  the  myddil  see,  and  he 
aloonc  in  the  lond  ; 

48  And  lie  sy5  hem  trauclinge  in  row- 
yuge ;  sothli  the  wynd  was  contrarie  to 
hem.  And  aboute  the  fonithe  wakinfj 
of  the  ny5t,  he  wandiynqe  on  the  see 
cam  to  hem,  and  woUle  jiasse  hem. 

49  And  thei,  as  thei  sy5cn  liim  wan- 
dn  iige  on  the  sec,  gessiden  for  to  be  a 
fautum,  and  eriedcn ; 

50  Forsoth  alle  sy5en  hym,  and  thei 
weren  distnrblid.  And  anon  he  spak 
with  hem,  and  seide  to  hem,  Triste  36, 
I  am  ;  uyle  50  dredc. 

51  And  he  cam  vp  to  hem  in  to  the 
boot,  and  the  wynd  ceesside.  And  thei 
more  wondriden  with  ynne  hem  ; 

52  For  thei  vndirstodcu  not  of  the 
looues  ;  sothli  her  hei'te  was  blyndid. 

53  And  whanne  thei  hadden  passid 
ouer  the  see,  thei  camen  in  to  the  lond 
of  Genazareth,  and  settcn  to  londe. 

54  And  whanne  thei  hadden  gon  out 
of  the  boot,  anon  thei  knewcn  him. 

55  And  thei  rennynge  thur^  al  that 
cuntree,  bigunnen  to  here  aboute  in 
beddis  hem  that  hadden  hem  yuele, 
where  thei  herden  him  be. 

56  And  whidur  euerc  he  entrlde  yn  to 
vilagis  and  towncs,  or  in  to  citees,  thei 
puttiden  syke  men  in  stretis,  and  ])reie- 
den  him,  that  thei  schulden  touche  either 
the  hem  of  his  eloth  ;  and  how  manye 
euere  touchiden  him,  weren  maad  saf. 


TYNDALE, 


I'j;) 


Chap.  VII.  i  And  Pharisees  and 
summe  of  scribis  comyngc  fro  Jerusa- 
lem, camen  to  gidore  to  him. 

2  And  whanne  thei  hadden  scyn  summe 
of  his  disciplis  ete  breed  with  comune 
hondis,^  thei  blamyden. 

3  Forsoth   Pharisees   and   aile   Jcwis 


awcy,  he  departed  into  a  monutaine  to 
praye. 

47  And  when  even  was  come,  (he  shippc 
was  in  the  myddes  of  the  sec,  and  he 
alone  on  the  londe  ; 

48  And  he  sawe  them  troubled  in  row- 
inge ;  for  the  wynde  was  contrary  vnto 
them.  And  aboute  the  fourth  quartre 
ot  the  nyght,  he  cam  vnto  them  walk- 
inge  apon  the  see,  and  wolde  have  passed 
by  them. 

49  When  they  sawe  him  walkinge  apon 
the  see,  they  supposed  yt  had  bene  a 
sprete,  and  eryed  oute  ; 

50  For  they  all  sawe  hym,  and  they 
were  a  frayed.  And  a  non  he  talked 
with  them,  and  sayde  vnto  them,  T>c  of 
good  chcrc,  it  is  I ;  be  not  afrayed. 

51  And  he  went  vnto  them  into  the 
shippe,  and  the  wynde  ceased.  And 
they  were  sore  amased  in  them  selves 
beyonde  measure  and  marvcyled  ; 

52  For  they  remcmbrcd  nott  off  the 
loves  ;  be  cause  their  liertes  wei'e 
blynded. 

53  And  they  cam  over,  and  went  into 
the  londe  off  Genazareth,  and  drue  vp 
into  the  haven. 

54  And  as  sone  as  they  were  come  out 
off  the  shippe,  streyght  they  knewe  hym. 

55  And  ran  forth  through  out  all  the 
region  rounde  about,  and  began  to  cary 
aboute  in  becddcs  all  that  were  sicke, 
Avhen  they  herde  tell  that  he  was  there. 

56  And  whither  soever  he  entrcd  into 
the  tonnes  or  cites,  or  A^yllages,  they 
leyde  their  sicke  in  the  stretes,  and 
prayed  hyme,  tliatt  they  myght  touche 
and  hit  wcr  but  the  edge  off  hys  vesture; 
and  as  many  as  touched  li}'m  were  sale. 


Chap.  VII.  i  And  the  Piianses  cam 
togedder  vnto  hym,  and  dyvers  off  tiie 
scribes  which  cam  from  Jerusalem. 

2  And  when  they  sawe  certayne  of  hys 
disciples  cate  breed  with  common  handes, 
that  is  to  saye,  with  vmvesshcn  hondcs, 
they  conn)layned. 

3  For  the  Pharises  and  all  the  Jcwes, 


200  GOTHIC,  360. 

niba  ufta  ]>-\valiand  handuns,  iii  matj'and, 
huLandaiis  anafilli  }nze  sinistane. 

4  Yali  af  ma])la,  niba  daupyand,  ni 
matyaud ;  yah  :ui|)ni'  i>t  manag,  )jatei 
andiicmun  du  haban,  daupeinins  stikle, 
yab  aarlvye,  yah  katile,  yah  bigre. 


5  pa]?roh  Ipan  frehun  'ina  {jai  Fareisaieis 
yah  })ai  bokaryos,  Duwlie  |'ai  siponyos 
pcinai  ni  gaggand  bi  |aiiimei  anafulliim 
];ai  siuistans.  ak  unjnvahanaim  handuni 
uiat.yand  hlaif  ? 

6  1])  is  andhafynnds  qa|)  du  im,  patei 
waila  praufetida  Esaias  bi  izwis,  Jans 
butans,  swe  gamelijj  ist,  So  manngei 
Avairilom  mik  sweraij',  i])  haivto  ize  faii'- 
ra  habaif)  sik  mis  ; 

7  1\>  sware  mik  bh)tand,  laisyandans 
biiscinins  anabusnins  manne. 

8  Afletandans  raihtis  anabusn  Gups, 
habai])  ])atei  anafidhun  mannans,  daup- 
einins  auvkye,  yah  stikle ;  yah  an|3ar 
galeik  swaleikata  manag  tauyi]). 

9  Yah  qa{)  du  'im,  Waila  iuwidi])  ana- 
busn Gu])3,  ei  Jiata  anafulhano  izwar 
fastaijj. 

10  Moses  auk  raihtis  qa}',  Swerai  attan 
}>einana  yah  aijjein  ])eina ;  yah  saei  ubil 
qi))ai  attin  seinamma  ai]j])au  aijjein  seinai, 
dau|)au  afdaujjj-aidau. 

1 1  Ij;  yus  qi}'i)',  Yabai  qij)ai  manna 
attin  seinamma  ai}?}'au  aijjein,  Kaurban, 
Jiatei  ist,  Maijjms,  Jjiswhah  Jjatei  us  mis 
gabatnis  : 

12  Yah  ni  fraletij?  ina  ni  waiht  tauyan 
attin  seinamma  ai]:})au  aijiein  seinai, 

13  Blau|)yandans  Avaurd  Gu))s  pizai 
anabusnai  izwavai,  )?oei  anafulhujj ;  yah 
galeik  swaleikata  manag  tauyijj. 


14  Yah  athaitands  alia  Jjo  managein, 
qa|)  im,  Hausei]?  mis  allai,  yah  frajjyaij). 


15  Ni  Avaihts  ist  utajjro  mans  innp;agg- 
ando  in  iiia,  |jatei  magi  ina  gamaiuyan  ; 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

buton  hi  liyra  handa  gelomlice  ])wean, 
healdcnde  hira  yldrena  gesetnessa. 

4  And  on  straete,  hi  ne  eta]?,  buton  hi 
gejjwegene  beon ;  and  manega  oclre 
synd,  de  him  gesette  synd,  fta^t  is  ca- 
licea  fyrm})a,  and  ceaca,  and  ar-fata,  and 
msestlinca. 


5  And  da  acsodon  hine  Phai-isei  and 
da  b5ceras,  Hwi  ne  ga}j  dine  leovning- 
cnihtas  sefter  ure  yldrena  gesetnysse,  ac 
besmitenum  handum  hyra  hliif  J?icga])  1 

6  Da  andswarode  he  him,  Wei  witegode 
Isaias  be  eow,  liccetevum,  swa  hit  awrit- 
en  is,  Dis  Iblc  me  mid  welevum  weorjjaj), 
s6})]ice  hyra  heortc  is  feor  fram  me  ; 

7  On  idel  hi  me  AveorJjiaJ),  and  manna 
lura  and  bebodu  laera]?. 

8  S5])lice  ge  forltetal?  Godes  bebod, 
and  healdajj  manna  laga,  J^Aveala  ceaca, 
and  calica ;  and  manega  odre  dyllice 
))ing  ge  doj). 

9  Da  S3ede  he  him,  Wei  ge  on  idel 
dydon  Godes  bebod,  dfet  ge  eower  laga 
healdon. 

10  Moyses  CAvre]),  Wur]ia  dinne  feder 
and  dine  m5dor ;  and  se  de  Avyrig})  his 
fa^der  and  his  modor,  swelte  se  deajje. 

11  Sojjlice  ge  c^A'eda}),  Gif  liAva  segj> 
his  feder  and  meder,  Corban,  dc'et  is  on 
ure  geJ)eode,  Gyfu  gif  hwylc  is  of  me, 
de  frema|) ; 

12  And  ofer  da^t  ge  ne  Isetajj  hine  senig 
])ing  don  his  feeder  odde  meder, 

13  Toslitende  Godes  bebod  for  eoA\'er 
stuntan  lage,  de  ge  gesetton ;  and  mane- 
ga odre  ])ing  dyssum  gelice  ge  d5j). 


14  And  eft  da  manegu  he  him  to 
clypode,  and  cwsejj,  Gehj'ra]?  me  calle, 
and  ongyta]). 

15  Nys  nan  })ing  of  dam  men  on  hine 
gangeude,  dyet  hine  besmitan  mcege ;  ac 


VII.  4-15]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

ctcu  not,  no  but  thei  waissclicn  ofte 
her  liondis,  hoklinge  tlie  tradiciouns^ 
of  elderc  men. 

4  And  thei  turnyngc  a5cn  fro  cliepynije, 
cten  not,  no  but  tliei  ben  waischun ; 
and  nianyc  othere  thin^is  l)on,  that  ben 
takun  to  hem  for  to  kepe,  waisohingis 
of  t'uppis,  and  cnietis,  and  of  vessels  of 
bras,  and  of  beddis. 

5  And  Pharisees  and  scribis  axiden 
him,  seyinge,  AVhi  gon  not  thi  disci])lis 
aftir  the  tradicioun  of  cldere  men,  but 
with  comyne  hondis  thei  eten  bred  ] 

6  And  he  answeringe  seide  to  hem, 
Ysaie  propheciede  wcl  of  50U,  ypocritis, 
as  it  is  Avritun,  This  pcplc  Avorscliipith 
nic  with  bppis,  forsothe  her  herte  is  fer- 
fro  me ; 

7  In  vcyn  trcwli  thei  worsehipen  mc, 
teohinge  doctrinys  and  preccptis  of  men. 

8  Forsoth  5e  forsakinge  the  maunde- 
ment  of  God,  holden  the  tradicioims  of 
men,  waischiugis  of  cruetis,  and  cuppis ; 
and  manye  othere  thingis  lyke  to  thes 
5e  don. 

9  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Wcl  56  han 
niaad  tlic  maundement  of  God  voyde, 
that  5e  kepe  5oure  tradicioun. 

10  Forsoth  Moyscs  seide,  Worschipe 
thi  fadir  and  thi  modir  ;  and  he  that 
schal  curse  fadir  or  modir,  by  dceth 
deie  he. 

1 1  Sothli  5e  seyen,  If  a  man  schal  seye 
to  fadir  or  to  modir,  Corban,  that  is, 
"What  eueve  3ifte  of  me,  schal  profite  to 
thee ; 

1 2  And  oner  56  suflfren  not  him  do  ony 
thing  to  fadir  or  modir, 

13  iirekynge  the  word  of  God  by 
50urc  tradicioun,  that  ■^c  han  5ouun ; 
and  5c  don  manye  othei'c  siiche  thingis. 


14  And  he  eftsoone  clcpingc  to  the 
cmnpanye  of  peple,  seide  to  hem,  5e  alle 
heerc  me,  and  vndirstoudcu. 

15  No  thing  with  onten  man  is  entr- 
inge  in  to  him,  that  may  dcfoule  him ; 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


201 


exceptc  they  washo  their  handes  ofte, 
cate  not,  obscrvinge  the  tradicions  of 
the  scniours. 

4  And  when  they  come  from  the  mar- 
kett,  except  they  washc  them  selves, 
they  eatc  not  ;  and  many  other  thinges 
there  be,  which  they  have  taken  apon 
them  to  observe,  as  the  wasshinge  of 
cuppes,  and  cruses,  and  of  brascn  vessels, 
and  of  tables. 

5  Then  axed  hym  the  Pharlses  and 
scribes,  Why  walke  not  thy  disciples 
accordinge  to  the  tradicions  of  the  scni- 
ours, butt  eate  breede  with  vnwesshen 
hondes 1 

6  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Well  jirophesied  hath  Esayas  of  you, 
ypocrytes,  as  it  is  wi-ittcn.  This  people 
lionoreth  me  with  their  lyppes,  but  their 
hert  is  farre  from  mc  ; 

7  In  vayne  they  worshippe  me,  teach- 
inge  doctryns  which  are  nothinge  but 
the  commandemcntcs  off  men. 

8  For  ye  laye  the  eonunandemcnt  of 
God  aparte,  and  ye  observe  the  tradi- 
cions of  men,  as  the  Avessinge  off  cruses, 
and  off  cuppes ;  and  many  other  suche 
lyke  thinges  ye  do. 

9  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Well  ye 
putt  awaye  the  commandement  of  God, 
to  mayntayne  yoiu-e  owne  tradecions. 

10  For  !Moses  sayde,  Honoure  thy 
father  and  thy  mother ;  and  whosoever 
sayeth  evyll  to  his  father  or  mother,  let 
hym  dey  for  it. 

1 1  But  ye  saye,  A  man  shall  saye  to 
his  father  or  mother,  Corban,  that  is. 
Whatsoever  thynge  I  offer,  that  same 
doetli  profht  the  ; 

1 2  And  ye  soflre  no  more  that  a  man 
do  cny  thynge  for  his  father  or  mother, 

13  And  thus  have  ye  made  the  com- 
maundcmcnt  off  God  off  none  effecte 
throu'di  youre  aAvne  tradicions,  which 
ye  have  ordeyncd  ;  and  many  sochc 
thynges  ye  do. 

14  And  he  called  all  the  people  vnto 
hym,  and  sayde  vnto  tliem,  Herken 
vnto  me  every  one  off  you,  and  vuder- 
stonde. 

1.5  There  is  no  thynge  with  outt  a 
man,  that   can  diffyle  hym,  when  hitt 


202 


GOTHIC,  qoo. 


ak  ]->ata  utgacfo'ando  iis  mann,  ]?ata  ist 
Jjata  gamainyaudo  mannan. 

1 6  Tabai  whas  Labai  ausona  hausyand- 
oua,  g'ahausyai. 

17  Yah  }iau  galaijj  in  gai'd,  us  jjizai 
manage]  n,  frcliun  ina  siponyos  is  bi  j^o 
gayukon. 

18  Yah  qa})  du  im,  Swa  yah  yus  un- 
wifcans  siyujj  1  Ni  fraj^yi]?,  {lammei  all 
Jjata  uta|5ro  inngaggaudo  in  mannan,  ni 
mag  ina  gamalnyan  1 

19  Unte  ni  galei}u|j  imma  in  liairto, 
•ak  in  wamba,  yah  in  urrunsa  usgaggi]?, 
gahrainei]^  allans  matins. 

20  Qajni|)-})an,  patei  j^ata  us  mann 
usgaggaudo,  }jata  gamaineijj  mannan. 

21  Inna}-ro  auk,  us  hairtin  manne 
mitoneis  ubilos  usgaggand,  kalkinassyus, 
lioi-inassyus,  maurj)ra, 

22  piubya,  faihufrikeins,  unseleins, 
liutei,  aglaitei,  augo  unsel,  wayamereins, 
liauhhairtei,  unwiti. 

23  po  alia  ubiloua  inna)n-o  usgaggand, 
yah  gagamainyand  mannan. 

24  Yah  yainjjro  usstandands,  galaijj  in 
markos  Twre  yah  Seidone.  Yah  ga- 
lei|;ands  in  gai'd,  ni  wilda  witan  mannan; 
yah  ni  mahta  galaugnyan. 

25  Gahausyandei  raihtis  qinobi  ina, 
|)izozei  habaida  dauhtar  ahman  un- 
iirainyaua,  qimandei,  draus  du  fotum  is. 

26  Wasu)5-))an  so  qino  haijjno,  Saurini 
fwnikiska  gabaurjjai.  Yah  baj)  ina,  ei 
J)0  unhuljjon  uswaurpi  us  dauhtr  izos. 

27  I]>  lesus  qaj)  du  izai.  Let  faur]jis 
sada  wairljan  barna ;  unte  ni  go)?  ist 
niman  hlaib  barne,  yah  wairpan  hund- 
am. 

28  Ip  si  andhof  imma,  yah  qaj?  du 
inima,  i^ai,  Frauya ;  yah  auk  hundos 
unclaro  biuda  matyand,  af  drauhsnom 
barne. 

29  Yah  qa}j  du  izai.  In  |jis  waurdis 
gagg,  usiddya  unhul})0  us  dauhtr  Jjeinai. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

da  j)ing  (le  of  dam  men  for))-ga]>,   da 
hine  besmita]?. 

1 6  Gif  hwa  earan  boebbe,  gehlyste  me. 

17  And  da  se  Heelend  fram  dsere 
menegu  eode,  his  leoi-ning-cnihtas  hine 
an  bigspel  Jicsodon. 

18  Da  cwae))  he,  And  synd  ge  dus  un- 
gleawe  1  Ne  ongyte  ge,  dset  call  da3t 
iitan  cym)?  on  done  man  gangende,  ne 
mseg  hine  besmitan  1 

19  Fordam  hit  ne  g?e)j  on  his  heortan, 
ac  on  his  innoj?.  and  on  fbr|;-gang  ge- 
■witej),  ealle  mettas  clsensigende. 

20  Da  ssedc  he  him,  Dset  da  }-ing  de 
.  of  dam  men  ga]?,  da  hine  besmita]?. 

21  Innan,  of  manna  heortan  yfele  ge- 
])ancas  cuma|>,  unriht-haemedu,  and  for- 
ligeru,  uianslihtas, 

22  [Stala,]  gltsung,  man,  facnu,  sceam- 
least,  yfel  gesih)),  dysinessa,  ofer-modig- 
nessa,  stuntscipe. 

23  And  ealle  das  yfelu  of  dam  innode 
cuma]?,  and  done  man  besmitajj. 

24  Da  ftrde  he  danon  on  da  endas 
Tyri  and  Sidonis.  And  he  in-agan  on 
dset  bus,  he  nolde  dset  hit  senig  wiste ; 
and  he  ne  mihte  hit  bemi];an. 

25  Sona  da  an  wif,  be  him  gehyrde, 
dtere  dohtor  hasfde  unclsenne  gast,  heo 
in-eode,  and  to  his  fotum  hi  astrehte. 

26  Sojjlice  dset  wif  wses  haeden,  Siro- 
fenisces  cynnes.  And  ba?d  hine,  dtet  he 
done  deofol  of  hyi-e  dehter  adrife. 

27  Da  ssede  he  hire,  Lset  serest  da 
beam  beon  gefylled ;  nis  na  god  dset 
man  nime  dara  bearna  hlaf,  and  hundum 
werpe. 

28  Da  andswarode  heo,  and  cwse};, 
Drihten,  dast  is  soJj  ;  witodlice  da  hwelp- 
as  etaj)  under  dsere  mysan,  of  dara 
cilda  cvuman, 

29  Da  ssede  he  hyre,  For  dsere  sprsece 
ga,  nu  se  deofol  of  dinre  dehter  gewit. 


VII.  1 6-2 9.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

but  tlio  thin^is  that  coiucii  forth  of  man, 
tho  it  bcu  that  dcfoulon  a  niau. 

1 6  Forsoth  if  ony  man  haiie  coris  of 
heeringo,  hcere  he. 

1  7  And  whannc  he  hadclc  cntriil  in  to 
an  hous,  fro  the  cumpany  of  jicplc,  his 
tlisciplis  axidcn  him  the  parable. 

18  And  he  seith  to  hem,  So  and  ^c  ben 
vnprudcnt.^  Vndirstonden  ^c  not,  for 
al  thing  withoute  forth  entringe  in  to 
a  man,  may  not  dofoule  him  1 

19  For  it  hath  not  cntrid  into  his 
hertc,  but  in  to  the  wombe,  and  byuethe 
it  goth  out,  purgynge  alle  metis. 

20  Sothli  he  scide.  For  the  thingis 
that  gon  out  of  a  man,  tho  defoxilen  a 
man. 

2  1  Forsoth  fro  withynne,  of ■  the  hcrte 
of  men  comen  forth  yuele  tliou5tis,  auou- 
tries,  fornicaciouns,  mansleyngis, 

22  Theftis,  couetises,''"  wickidnesses, 
gyle,  vuehastitc,  yuel  y3e,  blasphemyes, 
pride,  folye. 

23  Alle  thes  jTiclis  fro  withynne  comen 
forth,  and  defoulen  a  man. 

24  And  Jhesus  risynge  thennis,  wente 
in  to  the  endes  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  And 
he  gon  in  to  an  hows,  wolde  no  man 
wite  ;  and  he  mi5tc  not  dare.^ 

25  Sothli  a  womman,  anon  as  sche 
herde  of  him,  which  wommanis  dou3tir 
hadde  an  vncleue  spirit,  entride,  and  fel 
doun  at  his  feet. 

26  Sothli  the  womman  was  hcthene, 
of  the  generacioun  of  Sirefen.  And  she 
preide  liim,  that  he  wolde  caste  out  a 
deuel  fro  hir  doujtir. 

27  The  which  seide  to  hir,  SufTre  thou 
the  sones  be  fulfild  first ;  it  is  not  good 
to  take  the  bred  ot  sones,  and  sende  to 
houndis. 

28  And  she  answeride,  and  scidc  to  him, 
Forsothe,  Lord  ;  for  whi  and  litlc  welpis 
eten  vndir  the  bord,  of  the  crummes  of 
children. 

29  And  Jhesus  seith  to  hir.  For  this 
word  go,  the  fend  is  went  out  of  thi 
dou3tir. 


TYNDALF,  ir^7  6. 


203 


cntrcth  in  to  hym  ;  but  thoo  thyngcs 
wliich  proccdc  out  of  a  man  are  those 
which  defyle  a  man. 

1 6  Yf  eny  man  have  cares  to  hcare,  let 
hyni  hcare. 

17  And  when  he  cam  into  a  liousse, 
awaye  from  the  jicople,  his  disciples  axed 
him  of  the  similitude. 

18  And  he  sayd  vnto  them,  Do  ye  then 
hicke  vnderstondinge  1  Do  ye  not  yet 
perceave,  that  whatsoever  thinge  from 
with  out  entreth  into  a  man,  hit  can 
not  defyle  hym  1 

19  Be  cause  hit  entrith  not  into  his 
hert,  but  into  the  belly,  and  goctli  out 
into  the  draught,  that  porgeth  oute  all 
meates. 

20  And  he  sayde.  That  dcfileth  a  man, 
whiche  cometh  oute  of  a  man. 

21  For  from  Avithin,  even  oute  off  the 
herte  off  men  i^roceade  evyll  thoughtes, 
advoutry,  fornicacion,  murder, 

22  Theeft,  coveteousncs,  wickcdnes, 
diceyte,  vnclcnnes,  and  a  wicked  eye, 
blasphemy,  pryde,  folisshnes. 

23  All  these  evyll  thynges  com  from 
with  in,  and  defile  a  man. 

24  And  from  thence  he  rose,  and  went 
into  the  borders  off'  Tire  and  Sidon. 
And  cntred  into  an  housse,  and  wolde 
that  no  man  shulde  have  knowen  off" 
hym ;  butt  he  culde  nott  be  hid. 

25  For  a  certayne  woman,  whose 
doughter  had  a  foule  S])rete,  when  slse 
herde  off  hym,  cam,  and  fell  doune  att 
hys  fete. 

26  The  woman  was  a  grcke.  out  off 
Sirophenicia.  And  she  besought  hym. 
that  he  wolde  caste  out  the  devyll  out 
off  her  doughter. 

27  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Lett  the 
chyldren  fyrst  be  feed  ;  it  ys  nott  meto 
to  take  the  chyldrens  breed,  and  to 
caste  itt  vnto  whelppes. 

28  She  answered,  and  sayde  vnto  hym, 
Even  soo,  ^Master ;  ncverthclcsse  the 
whelj)pes  also  eate  vnder  the  table,  off' 
the  chyldrens  cromes. 

29  And  he  sayde  vnto  her,  For  thys 
sayinge  goo  thy  waye,  the  devyll  ys  goa 
out  off"  thy  doughter. 


204  GOTHIC,  360. 

30  Yali  galcijjandei  du  garda  seinam- 
ma,  bigat  unhulljon  usgaggana,  yah  J^o 
daulitar  ligandein  ana  ligra. 

31  Yah  aftra  galeijjands  af  markom 
Twre  yah  Seidone,  qam  at  marein  Ga- 
leilaie,  mi|)  tweihnaim  markom  Dalka- 
paulaios. 

32  Yah  berun  du  imma  bandana  stam- 
mana,  yah  bedun  ina,  ei  lagidedi  imma 
handau. 

33  Yah  afnimands  lua  af  managein 
snndro,  lagida  figgrans  seinans  in  ansona 
imma;  yah  spewands  attaitok  tuggon  is. 

34  Yah  iissaiwhands  du  himina,  ga- 
STvogida,  yah  qa]>  du  imma,  AifFajja, 
jjatei  ist,  Ushikn, 

35  Yah  sunsaiw  usluknodedun  imma 
hliumans,  yah  andbundnoda  bandi  tugg- 
ons  is,  yah  rodida  raihtaba. 

36  Yah  anabau]}  im,  ei  mann  ni  qe})- 
eina ;  whan  filu  is  im  anabau]?,  mais 
Jiamma  eis  meridedun, 

37  Yah  ufarassau  sildaleikidedun,  qij?- 
andans,  Waila  allata  gatawida,  yah 
baudans  gatauyi|j  gahausyan,  yah  un- 
rodyandans  rodyan. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  In  yainaim  j^an  dag- 
am,  aftra  at  filu  managai  managein 
wisandcin,  yah  ni  habandam  wha  mati- 
dedeina,  athaitands  siponyans,  qajmh  du 
im, 

2  Infeinoda  du  |)izai  managein,  unte 
yu  dagans  ])rins  mij)  mis  wesun,  yah  ni 
habaud  "\vha  matyaina ; 

3  Yah  yabai  fraleta  ins  lausqi}?rans  du 
garda  ize,  ufligand  ana  wigja ;  sumai 
niihtis  ize  fairrajjro  qemun. 

4  Yah  andhofun  imma  siponyos  is, 
AVhaJjro  Jians  mag  Avhas  gaso]>yan  hlaib- 
am  ana  au]iidai  1 

5  Yah  frah  ins.  Whan  managans  habai}) 
hlaibans  1     I]j  eis  qejjun,  Sibun. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

30  And  da  heo  on  hyre  bus  eode,  heo 
gemette  dset  meeden  on  hire  bedde 
licgende,  and  done  deofol  ut-gan.''' 

3 1  And  eft  he  eode  of  Tyra  gemserum, 
and  com  ])urh  Sidonem  to  dsere  Gahleisc- 
an  sse,  betwux  midde  endas  Decapoleos. 

32  And  hi  leeddon  him  Eenne  deafne 
and  dumbne,  and  hine  bsedon,  dset  he 
his  hand  him  on  asette. 

33  Da  nam  he  hine  onsundran  of  dsei'e 
menigu,  and  his  fingras  on  his  earan 
dyde  j  and  spaetende  his  tungan  onhran. 

34  And  on  done  heofon  behealdende, 
geomrode,  and  cwse)),  Effeta,  dset  is  on 
lire  gejjeode,  Sy  du  ontyned, 

35  And  sona  wurdon  Ids  earan  ge- 
openode,  and  his  tungan  bend  wear{> 
unslyped,  and  he  rihte  spraec. 

36  And  he  bead  him,  daet  hi  hit  nanum 
men  ne  SEedon;  s5|jKce  swii  he  him 
swidor  behead,  swa  hi  swdor  bodedon, 

37  And  dfes  de  ma  wundredon,  and 
cwsedon,  Ealle  ])ing  he  wel  dyde,  and  he 
dyde  dcet  deafe  gehyrdon,  and  dumbe 
sprsecon. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  ^  Eft  on  dam  dagum, 
him  wpes  mid  micel  menigu,  and  nsefdon 
hw?et  hi  ceton,  da  cwse])  he,  to  somne 
geclypedum  his  leorning-cnihtum, 

2  Ic  gemiltsige  dysse  menegu,  fordam 
hi  )ny  dagas  me  ge-anbidia]?,  and  nabbajj 
hwset  hi  eton  ; 

3  Gif  ic  hi  fssstende  to  hyra  husum 
Isete,  be  wege  hi  geteorigea^ ;  sume  hi 
comon  feorran. 

4  And  da  andswarodon  him  his  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas,  Hwanon  mseg  senig  niau 
das  mid  hlafum  on  disum  westene  ge- 
fyllan  ? 

5  Da  axode  he  hi,  Hu  fela  hlafa  haebbe 
ge  1     Hi  cwsedon,  Seofon. 


VII.  3o.-Vin.  5.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

30  And  whanue  slie  haildc  gou  horn, 
she  fond  tlie  wenclie  sittingc  on  the 
bcdd,  and  the  deucl  gon  out  fro  hir. 

31  And  cftsoone  Jhesus  go}nge  out 
fro  the  cndis^  of  Th-o,  cam  thuvj  Sidt)a 
to  the  see  of  Galilee,  that  is  bitwixe  the 
niyddil  endis  of  Dccapoleos. 

33  And  thci  lecden  to  him  a  dcef  man 
and  doumb,  and  prciedcn  him,  that  he 
putte  to  him  the  hond. 

33  And  he  takynge  him  asydis  fro  the 
cumpanyc,  sente  his  fyngris  in  to  his 
litle  ccris ;  and  spetingc  towchide  his 
tungc. 

34  And  he  biholdynge  in  to  lieuenc, 
sorwide  withynne,  and  seith,  Effeta,  that 
is,  Be  thou  openyd, 

35  And  anon  liis  eeris  weren  openyd, 
and  the  bond  of  his  tunge  is  unbounden, 
and  he  spak  ri5tly. 

36  And  he  comaundide  to  hem,  that 
tbei  schulden  seye  to  no  man ;  forsoth 
how  moche  he  comaundide  to  hem,  so 
moche  more  thei  prechiden  more, 

37  And  by  that  the  more  thei  won- 
driden,  seyingc,  He  dide  wel  alle  thiugis, 
and  deef  men  he  made  to  heere,  and 
doumbe  for  to  speke. 


TYNDALE,  J526. 


205 


Chap.  VIII.  i  In  tho  daycs,  whanne 
moche  cumpenye  of  peple  was  with  Jhe- 
su,  and  hadde  not  what  thei  schulden 
cte.  his  disciplis  gaderid  to  gidcre,  he 
seith  to  hem, 

2  I  haue  rewthe  on  the  cumpanyc  of 
peple,  for  loo  1  now  the  thridde  day 
thei  susteynen^  me,  and  ban  not  what 
thci  schulen  ete  ; 

3  And  if  I  leeue  hem  fastinge  in  to 
her  hous,  thei  schulen  fade  in  the  weye  3 
forsothe  summe  of  hem  camcn  fro  fcr. 

4  And  disciplis  answeriden  to  him, 
TVlierof  a  man  schal  mowe  fiUe  hem 
with  looues  here  in  wildirnesse  ? 

5  And  he  axide  hem,  How  manye  looucs 
ban  30 1   The  whiche  seiden,  Seuene. 


30  And  when  she  was  conic  home  to 
her  housse,  she  foundc  the  dcvyll  de- 
j>artcd,  and  her  doughter  lyinge  on  the 
Deed. 

31  And  he  departed  agayne  from  the 
coostcs  off  Tyre  and  tSydon,  and  caju 
vnto  the  see  oifGalile,  tin-owe  the  myddes 
off  the  coostes  off  the  .x.  cites. 

32  And  they  brought  vnto  him  won 
that  was  deffe  and.  stambred  in  liys 
speche,  and  prayde  hym,  to  layc  hys 
honde  apon  hym. 

33  And  he  toke  hym  a  sydc  from  the 
people,  and  putt  hys  fyngers  in  hys 
eares ;  and  did  spet  and  touched  his 
tounge. 

34  And  loked  vp  to  heven,  and  syghed, 
and  sayde  vnto  hym,  Ephatha,  that  }s 
to  saye.  Be  openned, 

35  And  streyght  waye  hys  cares  were 
openned,  and  the  stringe  off  hys  tounge 
was  loosed,  and  he  spake  playne. 

36  And  he  commaunded  them,  that 
they  shulde  tell  no  man  ;  butt  the  more 
he  forbad  them,  soo  moche  the  more  a 
greate  deale  they  pubblessed  it, 

37  And  were  beyonde  measure  astonyed, 
sayingc,  He  hath  done  all  thinges  Avell, 
and  hath  made  booth  the  deffe  to  heare, 
and  the  dom  to  speake. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  In  those  dayes,  when 
there  was  a  very  greate  com])anye,  and 
had  nothinge  to  eate,  Jesus  called  hys 
disciples  to  hym,  and  sayd  vnto  them, 

2  My  herte  meltcth  on  this  people,  be 
cause  they  have  nowe  bene  wyth  me  iij. 
dayes,  and  have  nothinge  to  cate  ; 

3  And  yf  I  shulde  sonde  them  awaye 
fastinge  to  their  awnc  houses,  they  shulde 
faynt  by  the  waye ;  for  dyvcrs  of  them 
cam  from  farre. 

4  And  hys  disciples  answered  hym, 
From  whence  myght  a  man  sufiyse  them 
with  breed  here  in  the  wyldcrncs  1 

5  And  he  axed  them,  Ilowe  many  loves 
have  ye  1    They  sayde,  Seven. 


206 


GOTHIC,  360. 


6  Yah  anabau])  ])izai  managein  ana- 
kumbyan  ana  airjmi.  Yah  uimands  Jmns 
sibun  hlaibans,  yah  awiliudonds,  gabrak, 
yah  atgaf  siponyam  seinaim,  ei  atlagi- 
dedeina  faur.     Yah  atlagidedun  faui-  ])0 


manaGfem. 


7  Yah  habaidedun  fiskans  fawaiis  ;  yah 
fians  ga))iu}>yands,  qa]?  ei  atlagidedeina 
yah  \>ims. 

8  Gainatidedun  ):an,  yah  sadai  waur])un ; 
yah  usnemun  laibos  gabruko,  sibun 
spwreidans. 

9  Wesunu|)-|}an  ])ai  matyandans,  swe 
fldwor  {)iisundyos  ;  yah  fralailot  'ins. 

10  Yah  galai|7  sunsaiw  'in  skip,  mi{) 
siponyam  seinaim,  yah  qam  ana  fera 
Magdahm. 

11  Yah  urrunnun  Fareisaieis,  yah  du- 
gunnun  mi];sokyan  'imma,  sokyandaus  du 
'imma  taikn  us  himiua,  fraisaudans  ina. 

12  Yah  ufswogyands  ahmin  seinamma, 
qa)5,  Wha  J^ata  kuni  taikn  sokei};  1 
Amen  qijia  'izwis,  yabai  gibaidau  kunya 
J^amma  taikne. 

13  Yah  afletands  'ins,  galeij^ands  aftra 
'in  skip,  uslaijj  hindar  marein. 

14  Yah  ufarmunnodedun  niman  hlaib- 
ans, yah  niba  ainana  hlaif  ni  habaidedun 
mi|;  sis  'in  skipa. 

15  Yah  anabau]?  "im,  qijjands,  Saiwhij), 
ei  atsaiwhij;  izwis  })is  beistis  Fareisaie, 
yah  beistis  Herodis. 

16  Yah  pahtedun  nii|)  sis  misso,  qi]j- 
andans,  Unte  hlaibans  ni  habam. 

17  Yah  frajjyands  lesus,  qa}>  du  'im, 
Y/ha  |;aggkei);,  unto  hlaibans  ni  habaij)  1 
Ni  nauh  fraj^yi)?,  nih  Avitu]? ;  unte  daub- 
ata  habai})  hairto  'izwar. 

18  Augona  habandans,  ni  gasaiwhijj, 
yah  ausona  habandans,  ni  gahauseijj ; 
yah  ni  gamunuj), 

19  pan  ))ans  fimf  hlaibans  gabrak  fimf 
pusundyom,  whan  manages  tainyons 
fullos  gabruko  usnemuj)  1  Qejjun  du 
"imma,  Twalif. 

20  Aj)})an    J-an    ]  ans    sibun    hlaibans 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Maxk 

6  Da  het  he  sittan  da  menegu  ofev  da 
eorjjan.  And  nam  da  seofon  hlafas,  and 
Gode  I'ancode,  and  hi  brsec,  and  sealde 
his  leorning-cnihtum,  dset  hi  toforan 
him  asetton.     And  hi  swa  dydon. 

7  And  hi  nsefdon  buton  feawa  fixa  • 
and  he  da  bletsode,  and  het  beforan  him 
settan. 

8  And  hi  seton,  and  wurdon  gefyllede ; 
and  hi  namon  disdt  of  dam  brytsenum 
belaf,  seofon  wilian  fulle. 

9  S6])lice  da  de  dar  seton,  wteron  fif 
Jjusend  ;  and  he  hi  da  forlet. 

10  And  sona  he  on  scyp,  mid  his 
leorning-cnihtum,  astah,  and  com  on 
da  dselas  Dalmanujja. 

1 1  And  da  ferdon  da  Pharisei,  and 
ongunnon  mid  him  smeagean,  and  taceu 
of  heofone  s5hton,  and  his  fandedon. 

12  Da  cwpejj  he,  geomriende  on  his 
gaste,  Hwi  sec))  deos  cneoris  tacenl 
Soj^lice  ic  eow  secge,  ne  bijj  disse 
cneorisse  tacen  geseald. 

13  And  hi  da  forlaetende,  eft  on  scyp 
astah,  and  ferde  ofer  done  muj^an. 

14  And  hi  ofergeton  dset  hi  hlafas  ne 
namon,  and  hi  naefdon  on  scype  mid 
him  buton  senne  hlaf. 

1 5  And  he  him  bead,  and  cw0e|>,  Lociaj), 
and  AvarniaJ)  fram  Pharisea,  and  Herodes 
hsefe. 

16  Da  ])ohton  hi  betwux  him,  and 
cwEedon,  Nasbbe  we  nane  hlafas. 

1 7  Da  se  Hselend  dset  wiste,  he  cwae]), 
Hwjet  ]jence  ge,  fordam  ge  hlafas  nab- 
ha\>  1  Gyt  ge  ne  oncnawa)),  ne  ne 
ongyta)) ;  gyt  ge  habba)>  eowre  heortan 
geblende. 

18  Eagan  ge  habba}),  and  ne  geseojj, 
and  earan,  and  ne  gehyraj) ;  ne  ge  ne 
}jenca)>, 

19  Hwpenne  ic  brpec  fif  hlafas  and 
twegen  fixas,  and  hu  fela  wyligena  ge 
namon  fulle  1     Hi  cwcedon  da,  Twelfe. 

20  And  hwajnne  seofon  hlafas  feower 


Vlir.  6-20.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

6  Aiul  he  comaumlide  the  cumpanye 
to  sitt  doun  on  the  crtlic.  And  he 
takynLTc  soucue  looues,  and  doynge 
thankynges,  brak,  and  ^af  to  his  dis- 
ciplis,  that  thei  schuldon  putte  forth. 
And  thoi  settcn  fortli  to  the  cunipany. 

7  And  thei  Iiadden  a  fowe  sinale  iischis  ; 
aud  he  blesside  hem,  and  comaundide 
for  to  bo  put  forth. 

8  And  thei  eetcn,  and  ben  fiilfild  ;  and 
thei  token  vp  that  lefte  of  relyf/  scuene 
leepis. 

9  Forsoth  thei  that  eeten,  •\veren  as 
loure  thousand  of  men ;  and  he  lefte 
hem. 

JO  And  anon  he  wente  vp  in  to  a 
boot,  with  his  <lisciplis,  and  earn  iu  to 
the  partis  of  Dahnamytha. 

1 1  And  Pharisees  wcnten  out,  and  bi- 
gunnen  to  seke"'  with  him,  axynge  a 
tokene  of  hym  fro  heueue,  temptinge 
liym. 

12  And  he  sorwynge  withynne  in 
spirit,  seith,  What  sekith  this  genera- 
cioun  a  tokene  1  Treuly  I  seie  to  30U, 
if  a  tokene  schal  be  jouun  to  this  gene- 
rdcioun. 

13  And  he  leeuynge  hem,  wente  vp 
cftsoone  in  to  a  boot,  and  wente  ouer 
the  sec. 

1 4  And  thei  for5aten  to  take  breed, 
and  thei  hadden  not  with  hem  no  but  o 
loof  in  the  boot. 

15  And  he  comaundide  to  hem,  sey- 
inge,  Se  ^e,  and  be  30  war  of  the  sour- 
dow3  of  Pharisees,  and  sourdow5  of 
Eroude. 

16  And  thei  thou5ten  oon  to  another, 
seiynge.  For  we  lian  not  breed. 

17  The  which  thing  knowun,  Jhesus 
seith  to  hem.  What  thenke  36,  for  30 
hau  not  Ijreed  ]  3it  30  knowen  not,  ne 
vndirstonden ;  3it  36  ban  50ure  herte 
blyndid. 

iS  3e  hauynge  y5en,  seen  not,  and  38 
hauynge  eeris,  hcercn  not ;  nether  30 
ban  myndc, 

19  ^\'hanne  I  brak  fyue  looues  in  to 
fiue  thousande,  and  hou  manye  coffyns 
ful  of  brokene  mete  50  token  vp  1  Thei 
seyu  to  him,  Tweluc. 

20  Whanne  and  seucne  looues  in  to 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


20: 


6  And  he  comraaundcd  the  pcojtlc  to 
sitt  dounc  on  the  grounde.  And  lie  toke 
the  .vii.  loves,  gave  thankes,  brake,  and 
gave  to  hys  disciples,  to  set  before  them. 
And  they  sett  them  before  the  people. 

7  And  they  had  a  fcawe  smale  fysshes  ; 
and  he  blessed  them,  and  commaunded 
them  also  to  be  sett  before  them. 

8  They  ate,  and  were  suffysed  ;  and 
they  toke  vp  oft"  the  broken  meate  that 
was  lefte,  vij.  basketes  full. 

9  They  that  ate,  were  in  nombcr  aboute 
fo^vI•c  thousandt  ;  and  he  sent  them 
awaye. 

10  And  a  non  he  toke  shippe,  whith 
his  disciples,  and  cam  in  to  the  parties 
of  Dalmanutha. 

1 1  And  the  Pharises  cam  forth,  and 
began  to  dispute  whith  hym,  and  sought 
of  hym  a  sigue  from  heven,  temptinge 
him. 

12  And  he  syghed  in  his  sprete,  and 
!   sayde,  Why  doth  thys  generacion  seke 

a  signe  1  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  there 
shall  no  signe  be  geveu  vnto  thys  gene- 
racion. 

13  And  he  lefte  them,  and  went  into 
the  shippe  agayne,  and  departed  over 
the  water. 

14  And  they  had  forgotten  to  take 
breed  with  them,  nether  had  they  in  the 
shippe  with  them  more  then  one  loof.'. 

15  And  he  charged  them,  sayinge. 
Take  hede,  be  ware  of  the  leven  of  the 
Pharises,  and  the  Icvcn  of  Pierode. 

16  And  they  reasoned  amongc  them 
selves,  saynge,  We  have  no  breed. 

17  And  when  Jesus  knewc  tliat,  he 
sayde  vnto  them,  Why  take  yc  thought, 
be  cause  ye  have  no  bread  1  Perceave 
ye  not  yet,  nether  vnderstonde  ;  hy.ve 
ye  yourc  herttes  yett  blynded  ] 

1 8  Have  ye  eyes,  and  se  uott,  and  have 
ye  cares,  and  heare  not ;  do  yc  nott 
remember  1 

19  When  I  brake  v.  loves  a  mongc  .v. 
'M.  men,  howe  many  baskcttes  full  of 
broken  meate  toke  ye  vpp  ?  They  sayde 
vnto  him  .xij. 

20  When  I  brake  vij  a  monge  iiij  M 


208 


GOTHIC,  360. 


fidwor  ]5USundyom,whan  managans  spwr- 
eidans  fullans  gabruko  usnemu})  1  Ip 
eis  qejmii,  Sibuu. 

21  Yah  qa])  du  im,  Whaiwa  nl  nauli 
fraj^yiM 

22  Yali  qemun 'in  BeJ^aniin,  yah  berun 
du  imma  blindan,  yah  bedun  ina,  ei 
imma  attaitoki. 

23  Yah  fairgreipands  handu  |jis  blind- 
ins,  ustauh  ina  utana  weihsis,  yah  speiw- 
.ands  in  augona  is,  atlagyands  ana  hand- 
uns  seinos,  frah  ina,  gau  wha  sewhi. 

24  Yah  ussaiwhands,  qa)?,  Gasaiwha 
mans  J^atei  swe  bagmans  gasaiwha  gagg- 
andans. 

25  pajjroh  aftra  galagida  handuns  ana 
po  augona  is,  yah  gatawida  ina  ussaiwh- 
an,  yah  aftragasati]?s  war)j,  yah  gasawh 
bairhtaba  allans. 

26  Yah  insandida  ina  du  garda  is, 
qifiands,  Ni  in  J)ata  weihs  gaggais ;  ni 
niannhun  qij)ais,  in  pamma  welisa. 

27  Yah  usiddya  lesus  yah  siponyos  is 
in  wchsa  Kaisavias  ])izos  Filippaus.  Yah 
ana  wiga  frah  siponyans  seinans,  qi))ands 
du  im,  Whaua  mik  qij^and  mans  Avisan  ? 

28  I))  eis  andhofun,  lohannen  j^ana 
Daupyand  ;  yah  anjjai-ai,  Hehan ;  sum- 
aili  ))an,  ainana  praufete. 

29  Yah  is  qa)j  du  im,  A|)|>an  yus  wliana 
mik  qij'i}?  wisan  1  Andhafyands  ];an 
Paitrns,  qa})  du  imma,  pu  is  Christus. 

30  Yah  faurbau{>  im,  ei  mannhun  ni 
qejjeina  bi  ina. 

31  Yah  dugann  laisyan  ins,  J^atei  skal 
sunus  mans  filu  winnan,  yah  uskiusan 
skukls  ist  fram  paim  sinistam,  yah  J)aim 
auhumistam  gudyam,  yali  bokaryam, 
yah  usqiman,  yah  afar  ]>rins  dagans 
usstaudan. 

32  Yah  swikunpaba  pata  waurd  rodida. 
Yah  aftiuhands  ina  Paitrus,  dugann 
andbeitau  ina. 

33  1]5  is  gawaudyands  sik,  yah  gasaiwh- 
ands    J^ans   siponyans    seinans,    andbait 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.  [St.  Mark 

})usendum,  and  hu  fela  wyligena  brytsena 
ge  namon  fulle  ?     Hi  SEedon,  Seofon. 

21  Da  ssede  he  him,  Hwi  ne  ongyte 
gegyt? 

22  And  hi  comon  da  to  Bethzaida,  and 
hi  brohton  him  da  eenne  blindne,  and 
hilie  bee  don,  dtet  he  hine  tet-hrine. 

23  And  da  set-hi-an  he  dpes  blindan 
hand,  and  Isedde  hine  butan  da  wic,  and 
spfette  on  his  eagan,  and  his  hand  on- 
asette,  and  hine  axode,  hAVieder  he  aht 
gesiwe. 

24  Da  cwfef)  he  da,  da  he  hyne  beseah, 
Ic  geseo  men  swylce  treow  gaugende. 

25  Eft  he  asette  his  handa  ofer  his 
eagan,  and  he  geseah  da,  and  wear)? 
geedniwod,  SAva  dset  he  beorhtlice  eall 
geseah. 

26  Da  sende  he  hyne  to  his  huse,  and 
cwfe]?,  Ga  to  dinum  huse ;  and  deah 
dii  on  tun  ga,  nsenegum  du  hit  ne 
sege.''' 

27  Da  eode  he  and  his  leorning-cnih- 
tas  on  dset  castel  Cesareoe  Philippi.  And 
he  on  wege  his  leorning-cnihtas  ahsode, 
Hwset  secgajj  men  daet  ic  sy  1 

28  Da  andswarodon  hi,  Sume,  lohan- 
nem  done  Fulluhtere  ;  sume,  Heliam ; 
sume,  sumne  of  dam  witegum. 

29  Da  cw8e)5  he,  Hwaet  secge  ge  deet  ic 
sy  1  Da  andswarode  Petrus  him,  and 
cw£e]?,  Du  eart  Crist. 

30  And  da  bead  he  him,  dset  hi  n^en- 
egum  be  him  ne  ssedon. 

31  Da  ongan  he  hi  Iseran,  da3t  mannes 
sunu  gebyrej)  fela  jjinga  |)olian,  and  beon 
aworpen  fram  ealdormannum,  and  heah- 
sacerdum,  and  b5cerum,  and  beon  of- 
slegen,  and  sefter  jjrim  dagum  arisan. 


32  And  spi'sec  da  openlice.  And  da 
nam  Petrus  hine,  and  ongan  hine 
Jjreagean. 

33  Da  bewende  he  hine,  and  cidde 
Petre,  and  cwiej?,  Ga  onbsec,  Satanasj 


VIII.  21-33-]   ^VYCLTFFE,  1389. 

four  thou^;aiulo  of  men,  how  many  Iccpis 
of  brokene  mete  je  token  vp  ?  And  tliei 
seyen,  Seuene. 

21  And  he  seide  to  hem,  How  vndir- 
stondeu  56  not  5it  1 

22  And  tliei  comen  to  Bethsayda,  and 
the!  bryngeu  to  him  a  blynd  man,  and 
]>reiedeu  hym,  that  he  schuldc  touche 
him. 

23  And  the  bond  of  the  blynd  man 
takun,  he  ledde  him  out  of  tlie  streete, 
and  spetyugc  in  to  his  y5cn,  his  hondi.s 
put  to,  he  axide  him,  it  he  syj  ony 
thing. 

24  And  he  Ijiholdinge,  seith,  I  se  men 
as  trees  walkynge. 

25  Aftirward  eftsoones  he  puttide 
lioudis  on  his  y5en,  and  he  bigau  for  to 
se,  and  he  is  restorid,  so  that  he  sy3 
clerely  alle  thingis. 

26  And  he  sente  him  in  to  his  hous, 
seyinge,  Go  in  to  thi  hous ;  and  if  thou 
schalt  go  in  to  the  streete,  seye  to  no 
man. 

27  And  Jhesus  entride  yn  and  his  dis- 
cipHs  in  to  the  castels  of  Sezarie  of 
Philip.  And  in  the  weye  he  axide  his 
disciplis,  seiynge  to  hem.  Whom  seyn 
men  me  for  to  be  1 

28  The  whiche  answeriden  to  hym, 
seiynge,  Summe,  John  Baptist ;  othere 
seyn,  Helye  ;  but  othere  seyn,  as  oon 
of  the  prophetis. 

29  Tluinue  he  seith  to  hem.  But  whom 
seye  ■^e  me  for  to  be  1  Petre  answeringe, 
seith  to  him.  Thou  ert  Crist. 

30  And  he  thretenyde  hem,  that  tliei 
schulden  nat  seie  to  ony  man  of  him. 

31  And  he  bigan  for  to  teche  hem,  for 
it  bihoueth  mannis  sone  suffre  manye 
thingis,  and  to  be  reproued  of  the  hi3este 
prestis,  and  of  eldere  men,  and  scribis, 
and  to  be  slayn,  and  aftir  thre  dayes, 
for  to  rise  a5en. 

32  And  he  spak  playnli  the  word. 
And  Petre  takynge  him,  bygan  for  to 
blame  him. 

33  The  which  turnyd,  seynge  his  dis- 
ciplis, mauaside  Petre,  seiynge.  Go  aftir 


TYNDALE,  1526.  209 

howc  many  baskcttcs  of  the  levinges  of 
broken  meate  toko  yc  vp  1    They  sayde, 

vij. 

2 1  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Howe  is 
it  that  yo  vnderstonde  noti 

22  And  he  cam  to  Bethsayda,  and  they 
brought  a  bhnde  man  vnto  him,  and 
desyred  hym,  to  touche  him. 

23  And  he  caught  the  blinde  by  the 
honde,  and  Icdd  hym  out  off  the  toune, 
and  spat  in  hys  eyes,  and  put  hys  hondes 
apon  hym,  and  axed  him,  yf  he  sawe 
eny  thinge. 

24  And  he  loked  vp,  and  sayde,  I  se 
men,  for  I  se  them  walke  as  they  were 
trees. 

25  After  that  he  put  his  hondes  agayue 
apon  his  eyes,  and  made  hym  see,  and 
he  was  restored  to  his  sight,  and  sawe 
every  man  clcrly. 

26  And  he  sent  hym  home  to  his  awne 
housse,  sayinge,  Nether  go  into  the 
toune,  nor  tell  it  to  eny  in  the  toune. 

27  And  Jesus  went  out  and  his  dis- 
ciples into  the  tounes  that  longe  to  the 
cite  called  Cesarea  Philippi.  And  by 
the  waye  he  axed  his  disciples,  sayinge. 
Whom  do  men  saye  that  Y  am  ] 

28  They  answered.  Some  saye,  that 
thou  arte  Jhon  Baptiste  ;  some  saye, 
Helyas ;  and  some,  one  off  the  pro- 
phetes. 

29  And  he  sayde  unto  them,  But  whom 
saye  ye  that  I  am  1  Peter  answered, 
and  sayd  vnto  hym.  Thou  arte  very 
Christe. 

30  And  he  charged  them,  that  they 
shulde  tell  no  man  off  it. 

31  And  he  began  to  declare  vnto 
them,  howe  that  the  sonne  of  man  muste 
suffre  many  thynges,  and  shulde  be  re- 
proved off  the  seniours,  and  off  the 
hye  prestes,  and  scrybes,  and  shulde  be 
kylled,  and  after  thre  dayes,  aryse 
agayne. 

32  And  he  spake  that  sayinge  openly. 
And  Peter  toke  hym  a  syde,  and  began 
to  chyde  hym. 

33  He  tourned  aboute,  and  loked  on 
his  disciples,  and  rebuked  Peter,  sayinge, 


210 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Paitru,  qi|;ands,  Gfigg  hinclar  mik,  Sat- 
ana;  unte  ni  fraj^yis  )iaim  Gu|)S,  ak  jjaim 
iiianne. 

34  Yah  atliaitands  ]>o  managein,  mi)i 
siponyam  seinalm,  qa];  du  'im,  Saei  wili 
afar  mis  laistyan,  inwidai  sik  silban,  yah 
nimai  galgan  seinana,  yah  laistyai  mik. 

35  Saei  alHs  wili  saiwala  seina  ga- 
iiasyan,  fraqistei]>  izai ;  ij?  saei  fraqisteijj 
saiwalai  seinai  in  meina  yah  in  J^izos 
aiwaggelyons,  ganasyi]?  \>o. 

36  Wha  auk  boteij)  mannan,  yabai 
gageigai)>  J^ana  fairwhu  allana,  yah  ga- 
sleijjei]^  sik  saiwalai  seiuai  1 

37  Ai})|)au  wha  gihij?  manna  inmaidein 
eaiwalos  seinai  zos  1 

38  Unte  saei  skamai]?  sik  meina,  yah 
waurde  meinaize  in  gafcam-J^ai  ))izai  hor- 
inondein  yah  frawaurhton,  yah  sunus 
mans  skaniaijj  sik  is,  jjan  qimij;  in 
Aviil|'au  attius  seiuis,  mi|)  aggilum  })aim 
weiham. 


Chap.  IX.  i  Yah  qa);  du  im,  Amen 
qij)a  izwis,  |)atei  sind  sumai  |)ize  her 
standandane,  ]jai  ize  ni  kausyand  dau]?- 
aus,  unte  gasaiwhand  ]jiudinassu  Gujjs 
qumanana  in  mahtai. 

2  Yah  afar  dagans  saihs  ganam  lesus 
Paitru,  yah  lakobu,  yah  lohannen,  yah 
ustauh  ins  ana  fairguui  hauli  suudro 
ainans  ;  yah  inmaidida  sik  in  andwair];- 
ya  ize. 

3  Yah  wastyos  is  waurjjun  glitmun- 
yandeins  wheitos  swe  snaiws,  swaleikos 
swe  wullareis  ana  air|)ai  ni  mag  ga- 
wheityan. 

4  Yah  atauglj's  war]?  im  Helias  m\\> 
Mose,  yah  Avesun  rodyandans  mi])  lesua. 

_5  Yah  andhafyands  Paitrus  qa}>  du 
lesua,  Eabbei,  go)?  ist  unsis  her  Avisan ; 
yah  gawaurkyam  hliyans  {n-ins,  })us  ain- 
ana,  yah  Mose  ainana,  yah  ainana  He- 

6  Ni  auk  wissa  wha  rodidedi ;  wesun 
auk  usagidai. 

7  Yah  war})  milhma  ufarskadwyands 
im;  yah  qam  stibna  us  |)amnia  milhmiu, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Maek 

fordam  du  nast  da  ])ing  de  synd  Godes, 
ac  da  J)ing  de  synd  manna. 

34  Da  cwas})  he,  togpedere  geclypedre 
menegu,  mid  his  leorning-cnihtum,  Gif 
hwa  wyle  me  fyligean,  widsace  hine 
sylfne,  and  nime  his  cwylminge,  and 
folgige  me. 

35  Se  de  wyle  his  sawle  hale  gedon, 
se  hi  forspil]) ;  se  de  forspil})  his  sawle 
for  me  and  for  dam  g5dspelle  se  hig 
gehsel}). 

36  Hwtet  fremaj)  men,  deah  he  eallne 
middan-eard  gestryne,  and  do  his  sawle 
forwyrd  1 

37  Odde  hwylc  gewryxl  sylj)  se  man 
for  his  saAvle  ? 

38  So}) lice  se  de  me  forsyh}),  and  mine 
Avord  on  disre  unriht-hsemedan  and  syn- 
fulran  cneorisse,  done  mannes  sunu  for- 
syh}), donne  he  cym})  on  his  feeder 
Avuldre,  mid  halgum  englum. 


Chap.  IX.  i  Da  saede  he  him,  So})lice 
ic  seege  eow,  djset  sume  synd  her  Avun- 
iende,  de  dea])  ne  onbyrigea}),  ser  hi 
geseon  Godes  rice  on  msegne  cuman.''' 

2  Dii  sefter  syx  dagum  nam  se  Hselend 
Petrum,  and  lacobum,  and  lohannem, 
and  Igedde  hi  sylfe  on  sundron  on  sumne 
liealme  munt ;  and  Avear})  beforan  him 
ofer-hiAvod. 

3  And  his  reaf  Avurdon  glitiniende  SAva 
liAvite  SAva  snaw,  swa  nan  fullere  ofer 
eor])an  ne  mseg  swa  hAvite  gedon. 

4  Da  a^tywde  him  Helias  mid  Moyse, 
and  to  him  spraecon. 

5  Da  andsAA'arode  Petrus  him  and  CAVse]?, 
Lareow,  god  is  d^et  Ave  her  beon  ;  and 
uton  AA'yi'can  her  })reo  eardung-stoAA'a,  de 
ane,  and  Moyse  ane,  and  Helie  ane. 

6  So})lice  he  nyste  hAA^fet  he  CAva?]) ;  he 
wpes  afsered  mid  ege. 

7  And  seo  lyft  hi  ofersceadeAA'ode  ;  and 
stefn  com  of  dtere  lyfte,  and  cwas]),  Des 


Vlir.  34.-IX.  7.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

me,  Satlianas  ;  for  thou  saucrist  not  tlio 
tliiiij,'is  that  bou  of  Uod,  but  tho  thingis 
that  ben  of  men. 

34  And  the  cumpanye  of  pcplc  gedcri  J, 
with  his  disciplis,  he  scide  to  hem,  If 
ony  man  wolc  sue  me,  dcnyc  he  him 
self,  and  take  he  his  cros,  and  sue  he 
me. 

35  Sothly  who  so  wolc  make  liis  soule^ 
saf,  lie  sehal  Iceso  it ;  forsothc  he  that 
schal  locse  his  soule'*'  for  me  and  the 
gospel,  sclial  make  it  saf 

36  Sothli  what  profiteth  it  a  man,  if  he 
Wynne  al  the  world,  and  do  peyringe  to 
his  soule  1 

37  Or  what  chaungyng  schal  a  man 
5yue  for  his  soule  1 

38  Forsoth  who  that  sclial  knoleche 
me,  and  my  Avordis  in  this  generacioun 
auoutresse,  and  mannis  sone  schal  know- 
leche  him,  whanne  he  schal  come  in  the 
glory  of  his  fadir,  with  his  auugcls. 


TYNDALE, 


211 


Chap.  IX.  1  And  he  seide  to  hem, 
Treuly  I  seie  to  50U,  for  ther  ben  summe 
of  men  stondinge  here,  the  whiche 
schulen  not  taste  deeth,  til  thei  sen  the 
rewme  of  God  comynge  in  vertu. 

2  And  aftir  sixe  dayes  Jhesus  took 
Petre,  and  James,  and  John,  and  ledith 
hem  by  hem  selue  aloone  in  to  an  hi3 
hil ;  and  he  is  ti'ansfigurid  byfore  hem. 

3  And  his  clothis  ben  maad  schynjTige 
and  white  ful  moche  as  snow,  and  which 
maner  clothis  a  fullere'''  may  not  make 
white  on  erthe. 

4  And  Ilelye  with  Moyses  apperide  to 
hem,  and  thei  wereu  spekynge  with 
Jhesu. 

5  And  Petre  answeringe  seith  to  Jhesu, 
Maistir,  it  is  good  vs  for  to  be  here ; 
make  we  here  thre  tabernaclis,  oon  to 
thee,  oon  to  Moyses,  and  oon  to  Helye. 

6  Sothli  he  wiste  not  what  he  schulde 
seie  ;  forsothe  thei  weren  agast  by  drede. 

7  And  ther  is  maad  a  cloude  schadew- 
iuge  hem  ;  and  a  voys  cam  of  the  cloude, 


Goo  after  me,  Satan  ;  for  thou  saverest 
not  the  thyngos  off"  God,  but  the  thynges 
off  men. 

34  And  he  called  the  people  vuto  hym, 
with  his  disciples  also,  and  sayd  vnto 
them.  Whosoever  wyll  folowe  me,  lett 
hym  forsake  hym  silfe,  and  take  vp  his 
crosse,  and  folowe  me. 

35  For  whosoever  wyll  save  his  lyfe, 
shall  lose  it ;  but  whosoever  shall  lose 
his  lyfe  for  my  sake  and  the  gospels,  the 
same  shall  save  it. 

36  What  shal  it  profct  a  man  yf  he 
shulde  wyn  all  the  worlde,  and  loose  his 
awne  soule  1 

37  Or  els  Avhat  shall  a  man  geve  to 
redeme  his  soule  agayne'? 

38  Whosoever  therfore  shall  be  as- 
shamed  off"  me,  and  off"  my  wordes  a- 
monixe  this  advouti'ous  and  sinfull  gene- 
racion,  of  hjan  shall  the  Sonne  of  man 
be  ashamed,  when  he  commeth  in  the 
glory  of  his  father,  Avith  the  holy  angels. 


Chap.  IX.  i  And  he  sayde  vnto  them, 
Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  there  be  some 
off"  them  that  stoude  here,  which  shall 
not  taste  of  deeth,  tyll  they  have  sene 
the  kyngdom  off"  God  come  with  power. 

2  And  after  .vj.  dayes  Jesus  toke  Peter, 
James,  and  Jhon,  and  leede  them  vp  in 
to  an  hye  mountayne  out  of  the  waye 
alone ;  and  he  was  transfigured  before 
them. 

3  And  his  rayment  did  shyne  and  was 
made  very  Avhyte  even  as  snowe,  so 
whyte  as  noo  fuller  can  make  apon  the 
erth. 

4  And  there  apered  vnto  them  Helyas 
with  Moses,  and  they  talked  with  Jesu. 

5  And  Peter  answered  and  sayde  to 
Jesu,  Master,  here  is  good  beinge  for  vs  ; 
let  vs  make  .iij.  tabernacles,  one  for  the, 
one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Helyas. 

6  And  wist  not  what  he  sayde ;  for 
they  were  afrayde. 

7  And  there  was  a  cloude  that  shad- 
dowcd  them ;    and  a  voyce  cam  out  of 

V  2 


212 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Sa  'ist  sunus  meins  sa  liuba,  bamma 
hausyai|j. 

8  Yali  anaks  insaiwhandans,  ni  ^lan- 
aseijjs  alnohun  gasewbun,  alya  lesu 
ainana  mijj  sis. 

g  Dala|>  ]?an  atgaggandam  im  af  jiamma 
fairgvinya,  anabau})  i'm,  ei  mannhun  ni 
spillodedeina  patei  gasewbuu,  niba  bij^e 
sunus  mans  us  daujjaim  usstojji. 

10  Yah  J)ata  waurd  babaidedun  du  sis 
misso,  sokyandans  wha  ist  jjata,  us 
dau])aim  usstandan. 

11  Yah  frebun  ina,  qij^andans,  Unte 
qijjand  |)ai  bokaryos,  j^atei  Helias  skuli 
qiman  faurjjis  1 

12  I|>  is  andbafyands  qajj  du  im,  Helia 
swejjaub  qimands  faur))is,  aftragaboteij? 
alia ;  yab  wbaiwa  gameH)>  ist  bi  sunu 
mans,  ei  mauag  winnai,  yab  frakun))S 
wairjjai. 


13  Akei  qi[)a  izwis,  Jjatei  yu  Helias 
qam,  yab  gatawidedun  imma  swa  filu 
swe  wildedun,  swaswe  gameli|j  ist  bi 
ina. 

14  Yab  qimands  at  siponyam,  gasawb 
filu  manageins  bi  ins,  yab  bokaryans 
sokyandans  mi]?  im. 

15  Yab  sunsaiw  alia  managei  ga- 
saiwbandans  ina,  usgeisnodedun ;  yab 
durinnandans,  inwitun  ina. 

16  Yab  frab  )}ans  bokaryans,  Wha 
sokeij)  mi]j  )?aim  1 

17  Yab  andbafyands  ains  us  J^izai 
managein  qaJj,  Laisari,  brahta  sunu 
meinana  du  jjus  habandan  ahman  un- 
rodyandan ; 

18  Yah  J^iswharub  jjei  ina  gafabij?,  ga- 
wairpi]>  ina,  yab  whajjyi)?,   yah   kriustil? 
tunjjuns  seinans,  yah  gastaurkni}?.     Yab 
qa}j    siponj^am   j^einaim,   ei   usdreibeina  i 
ina,  yab  ni  mahtedun. 

19  Ijj  is  andbafyands  im  qa]j,  0!  kuni 
ungalaubyando,  und  wha  at  izwis  siyau, 
und  Avha  ))ulau  izwis  ?  BairiJ)  ina  du 
mis. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Mark 
is  min  leofesta  sunu,  gebyraj)  bine. 

8  And  s5na  da  hi  besawon,  hi  nanne  hi 
mid  him  ne  gesawon,  biiton  done  Hsel- 
end  sylfne  mid  him. 

9  And  da  hi  of  dam  munte  astigon,  he 
bead  him,  dset  hi  nanum  ne  saedon  da 
)>ing  de  hi  gesawon,  biiton  donne  man- 
nes  sunu  of  dea}je  arise. 

10  Hi  da  dset  word  geheoldon  betwux 
him,  and  smeadon  bwset  d8et  waere, 
donne  be  of  deaj)e  arise. 

11  And  hi  bine  absodon  da,  Hwset 
secga]?  Pharisei  and  da  boceras,  dset 
gebyraj?  aerest  Helias  cume  1 

12  Da  saede  he  him  andswariende, 
Helias  ealle  ]?ing  ge-edniwa|),  donne  he 
cym)) ;  swa  be  mannes  suna  awi-iten  is^ 
d«t  he  fela  )Jolige,  and  si  oferhogod. 


1 3  Ac  ic  secge  eow,  dset  Helias  com, 
and  hi  dydon  him  swa  bwset  swa  hi 
woldon,  swa  be  him  awriten  is. 

14  And  da  he  com  to  his  leorning- 
cnihtum,  he  geseah  mycele  menegu 
abuton  hi,  and  b5ceras  mid  him  spi-ec- 
ende. 

15  And  sona  eall  folc  dsene  Haelend 
geseonde,  wear]?  afttred,  and  forht ;  and 
bine  gretende,  him  to  urnon. 

16  Da  absode  he  hi,  Hwaet  smeage  ge 
betweox  eow  T 

17  Him  andswarode  an  of  dsere  men- 
igu,  Lareow,  ic  brohte  minue  sunu 
dumbne  gast  bsebbende ; 

18  Se  swa  bwser  swa  he  bine  gelsecj?, 
forgnit  bine,  and  to})um  gristbita)?,  and 
forscrinc]?.  And  ic  ssede  dinum  leorn- 
ing-cnihtum,  dset  hi  bine  ut-adrifon,  and 
bi  ne  mibton. 

1 9  Da  andswarode  he  him,  Eala  I  un- 
geleaffulle  cneorys,  swa  lange  swa  ic 
mid  eow  beo,  swa  lange  ic  eow  ]?olige  ? 
Bringa])  bine  to  me. 


IX.  8- 1  p.]  AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

seyinijc,  This  is  my  mooste  dcercworthc 
sonc,  hccre  5e  him. 

8  And  anon  thei  biholdinj^e  ahoiitc, 
sy;e  no  more  any  man,  no  but  Jhesus 
oonly  with  hem. 

9  Anil  hem  comyngc  down  fro  the  hil, 
he  comuundide  hem,  that  thoi  schuUle 
not  telk^  to  any  man  tho  thingis  that 
thei  hadde  seyn,  no  hut  whanne  mannis 
sone  hath  risun  fro  deedc  spintis. 

10  AjuI  thei  heehlen  the  word  at  hem 
silf,  selvvnge  what  sehukle  be,  whanne 
he  hath  risun  fro  deede. 

1 1  And  thei  axiden  him,  seyinge,  What 
therfore  seyn  Pliarisees  and  scribis,  for 
it  bihoueth  Helve  for  to  come  first  1 

T :;  The  which  answeringe  seith  to  licm, 
Whanne  Helve  schal  come  first,  he  schal 
restore  alle  thingis  ;  and  hou  it  is  writun 
in  to  mannis  sone,  that  he  suffre  many 
thingis,  and  be  despisid. 


13  But  I  seie  to  50U,  for  and  Helj'e  is 
comnn,  and  thei  diden  to  him  what  euere 
thingis  thei  woklen,  as  it  is  writun  of 
him. 

14  And  he  comynge  to  his  disciplis, 
sy3  a  greet  eumpany  aboute  hem,  and 
scribis  axynge  with  hem. 

15  And  anon  al  the  cumpanye  sejTige 
Jhesu,  was  astoneyed,  and  thei  dreden  ; 
and  thei  rennynge  to,  greeteu  him. 

1 6  And  he  axide  hem,  What  seken  je 
among  50U  1 

17  And  con  of  the  cumpany  answer- 
inge seide,  Maistir,  I  haue  brou3t  to 
thee  my  sone  hauynge  an  vnclene  spirit ; 

18  The  which  wlier  euere  he  schal  take 
hym,  hirtith  him,  and  he  frothith,^  and 
betith  to  gidere  Avith  teeth,  and  wexith 
drye.  And  I  seide  to  thi  disciplis,  that 
thei  sehulden  caste  hym  out,  and  thei 
my5ten  not. 

19  The  which  answeringe  to  hem  seide, 
A  !  thou  schrewid  generacioun  and  out 
of  bileue,  hou  longe  schal  I  be  at  50U, 
hou  longe  schal  I  suffre  30U  ?  Brynge 
36  hym  to  me. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


213 


the   cloudc,    saynge,   This   ys   my  derc 
Sonne,  here  hym. 

8  And  sodcnly  they  lokcd  rounde 
aboute  them,  and  sawe  no  man  more, 
but  Jesus  only. 

9  As  they  cam  doune  from  the  hill,  he 
charged  them,  that  they  .shulde  tell  no 
man  what  they  had  scne,  tyll  the  sonne 
of  man  were  risen  from  deeth  agayne. 

10  And  they  kepte  that  saynge  with 
in  them,  and  demaunded  won  of  another, 
what  that  rysinge  from  deeth  agayne 
shulde  meane. 

1 1  And  they  axed  hym,  sayinge.  Why 
then  saye  the  scribes,  that  Helyas  muste 
fyrste  come  ? 

1 2  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
Helyas  at  his  fyrste  commynge,  shall 
brynge  all  thynges  agayne  into  good 
order ;  and  even  so  ys  it  wrytten  off 
the  Sonne  off  man,  that  he  shall  suffre 
man}^  thinges,  and  shall  be  set  att 
nought. 

13  And  I  saye  vnto  you,  thatt  Helyas 
ys  come,  and  they  have  done  vnto  hym 
whatsoever  pleased  them,  as  it  is  wrytten 
off  hym. 

14  And  he  cam  to  his  disciples,  and 
sawe  moche  people  aboute  them,  and 
the  scribes  disputinge  with  them. 

15  And  streyght  waye  all  the  people 
behelde  hym,  and  were  amased ;  and 
ran  to  hym,  and  saluted  hym. 

16  And  he  sayde  vnto  the  scribes, 
What  dispute  ye  with  them  1 

17  And  won  of  the  companye  answered 
and  sayde,  iNIaster,  I  have  i)rought  my 
Sonne  vnto  the  which  hath  a  dom  spirite  ; 

18  And  whensoever  he  taketh  hym,  he 
teareth  hym,  and  he  fomcth,  and  gnassh- 
eth  with  his  tethe,  and  pyneth  awaye. 
And  I  spake  to  thy  disciples,  that  they 
shulde  caste  hym  out,  and  they  coulde 
nott. 

1 9  He  answered  him  and  sayd,  0 ! 
generacion  without  faight,  howe  longe 
shall  Y  be  with  you,  howe  longe  shall  Y 
suffre  you"?  Bringe  him  vnto  me. 


214 


GOTHIC,  360. 


20  Yah  brabtedun  ina  at  imma.  Yab 
gasaiwbands  'ina,  suiisahv  sa  abma  tabida 
"ina  ;  yab  driusands  ana  airjja,  walwisoda 
■wbajjyands. 

2 1  Yab  frab  Jjana  attan  is,  AVhan  lagg 
niel  ist,  ei  j^ata  war])  imma  1  I]j  is  qajj. 
Us  barniskya ; 

22  Yab  ufta  ana  yab  in  fon  atwai-p  yab 
in  wato,  ei  usqistidedi  imma ;  akei 
yabai  mageis,  bilp  unsara,  gableijjyands 
unsis. 

23  I})  lesus  qajj  du  imma,  pata  yabai 
mageis  galaubyan,  allata  mabteig  Jjamma 
galaubyandin. 

24  Yab  sunsaiw  ufbropyands  sa  atta 
])is  barnis  mij)  tagram  qa]?,  Galaubya ; 
bilp  meinaizos  ungalaubeinais. 

25  Gasaiwbands  Jjan  lesus  ])atei  sarna]) 
rann  managei,  gawbotida  abmin  })amma 
unbrainyin,  qijiands  du  imma,  pu  abma 
]3U  unrodyands  yab  baujis,  ik  ])us  ana- 
biuda,  usgagg  us  J^amma,  yab  ]ianasei)5S 
ni  galeijjais  in  ina. 

26  Yab  bvopyands,  yab  filu  tabyands 
ina,  usiddya;  yab  warjj  swe  dauj^s,  swa- 
swe  managai  qe|)un,  jjatei  gaswalt. 

27  I})  lesus  undgreipands  ina  bi  band- 
au,  urraisida  ina  ;  j'ab  ussto}). 

28  Yab  galeijjandan  ina  in  gard,  sip- 
onyos  is  frebun  ina  sundro,  Duwbe  weis 
ni  mabtedum  usdreibau  Jjana  ? 

29  Yab  C[ii\>  du  im,  pata  kuni  in 
waibtai  ni  mag  usfjairafan,  niba  in  bidai 
yab  fastubnya. 

30  Yab  yain]5ro  usgaggandans,  iddye- 
dun  l^airb  Galeilaian ;  yab  ni  wilda  ei 
wbas  wissedi, 

31  Unte  laisida  siponyans  seinans,  jab 
qa]>  du  im,  patei  sunns  mans  atgibada 
in  banduns  manne,  yab  usqimand  imma, 
yab  usqistiJ)S,  {jridyin  daga  usstandi]). 


32  i))  eis  ni  fro})un  Jjamma  waui'da, 
yab  ohtedun  ina  fraibnan. 

33  Yab  qam  in  Kafarnaum.  Yab  in 
garda  qumans,  frab  ins,  Wba  in  Aviga 
mi]j  izwis  misso  mitodedu])? 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

20  Da  bi'obton  bi  bine.  And  da  be 
bine  geseab,  sona  se  gast  bine  gedrefde  ; 
and  on  eorjjan  forgnyden,  faemende  be 
tearflode. 

21  And  da  absode  he  hys  feeder,  Hii 
lang  tid  is,  syddan  bim  dis  gebp'ede  ? 
Da  cwfe})  be,  Of  cildbade  ; 

22  He  bine  gelombce  on  fyr  and  on 
wseter  sende,  diet  be  bine  forspilde ;  ac 
gif  du  bwset  miht,  gefylsfc  us,  lire  ge- 
miltsod. 

23  Da  cwsej?  se  Hselend,  Gyf  dii  ge- 
lyfan  mibt,  ealle  jjing  synd  gelyfedum 
mibtlice. 

24  Da  sona  brymde  dses  cildes  fseder 
and  wepende  cwte]?,  Dribten,  ic  gelyfe  ; 
gefylst  minre  uugeleaffulnysse. 

25  And  da  se  Hselend  geseab  da  to- 
yrnendan  menegu,  be  bebead  dam  un- 
clsenan  gaste,  dus  cwedende,  Eala  deafa 
and  dumba  gtlst,  ic  beode  de,  ga  of  bim, 
and  ne  ga  dii  leng  on  bine. 

26  He  da  brymende,  and  bine  s^vyde 
slitende,  eode  of  bim ;  and  be  wses 
s-\^ylce  be  dead  wsere,  swa  dset  manega 
cwsedon,  s5]3bce  be  is  dead. 

27  Da  nam  se  Heelend  bis  band,  and 
bine  up-abof ;  and  be  aras  da. 

28  And  da  be  into  dam  buse  eode,  bis 
leorning-cnibtas  bine  digolHce  absodon, 
Hwi  ne  mibton  we  bine  ut-adrifan  ? 

29  Da  SEede  be,  Dis  cyn  ne  mteg  of 
nanum  men  ut-gan,  buton  {)urb  gebedu 
and  on  fa?stene. 

30  D;i  bi  danon  ferdon,  big  forbugon 
Galileam ;  be  nolde  daet  bit  cenig  man 
wiste. 

31  S6j)bce  be  Iserde  bis  leorning- 
cnibtas,  and  ssede,  S5})lice  mannes  sunu 
bip  geseald  on  sj-nfuira  banda,  dset  bi 
bine  ofslean,  and  ofslagen,  dam  ])riddan 
dsege  be  arist. 

32  Da  nyston  bi  dset  word,  and  bi 
adredon  bine  ahsiende. 

33  Da  comon  bi  to  Capbarnaum.  And 
da  bi  fet  bam  wseron,  be  absode  bi, 
Hw£et  smeade  Qe  be  wege? 


IX.  20-33]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

20  And  tlicl  l)rou5tcn  liym  to.  And 
Nvhanne  he  liaddc  seyn  him,  anon  the 
spirit  troublidc  liiin  ;  and  he  cast  doun 
in  to  the  erthe,  was  wulcwid  fvothinge. 

2 1  And  he  axide  his  fodir,  ITou  niochc 
t)f  tyme  it  is,  sithen  this  thing  fel  to 
him  1  And  he  seith,  Fro  childhod  ; 

22  And  oftc  he  hath  sent  him  and  in 
to  ficr  and  in  to  watir,  that  he  schulde 
lecsc  him  ;  but  and  if  thou  maist  ony 
tiling,  help  vs,  hauynge  mercy  on  vs. 

23  Sothli  Jhcsus  seith  to  him,  If  thou 
juaist  bilcue,  alle  thingis  ben  possible  to 
a  man  bilcuyuge. 

24  And  anon  the  fadir  of  the  child  cri- 
ynge  with  tceris  scide,  Lord,  I  bileue ; 
help  thou  myn  vnbileucfulnesse. 

25  And  whanue  Jhcsus  hadde  seyn  the 
company  of  peple  rcnnynge  to  gidcre, 
he  manaside  to  the  vnclcne  spirit,  scy- 
inge  to  him,  Thou  deef  and  doumb 
spirit,  I  comaund  thee,  go  out  fro  him, 
and  cntre  not  more  in  to  him. 

26  And  he  criynge,  and  moche  to- 
breidynge  him,  wente  out  fro  him  ;  and 
he  is  raaad  as  deed,  so  that  manye  seiden, 
that  he  was  deed. 

27  Forsoth  Jhesus  holdynge  his  bond, 
lifte  vp  him  ;  and  he  roos. 

28  And  whanne  he  hadde  entrid  in  to 
an  hous,  his  disciplis  axideu  him  priuely, 
Win  my5ten  not  we  caste  hym  out  1 

29  And  he  seyde  to  hem,  This  kynde 
in  no  thing  may  go  out,  no  but  in  preier 
and  fastinge. 

30  And  thei  gon  fro  thcnnis,  wenten 
forth  in  to  Galile ;  and  he  wolde  no 
man  wite. 

31  He  tau5tc  his  disciplis,  and  seide 
to  hem.  For  mannus  sone  schal  be  bi- 
trayed  in  to  the  hondis  of  men,  and  thei 
schulen  sle  him,  and  he  slayn,  on  the 
thridde  day  schal  rise  a5en. 

32  And  thei  knewen  not  the  word,  and 
dreddcn  for  to  axe  him. 

33  And  thei  camcn  to  Cafamaum. 
Which  whenne  he  was  in  the  hous,  axide 
hem,  What  tretiden  ^e  in  the  weie  1 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2\i 


20  And  they  brought  him  vnto  him. 
And  as  sonc  as  the  sprete  sawe  him,  he 
tare  him  j  and  he  fell  dounc  on  the 
grounde,  walowinge  and  fomynge. 

21  And  he  axed  his  father,  Howe  hmgc 
is  it  a  goo,  sens  this  hath  happened  hym  1 
And  he  sayde.  Of  a  chylde  ; 

22  And  ofte  tymes  casteth  hym  in  to 
the  fyrc  and  also  in  to  the  water,  to 
destroyc  hym ;  butt  yff  thou  canste  do 
eny  thynge,  have  mercy  on  vs,  and 
helppe  vs. 

23  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him,  Ye  yf  thou 
couldest  beleve,  all  thynges  are  possyble 
to  hym  that  belevith. 

24  And  streygthwaye  the  father  off  the 
chylde  cryed  with  teares  sayinge,  Lorde, 
I  beleve  ;  sucker  myue  vnbelefe. 

25  When  Jesus  sawe  that  the  people 
cam  runnynge  togedder  vnto  hym,  he 
rebuked  the  foule  sprete,  sayinge  vnto 
hym,  Thou  dom  and  defie  spi-ete,  I 
charge  the,  come  out  of  hym,  and  entre 
no  more  in  to  hym. 

26  And  the  sprete  cryed,  and  rent  him 
sore,  and  cam  out ;  and  he  was  as  won 
that  had  bene  deed,  in  so  moclie  that 
many  sayde,  he  is  deed. 

27  Butt  Jesus  caught  hys  honde,  and 
lyfte  hym  vpp  ;  and  he  roose. 

28  And  when  he  was  come  in  to  the 
housse,  his  disciples  axed  him  secretly, 
Why  coulde  nott  we  caste  hym  out  1 

29  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Thys 
k)^lde  can  by  non  other  mcancs  come 
forth,  but  by  prayer  and  fastynge. 

30  And  they  departed  thcns,  and  toke 
there  iorney  thorowe  Galile  ;  and  wolde 
not  that  eny  man  shulde  have  knowen  itt. 

31  For  he  taught  hys  disciples,  and 
sayde  vnto  them.  The  Sonne  off  man 
shalbc  delyvered  in  to  the  hondes  off 
men,  and  they  shall  kyll  hym,  and  after 
that  he  ys  kyllcd,  he  shall  aryse  agayne 
the  thryd  daye. 

32  Butt  they  wistc  nott  what  that  say- 
inge meant,  and  were  affrayed  to  axe 
hym. 

33  And  he  cam  to  Capeniaum.  And 
when  he  was  come  to  housse,  he  sayde 
to  them,  What  was  that  ye  disputed  by- 
twene  you  by  the  waye  1 


216 


GOTHIC,  360. 


34  Ijj  eis  slawaldedun ;  clu  sis  misso 
andi'unnun,  wharyis  maists  wesi. 

35  Yah  sitands  atwopida  |)ans  twalif, 
yah  qajj  du  'im.  Yabai  whas  wili  frumists 
wisan,  siyai  allaize  aftumists,  yah  allaim 
andbahts. 

36  Yah  nimands  barn,  gasatida  i'ta  'in 
niidyaim  im  ;  yah  ana  armins  nimands 
ita,  qa{)  du  im, 

37  Saei  ain  |)ize  swaleikaize  barne 
andnimi]?  ana  naniin  meinamma,  mik 
andnimi)>;  yah  sawhazuh  saei  mik  and- 
nimijj,  ni  mik  andnimi}?,  ak  j^ana  sand- 
yandan  mik. 

38  Andhof  Jjan  imma  lohannes,  qij?- 
ands,  Laisai-i,  sewluim  suraana  in  ]>e\n- 
amma  namin  usdreibandan  unhul}ions, 
saei  ni  laistei})  unsis,  yah  waridedum 
imma,  unte  ni  laisteijj  unsis. 

39  J]>  is  qaj),  Ni  waryi})  imma  ; 
ni  mannahun  auk  ist  saei  tauyi}>  maht 
in  namin  meinamma,  yah  magi  sprauto 
ubil  Avaurdyan  mis. 

40  Unte  saei  nist  wijjra  izwis,  faur 
izwis  ist. 

41  Saei  auk  allis  gadragkyai  izwis 
stikla  watins  in  namin  meinamma,  unte 
Christaus  siyu)?,  amen  qi|;a  izwis,  ei  ni 
fraqisteijj  mizdon  seinai. 

42  Yah  sawhazuh  saei  gamarzyai  ain- 
ana  ];ize  leitilane  );ize  galaubyandane  du 
mis,  go]?  ist  imma  mais  ei  galagyaidau 
asihiqairnus  ana  balsaggan  is,  yah  fra- 
waurpans  wesi  in  marein. 

43  Yah  yabai  marzyai  J)uk  handus 
])eina,  afmait  j^o  ;  go))  j?us  ist  hamfanima 
in  libain  galei))an,  ))au  twos  handuns 
liabandin  galeif'an  in  gaiainnan,  in  fou 
}jata  unwhapnando, 

44  parei  ma})a  ize  ni  gaswiltij),  yali  fon 
ni  afwhapuij). 

45  Yah  yabai  fotus  j^eins  marzyai  })uk, 
afmait  ina ;  go]>  ))us  ist  galeijjan  in 
hbain  haltamma,  J)au  twans  fotuns  hab- 
andin  gawairpan  in  gaiainnan,  in  fon 
Jjata  unwliapnando, 

46  parei  ma};a  ize  ni  gaswilti)),  yah 
fon  ni  afwhapni|). 

47  Yah  yabai  augo  J^eiu  marzyai  Jjuk, 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

34  And  hi  suwodon  ;  witodlice  hi  on 
wege  smeadon,  hwylc  hyra  yldost  Wtere. 

35  Da  he  saet  he  clypode  hi  twelfe, 
and  sgede  him,  Gif  eower  liwylc  wyle 
beon  fyrmest,  bee  se  eadmodost,  and 
eower  eaira  J>en. 

36  Da  nam  he  anne  enapan,  and  ge- 
sette  on  hyra  middele ;  da  he  bine 
beclypte,  he  ssede  him, 

37  Swa  hwylc  swa  anne  of  dus  ge- 
radum  cnapum  on  minum  naman  onfehjj, 
se  oufehj)  me  ;  and  se  de  me  onfehjj,  he 
ne  oifehj)  me,  ac  done  de  me  sende.''' 

38  Da  andswarode  lohannes,  and  cw?e]), 
Lareow,  sumne  we  gesawon  on  dinum 
naman  deofol-seocnessa  lit-adrifende,  se 
ne  fyligj)  us,  and  we  him  forbudon. 

39  Da  cwsej)  he,  Ne  forbeode  ge  him; 
nis  nan  de  on  minum  naman  mtegen 
wyrce,  and  msege  rade  be  me  yfele 
sprecan. 

40  Se  de  nis  agen  eow,  se  is  for 
eoAv. 

41  S6)3]ice  se  de  syl})  drinc  eow  cahc 
fulne  wieteres  on  minum  naman,  fordam 
ge  Cristes  synd,  ic  eow  so]?  secge,  ne 
forlyst  he  his  mede. 

42  And  swa  hwa  swa  gedrefj>  jenne  of 
dyssum  lytlingum  on  me  gelyfendum, 
betere  him  weere  dset  an  cweorn-stan 
Wccre  to  his  sweoran  gecnyt,  and  wsere 
on  sse  beworpen. 

43  And  gif  din  hand  de  swicaln  ceorf 
hi  of ;  betere  de  is  dset  dii  wanhal  to 
life  ga,  donne  dii  twa  handa  Inebbe  and 
fare   on    helle,    and    on    unacwencedlic 

44  Dar  hyra  wyrm  ne  swylt,  and  fyr 
ne  bij)  acwenced. 

45  And  gif  din  f5t  swica|j  de,  ceorf 
hine  of;  betere  de  is  dset  du  healt 
ga  on  ece  lif,  donne  dii  haebbe  twegeu 
let  and  si  aworpen  on  helle,  una- 
cwencedlices  fyres, 

46  Dar  hyra  wyrm  ne  swylt,  ne  fyr  ne 
bij)  adweesced. 

47  Gif  din  eage  de  swica]?,  weorp  hit 


IX.  34-47-]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

34  And  thci  ■\vcrcn  stillc  ;  sothli  tliei 
disputidon  among  hem  in  the  weie,  who 
of  hem  schuUle  be  more. 

35  And  he  sittinge  clepide  the  twcluc, 
and  seith  to  liem,  If  any  man  wole  be 
the  first  among  ;;ou,  he  sehal  be  the 
la.ste,  and  mynystro  of  alle. 

36  And  he  takinge  a  chiUlc,  ordeynede 
him  in  the  myiUlil  of  hem ;  whom 
whanne  he  hadde  byclippid,  he  seith  to 
hem, 

37  Who  euere  schal  receyue  oon  of 
suche  chiklren  in  my  name,  he  receyueth 
me ;  and  wlio  euere  receyueth  me,  he 
rece}iieth  not  me  aloone,  but  him  that 
sente  me. 

38  John  answcride  to  him,  seyinge, 
Maistir,  we  sy5cn  sum  oon  for  to  caste 
out  fendis  in  thi  name,  the  which  sueth 
not  vs,  aud  we  han  forbedun  him. 

39  Sothli  Jhesus  seith  to  him,  Nyle  56 
forbede  him  ;  ther  is  no  man  that  doth 
vertu  in  my  name,  and  may  soone  speke 
jTiele  of  me. 

40  Forsothe  he  that  is  not  a5ens  v.s,  is 
for  vs. 

41  Sothli  who  euere  schal  33016  drynke 
to  50U  a  cuppe  of  cold  watir  in  my  name, 
for  56  ben  of  Crist,  treuly  I  seie  to  50U, 
he  schal  not  leese  his  mede. 

42  And  who  euere  schal  sclaundre  oon 
of  thes  litle  bileuynge  in  me,  it  is  good 
to  him  that  a  mylne  stoon  of  assis  were 
don  aboute  his  necke,  and  were  sent  in 
to  the  see. 

43  And  if  thin  bond  sclaundre  thee, 
kitt  it  awey  ;  it  is  good  to  thee  fcble  to 
entre  in  to  lyf,  tlian  hauynge  twey  liondis 
go  in  to  helle,  in  to  fier  that  neuere  schal 
be  quenchid, 

44  Where  the  worm  of  hem  deicth  not, 
and  the  ficr  is  not  (luenchid. 

45  And  if  thi  foot  sclaundre  thee,  kitt 
it  of ;  it  is  good  to  thee  for  to  entre 
crokid  in  to  euerlasting  lyf,  than  hau- 
ynge twey  feet  to  be  sent  in  to  helle  of 
fier,  that  neuer  schal  be  qucncliid, 

46  Where  the  worni  of  hem  deieth  not, 
and  the  fier  is  not  quenchid. 

47  That  if  thin  y5e  sclaundre  thee,  cast 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


217 


34  And  they  hclde  their  peace  ;  for  by 
the  waye  they  reasoned  amonge  them 
selves,  who  shulde  be  the  chefest. 

35  And  he  sate  doune  and  called  the 
twelve  vnto  hym,  and  sayd  to  them,  Yf 
eny  man  desyre  to  be  fyrst,  the  same 
shalbe  last  ott"  all,  and  .servaunt  vnto  all. 

36  And  he  toke  a  cliylde,  and  sett  hynt 
in  the  myddes  of  them  ;  and  toke  hym 
in  hys  armes,  and  sayde  vnto  them, 

37  Whosoever  receave  eny  soche  a 
chylde  in  my  name,  he  receaveth  me ; 
and  whosoever  receaveth  me,  receaveth 
not  me,  but  him  that  sent  me. 

38  Jhon  answered  him,  sayinge,  Master, 
we  sawe  won  castinge  out  devyls  in  thy 
name,  Avhich  folow^eth  not  vs,  and  Ave 
forbade  hym,  be  cause  he  foloweth  vs 
nott. 

39  But  Jesus  sayde.  Forbid  hym  nott ; 
for  there  ys  no  man  that  shall  do  a 
myracle  in  my  name,  and  can  speake 
lightly  evyll  of  me. 

40  Whosoever  is  not  agaynste  you,  is 
on  youre  parte. 

41  And  whosoever  shall  geve  you  a 
cuppe  off  water  to  drinke  for  my  nams 
sake,  be  cause  ye  are  belongynge  to 
Christe,  verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  he  shall 
nott  loose  his  rewarde. 

42  And  whosoever  shall  hourte  won  of 
this  litell  wons  that  beleve  in  me,  it 
were  better  for  him  that  a  myll  stone 
Avcre  hanged  aboute  his  necke,  and  that 
he  were  cast  in  to  the  see. 

43  And  yf  thy  hande  offende  the,  cut 
hym  of;  itt  ys  better  for  the  to  entre 
into  lyife  maymed,  then  to  goo  Avith  tAvo 
hondes  in  to  hell,  in  to  fire  that  ncA'er 
shalbe  quenched, 

44  Where  there  AA-orme  dyeth  nott,  and 
the  fyre  never  goeth  oute. 

45  And  yi  thy  fote  offende  the,  cut 
hym  of ;  it  is  better  for  the  to  goo  halt 
in  to  lyfe,  then  Avith  ij.  fete  to  be  cast 
into  hell,  into  fyre  that  never  shalbe 
quenched, 

46  Where  there  Avorme  dyeth  not,  and 
the  fyre  never  goeth  oute. 

47  And  yf  thyne  eye  offende  the,  pluckc 


^18 


GOTHIC,  360. 


uswairp  imma ;  go])  pus  ist  hailiamma 
galei};au  in  Jjiudangardya  Gu];s,  })au  twa 
augona  habandin  atwairpan  in  gaiainnan 
funins, 

48  parei  ma})a  ize  ni  gadauj)ni}),  yali 
fon  ni  af\vliapni|). 

49  Whazuli  auk  funin  saltada,  yah 
wharyatoli  liunsle  salta  saltada. 

50  Go]j  salt ;  ij?  yabai  salt  unsaltan 
"wairjjij),  wlie  supuda  1  Habai})  in  izAvis 
salt,  yah  gawau'|)eigai  siyaij)  mi]?  izwis 
misso. 


Chap.  X.  i  Yah  yain|)ro  usstand- 
•ands,  qam  in  markom  ludaias  hindar 
laurdauau ;  yah  gaqemuu  sik  aftra  man- 
ageins  du  imma,  yah  swe  biuhts,  aftra 
laisida  ins. 

2  Yah  duatgaggandans  Fareisaieis, 
frehun  ina,  Skuldu  siyai  mann  qen  af- 
satyan  1  fraisandans  ina. 

3  I]>  is  andhafyands  qa]>,  "\Vha  izwis 
anabaujj  Moses  1 

4  Ijj  eis  qe];un,  Moses  uslaubida  unsis 
bokos  afsateiuais  melyan,  yah  aflctan. 

5  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa]j  du  im, 
Wijjra  harduhairtein  izwara  gamelida 
izwis  ]jo  anabusn. 

6  I]?  af  anastodeinai  gaskaftais  gumein 
yah  qinein  gatawida  Gu]j  ; 

7  Inuh  J)is  bilei['ai  manna  attin  seinam- 
ma  yah  ai])ein  seiuai, 

8  Yah  siyaina  ])0  twa  du  leika  samin. 
Swaswe  Jvanaseijjs  ni  siud  twa,  ak  leik 
ain. 

9  patei  nu  Gu]j  gawa]),  manna  ]?amma 
ni  skaidai. 

10  Yah  in  garda  aftra  siponyos  is  bi 
]jata  samo  frehun  ina. 

11  Yah  qa]>  du  im,  Sawhazuh  saei 
afletijj  qen  seina,  yah  liugaij)  an]?ara, 
horino)>  du  })izai. 

12  Yah  yabai  qino  afletijj  aban  seinana, 
yah  liugada  anjjaramma,  horino}). 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St  .  Mark 

ut ;  betere  cle  is  mid  anum  eagan  gan 
on  Godes  rice,  clonne  twa  eagan  hoeb- 
bende  sy  aworpen  on  helle  fyr, 

48  Dar  hyra  wyrm  ne  swylt,  ne  fyr  ne 
bijj  acwenced. 

49  S5)jlice  selc  man  bi}?  mid  fyre  ge- 
sylt,  and  relc  offrung  bi])  mid  sealte 
gesylt.  ^ 

50  God  is  sealt ;  gif  ctaet  sealt  unsealt 
bi]),  on  clam  cte  ge  hit  sylta])  1  Habba}) 
sealt  on  eow,  and  habba])  sibbe  betwux 
cow. 


Chap.  X.  1  And  danon,  he  com  on 
ludeisce  endas  of  lordane ;  da  comon 
eft  menigu  to  him,  and  swa  swa  he 
gewunode,  he  hi  Iserde  eft-s5na. 


2  Da  genealsehton  him  Pharisei,  and 
hine  axodon,  HAveeder  alyf])  senegum 
men  his  wif  forlsetan  1  his  dus  fand- 
igende. 

3  Da  andswarode  he  him,  Hwset  bead 
Moyses  eow  1 

4  Hi  ssedon,  Moyses  lyfde  dset  man 
write  hiw-gedalcs  boc,  and  hi  forlcte. 

5  Da  cwte])  se  Hfelend,  For  eowre 
heortan  heardnesse  he  eow  wrat  dis 
bebod. 

6  Fram  fruman  gesceafte  God  hi  ge- 
worlite  AVEepnedman  and  Avimman ; 

7  And  cwsej),  Foi-dam  se  man  forlset 
his  finder  and  moder,  and  hine  his 
wife  ge])eot, 

8  And  beo])  twegen  on  anum  flaesce. 
Witodlice  ne  synd  nii  tAvegen,  ac  an 
flaesc. 

9  Dset  God  gesamnode,  ne  syndrige 
daet  nan  man. 

10  And  eft  innan  huse  his  Icorning- 
cnihtas  hine  be  dam  ylcan  fdisodon. 

11  Da  cwa?])  he,  Savo,  liAvylc  man  swa 
his  wif  forlset,  and  oder  nim]),  unriht- 
haemed  he  Avyrc])  ])urh  hi. 

1 2  And  gif  dtist  Avif  hire  AA^ere  forleet, 
and  oderne  nim}),  heo  unriht-haem]).''' 


IX.  4S.-X.  12.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

it  out ;  it  is  good  to  thee  for  to  cntre 
gogil  y5ccl  in  to  rewme  of  God,  tlmn 
liauynge  twey  yjcn  for  to  be  sent  in  to 
helle  of  fier, 

48  Where  the  worm  of  lioni  deieth  not, 
and  the  fier  is  not  qucnohid. 

49  Forsoth  cuery  man  schal  be  saltid^ 
with  fier,  and  euery  shiyn  saerificc  schal 
be  sauorid  with  salt. 

50  Salt  is  good  thing ;  that  if  salt  be 
VTisauori,  in  what  thing  schulcn  56  make 
it  sauori  1  Haue  50  salt  in  30U,  and 
baue  5e  pees  among  50U. 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


219 


CiiAP.  X.  I  And  Jhcsus  risynge  vp 
fro  thcnnis,  cam  in  to  the  endis  of  Jude 
oucr  Jordan  ;  and  eftsooues  the  cum- 
panyes  of  pcple  camen  to  gidere  to  him, 
and  as  he  was  wont,  cftsoone  he  tau5tc 
hem. 

2  And  Pharisees  comynge  ny5,  axiden 
him,  If  it  be  leefTul  to  a  man  for  to 
leeue^  his  wyf  1  temptinge  him. 

3  And  he  answeringe  scith  to  hem, 
What  comaundide  Moyses  to  5011 1 

4  The  whiche  seiden,  ]\Ioyses  suffride 
to  write  a  libel  of  forsakiuge,  and  to 
forsake. 

5  To  whom  Jhesus  answeringe  seith, 
To  the  hardncsse  of  50ure  lierte  Moyses 
wroot  to  5011  this  precept. 

6  Forsothe  fro  the  bigynnyng  of  ei"ea- 
ture  God  made  hem  male  and  female  ; 

7  And  he  seide,  For  this  thing  a  man 
schal  leeue  fadir  and  modir,  and  schal 
clefe  to  his  wif, 

8  And  thei  schulen  be  twejTie  in  o 
fleisch.  And  so  now  thei  ben  not 
tweyne,  but  o  fleisch. 

9  Therfore  that  thing  that  God  ioynede 
to  gidere,  no  man  departe. 

10  And  eftsoone  in  the  hows  his  dis- 
ciplis  axiden  him  of  the  same  thing. 

11  And  he  scith  to  hem.  Who  cuere 
schal  leeue  his  wyf,  and  wedde  another, 
he  doth  auoutrie  vpon  hir. 

T  2  And  if  the  wyf  schal  leeue  hir  hose- 
bonde,  and  be  weddid  to  another,  she 
doth  auoutrie. 


hym  oute  ;  itt  ys  better  for  the  to  goo 
in  to  the  kyngdom  of  God  with  one  eye, 
then  havynge  two  eyes  to  be  caste  into 
hell  fyre, 

48  Where  their  worme  dyeth  nott,  and 
the  fyre  never  gocth  outc. 

49  Every  man  therfore  shalbe  salted 
with  fyre,  and  every  sacryfysc  shalbe 
seasoned  with  saltt. 

50  Salt  ys  good  ;  but  yf  the  salt  be 
vnsavery,  what  shall  ye  salte  there  with  1 
Se  that  ye  have  saltt  in  yourc  selves, 
and  have  peace  amonge  youre  selves  one 
with  another. 


Chap.  X.  i  And  he  rose  from  thens, 
and  went  in  to  the  coostes  of  Jewry- 
through  the  regyon  that  ys  beyonde 
lordau ;  and  the  people  i-csorted  vnto 
hym  afresshe,  and  as  he  was  wont,  he 
taught  them  agayne. 

2  And  the  Pharyses  cam,  and  axed  hjin 
a  question.  Whether  it  were  laufuU  for 
a  man  to  putt  awayc  hys  wyfc?  to 
prove  hym. 

3  He  answered  and  said  vnto  them, 
What  did  Moses  bid  you  do  1 

4  And  they  sayde,  Moses  suffred  to 
wryte  a  testimonial!  of  her  divorsment, 
and  to  putt  her  awaye. 

5  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto 
them.  For  because  of  youre  harde  herttcs 
he  wrote  thys  precept  vnto  you. 

6  But  at  the  fyrst  ereacion  God  made 
them  man  and  woman  ; 

7  Sayinge,  For  thys  thinges  sake  shall 
a  man  leve  father  and  mother,  and  bydo 
by  his  wyfe, 

8  And  .ij.  shalbe  made  won  flesshc.  So 
then  are  they  nowe  nott  twayne,  but 
won  flesshe. 

9  Therfore  that  whych  God  hath  cup- 
pled,  let  nott  man  scjjaratc. 

10  And  in  the  housse  his  disciples  axed 
him  agayne  of  that  mater. 

1 1  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Whoso- 
ever putteth  awayc  his  wyfe,  and  marycth 
another,  breaketh  wedlocke  to  her  warde. 

12  And  yf  a  woman  forsake  her  hus- 
band, and  be  maryed  to  another,  she 
coramitteth  advoutiy. 


220  GOTHIC,  360. 

13  panuTi  atbenin  du  imma  barna,  ei 
attaitoki  ini ;  ijj  Jjai  siponyos  is  sokun 
]jaim  bairandam  du. 

14  Gasaiwbands  Jjan  lesus,  umverida, 
yah  qajj  du  im,  Leti)?  ]>o  barna  gaggan 
du  mis,  yah  ni  waryi])  ]>o,  unte  Jjize  ist 
J^iudaugardi  GuJjs. 

15  Amen  qijja  "izwis,  saei  ni  andnimijj 
Jjiudangardya  Gu))S  swe  barn,  ni  pauh 
qimij)  in  "izai. 

16  Yah  ga})laihands  ira,  lagyands  hand- 
uns  ana  \>o,  ))iu[)ida  im. 

17  Yah  usgaggandin  imma  in  wig, 
duatrinnands  ains,  yah  knussyands,  hap 
ina,  qi))and3,Laisari  J)iu})eiga,  wha  tauyau, 
ei  libainais  aiweinons  arbya  wairjjaul 

18  Ij)  is  qaj)  du  imma,  Wha  mik  qij)is 
])iu]?eigana  ?  M  whashun  j^iufjcigs,  alya 
ains  Gu|). 

19  pos  anabusnins  kant,  ni  horinos,  ni 
maur})ryais,  ni  hlifais,  ni  siyais  ga- 
liugaweitwods,  ni  anamahtyais,  swerai 
attan  ))einana  yah  aijjein  Jjeina. 

20  paruh  andhafyands  qa))  du  imma, 
Lai  sari,  po  alia  gafastaida  us  yundai 
mcinai. 

21  I|j  iesus  insaiwhauds  du  imma, 
friyoda  ina ;  yah  qa|)  du  imma,  Ainis 
J)us  wan  ist ;  g^^S^  swa  filu  swe  habais 
frabugei,  yah  gif  jjarbam,  yah  habais 
huzd  iu  himinam ;  yah  hiri,  laistyan 
mik  nimands  galgan. 

2  2  I)>  is  ganipnands  in  ))is  waurdis, 
galai]?  gaurs,  was  auk  habands  faihu 
manag. 

23  Yah  bisaiwhands  Iesus,  qaj)  sipon- 
yam  seinaim,  Sai  whaiwa  agluba  pai  faiho 
gahabandans  in  Jjiudangardya  GuJ)S  ga- 
leil'and. 

24  I)j  }jai  siponyos  afslaujinodedun  in 
waurde  is.  paruh  Iesus  aftra  andhaf- 
yands qajj  im,  Barnilona,  Avhaiwa  aglu 
ist,  Jjaim  hugyaudam  afar  faihau  in 
J)iudangardya  Gu])S  galeijjan. 

25  Azitizo  ist  ulbandau  })airh  J)airko 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Mark 

13  And  hi  brohton  him  hyra  lytlingas, 
dset  he  hi  set-hrine  ;  cla  ciddon  his  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas  dam  de  hi  brohton. 

1 4  Da  se  Hselend  hi  geseah,  unwurd- 
lice  he  hit  forbead,  and  ssede  him,  Lseta]> 
da  lytlingas  to  me  cuman,  and  ne  for- 
beode  ge  him,  s6|)lice  swylcera  is  heofona 
rice. 

1 5  Soj^lice  ic  secge  eow,  swa  hwylc 
swa  Godes  rice  ne  onfeh})  swa  lytling, 
ne  gee]?  he  on  dset. 

16  Da  beclypte  he  hi,  and  his  handa 
ofer  hi  settende,  bletsode  hi.'*' 

17  And  da  he  on  wege  eode,  sum  him 
to  arn,  and  gebigedum  cneowe  tof5ran 
him,  cwse[),  and  bsed  hine.  La  goda 
lareow,  hwset  do  ic,  dset  ic  ece  lif  age  1 

18  Da  cw£e]>  se  Hselend,  Hwi  segst  du 
me  godne  1  Nis  mm  man  g5d,  buton 
God  aua. 

19  Canst  du  da  bebodu,  ne  unriht- 
hsem  du,  ne  slyh  du,  ne  stel  du,  ne 
sege  du  lease  gewitnesse,  facen  ne  do 
du,  weor);a  dinne  fpeder  and  dine  m5der. 

20  Dii  andswarode  he,  G5da  lareow, 
call  dis  ic  geheold  of  minre  geogude, 

21  Se  Hjelend  hine  da  behealdende, 
lufode ;  and  ssede  him.  An  })ing  de  is 
Avana ;  gesyle  eall  da^t  du  i^ge,  and  syle 
hit  Jiearfum,  donne  hajfst  du  gold-hord 
on  heofonum  ;  and  cum,  and  folga  me    . 


22  And  for  dam  worde  he  waes  ge- 
unret,  and  ferde  gnornigende,  fordam 
he  hfefde  mycele  sehta. 

23  Da  cw£ej)  se  HtJelend  to  his  leorning- 
cnihtum,  hine  beseonde,  S\vyde  earfoji- 
lice  on  Godes  rice  ga\>  da  de  feoh 
habba}?. 

24  Da  forhtodon  his  leorning-cnihtas 
be  his  wordum.  Eft  se  Hselend  him 
andswariende  cwsej),  Eala  cild,  swyde 
earfojjlice  da  de  on  heora  feo  getruwig- 
eaj)  giij?  on  Godes  rice. 

25  Eadere  ys  olfende  to  farenne  })urh 


X.  13-25.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 3  And  thel  oflViilcn  to  him  litle  cliil- 
dron,  that  lie  schulde  touche  hem ; 
sothcli  disciplis  thretonyden  to  men  of- 
fringe. 

14  ^\^lom  whannc  Jhcsus  hadde  scyn, 
lie  baar  licuye/  and  seith  to  hem,  Suft're 
50  litle  children  for  to  come  to  1110,  and 
forbede  je  hem  not,  forsoth  of  suche  is 
the  kyn>j;dom  of  God. 

I.",  Trouli  I  seie  to  5011,  who  euere 
schal  not  receyne  the  kyngdom  of  God 
as  this  litle  child,  he  schal  not  eutre  in 
to  it. 

16  And  he  hiclippinge  hem,  and  putt- 
inge  hondis  vjiou  hem,  blesside  hem. 

1 7  And  whanne  Jhesus  was  gou  out 
in  the  weye,  o  man  rennynge  bifore,  the 
kne  bowid,  preiede  him,  seiynge,  Goode 
maistir,  what  schal  I  do,  that  I  receyue 
euerlastinge  h'f  ? 

18  Forsotlie  Jhesus  seide  to  him.  What 
seist  thou  me  good  ?  No  man  good,  no 
but  God  aloone. 

19  Thou  hast  knowen  the  comaunde- 
mentis,  do  thou  non  auoutrie,  sle  not, 
stele  not,  seie  not  fals  witnessinge,  do 
no  fraude,  worschipe  thi  fadir  and  modir. 

20  And  he  answeringe  seith  to  him, 
Maistir,  I  haue  kept  alle  these  thingis 
fro  my  50uthe. 

2 1  Sothli  Jhesus  biheld  him,  and  louyde 
hym  ;  and  he  seide  to  him,  0  thing 
failith  to  thee  ;  go  thou,  selle  thou  what 
euere  thingis  thou  hast,  and  jyue  to  pore 
men,  and  thou  schalt  haue  tresour  in 
heuene  3  and  come,  sue  thou  me. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


221 


22  The  which  maad  sorwful  in  the 
word,  wente  awey  mornynge,  forsoth  he 
was  hauynge  many  possesciouns. 

23  And  Jhesus  biholdinge  aboute,  seith 
to  his  disciplis,  How  hard  thei  that  han 
money  schulen  entre  in  to  the  kyngdom 
of  God. 

24  Forsothe  the  diseijjlis  weren  ston- 
eyed  in  his  wordis.  And  Jhesus  eft- 
soone  answeringe  seith  to  hem,  5e  litle 
sones,  how  hard  thing  it  is,  men  trist- 
ynge  in  richessis  for  to  eutre  in  to  the 
kyngdom  of  God. 

25  It  is  li5ter^  a  camel  for  to  passe 


13  And  they  brought  chyldrcn  to  hym, 
that  he  shoulde  touche  them  ;  and  liys 
disciples  chid  thoose  that  brought  tlicni. 

14  AVlien  Jesus  sawe  that,  he  was  dis- 
pleased, and  sayd  vnto  tlicm,  Siiffrc  the 
oiiyldren  to  come  vnto  me,  and  forbid 
them  not,  for  vnto  suche  belongetli  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

15  Verely  I  saye  to  you,  whosoever 
shall  not  reccave  the  kyngdom  of  God 
as  a  chylde,  he  shall  not  entre  therin. 

16  And  he  toke  them  vppe  in  his 
armes,  and  putt  his  hondes  apon  them, 
and  blessed  them. 

17  And  when  he  was  come  out  into 
the  waye,  there  cam  won  runninge,  and 
kneled  to  him,  and  axed  him,  Goode 
master,  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  maye 
enheret  eternal  lyfe  1 

18  Jesus  said  vnto  him.  Why  callest 
thou  me  goode  1  There  is  no  man  goode 
but  won,  whych  ys  God. 

19  Thou  knowest  the  commaundmentes, 
breake  not  matrimony,  kyll  not,  steale 
nott,  here  no  falce  wytnes,  defraude  no 
man,  honore  thy  father  and  thy  mother. 

20  He  answered  and  said  to  him, 
Master,  all  theese  I  have  observed  from 
my  youth. 

2 1  Jesus  behelde  him,  and  had  a  favour 
to  him  ;  and  said  vnto  him.  Won  thiuge 
is  lackinge  vnto  the  ;  goo,  and  sell  all 
that  thou  hast,  and  geve  itt  to  the 
povre,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasui-e  in 
lieven  ;  and  come,  and  folowe  me  and 
take  thy  crosse  on  the. 

22  But  he  was  discumforted  with  that 
sayinge,  and  went  awaye  mornynge,  for 
he  had  greate  possessions. 

23  And  Jesus  lokcd  rounde  aboute, 
and  sayd  vnto  hys  disciples,  With  what 
difficulte  shall  they  that  have  ryches 
entre  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

24  Hys  disciples  were  astonnyed  att 
hys  wordes.  Jesus  answered  agayne 
and  sayde  vnto  them,  Chyldren,  howe 
harde  is  it,  for  them  that  trustc  in  their 
ryches  to  entre  in  to  the  kyngdom  oft" 
God. 

25  Hit  ys  easyer  for  a  camell  to  go 


222 


GOTHIC,  360. 


iie])los  <;alei]jan,  ]?au  gabigamma  in  Jiiud- 
augardya  Gu]>s  galeij^an. 

26  I]>  eis  mais  usgeisnodedun,  qij?- 
andans  du  sis  misso,  Yah  whas  mag 
ganisan  ] 

27  Insaiwliands  du  im  lesus,  qa]>,  Akei 
fram  mannam  unmahteig  ist,  ni  fram 
Gujja ;  allata  auk  mahteig  i'st  fram 
Gu);a. 

28  Dugann  fian  Paitrus  qij^an  du  i'm- 
ma,  Sai !  weis  aflailotum  alia,  yah  laist- 
idedum  |;uk. 

29  Andhafyands  im  lesus  qa]),  Amen 
qi];a  izwis,  ni  whashun  ist  saei  aflailoti 
gai'd,  aijjjjau  brojjruns,  aijjjjau  ai])ein, 
ai)j}jau  attan,  aijjjmu  qen,  ai})|)au  bavna, 
ai))]?au  liaimoJ)lya  in  meina  yah  in  Jjizos 
aiwaggelyons, 

30  Saei  ni  andnimai  .r.  faljj  nu  in 
])amma  mela,  gardins,  yah  brojjruns,  yah 
swistruns,  yah  attan,  yah  aijjein,  yali 
barna,  yah  haimo})lya,  mi]?  wrakom,  yah 
in  aiwa  ]>amma  anawairjnn  libain  aiw- 
einon. 

31  Ajjjjan  managai  wairj^and,  fnimans 
aftumans,  yah  aftumans  frumans. 

32  Wesunu])-J)an  ana  wiga  gaggandans 
du  lairusaulwmai ;  yah  faurljigaggands 
ins  iesus,  yah  sildaleikidedun,  yah  afar- 
laistyandans  faurhtai  waur))un.  Yah 
andnimands  aftra  )jans  twalif,  dugann 
im  qij)an,  \o%\  habaidedun  ina  gadaban. 

33  patei  sai!  usgaggam  in  lairusaul- 
wma,  yah  sunns  mans  atgibada  Jjaim 
ufargudyam,  yah  bokaryam ;  yah  ga- 
wargyand  ina  daujjau, 


34  Yah  bilaikand  ina,  yah  bliggwand 
ina,  yah  speiwand  ana  ina ;  yah  usqimand 
imma,  yah  Jjridyin  daga  ustandijj. 

35  Yah  athabaidedun  sik  du  imma 
lakobus  yah  lohannes,  sunyus  Zaibai- 
daiaus,  qijjandans,  Laisai-i,  wileima,  ei 
})atei  __l5uk  bidyos,  tauyais  uggkis. 

36  Ij?  iesus  qa})  im,  Wha  wileits 
tauyan  mik  igqis  ? 

37  I)?  eis  qejjun  du  imma,  Fragif  ugkis, 
ei  ains  af  taihswon  Jjeinai,  yah  ains  af 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

needle  fjyrel,  donne  se  rica  and  se  welega 
on  Godes  rice  ga. 

26  Hi  dses  de  ma  betwux  him  wun- 
dredon,  and  cwcedon.  And  hwa  mseg 
beon  hal  ? 

27  Da  beheold  se  Hselend  hi,  and 
cwse)),  Mid  mannum  hit  is  uneadelic,  ac 
na  mid  Gode ;  ealle  ])ing  mid  Gode 
synd  eadel:ce. 

28  Da  ongan  Petrus  ewedan,  Witod- 
lice !  we  ealle  Jjing  forleton,  and  fol- 
godon  de. 

29  Da  andswarode  him  se  Hselend, 
Nis  nan  de  his  bus  forlset,  odde  ge- 
brodru,  odde  geswustra,  odde  faeder, 
odde  moder,  odde  beam,  odde  seceras 
for  me  and  for  dam  godspelle, 

30  De  hund-feald  ne  onfo  nu  on  disse 
tide,  bus,  and  brodru,  and  swusti'a,  and 
ffeder  and  moder,  and  beam,  and 
seceras,  mid  ehtnessum,  and  on  to- 
weardre  worulde  ece  lif. 

31  Manega  fyrraeste  beojj  ytemeste^ 
and  ytemeste  fyrmeste. 

32  S5])lice  hi  ferdon  on  wege  to  Hieru- 
salem ;  and  se  Hselend  him  beforau 
code,  and  hi  adredon  him  hine,  and  him 
fyligdon.  And  eft  he  nam  hi  twelfe, 
and  ongan  him  secgan,  da  ])ing  de  him 
towearde  weeron. 

33  Dpet  we  nu  astiga}>  to  Hierusalem, 
and  mannes  sunn  bij)  geseald  sacerda 
ealdrum,  and  bocerum,  and  ealdrum ; 
and  hi  hine  dea])e  genyderia]>,  and  hi 
hine  );eodum  sylla]?. 

34  And  hi  hine  bysmria)?,  and  hi  him 
on  spseta}),  and  hine  swinga)? ;  and  ofsleaj) 
hine,  and  he  arist  on  dam  briddan 
dpege. 

35  Him  da  genealcchton  to  lacobus 
and  lohannes,  Zebedeis  suna,  and  cwced- 
on,  Lareow,  we  wylla}?,  dtet  dii  us  do, 
swa  hwfet  SAva  we  biddaj?. 

36  Da  cwee])  he,  Hwset  wylle  gyt  d?et 
ic  inc  do  ? 

37  Da  cwsedon  hi,  Syle  unc,  dset  wyt 
sitton,   on   dinum   wuldre,  an   on   dine 


X.  26-37.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

thorw  a  ncdlis  yjc,  than  a  riclie  man  for 
to  entrc  in  to  the  kyngtloni  of  God. 

26  "Whiche  wonthiilon  more,  seyinge 
at  hem  sohie,  And  who  may  bo  maud 
saf? 

27  And  Jhesus  bilioUllngo  hem,  seith 
to  hem,  Anentis  men  it  is  impossible, 
but  not  anemptis  God  ;  for  alle  thingis 
ben  possible  aneniptis  God. 

28  And  aftirward  Petrc  bigan  for  to 
scyc  to  him,  Loo !  we  han  left  alle 
thingis,  and  han  sued  thee. 

29  Jhesus  answeriuge  seith,  Treuli  I 
seie  to  50U,  thcr  is  no  man  that  schal 
leeue  hous,  or  brethcrcn,  or  sistris,  or 
fadir,  or  niodir,  or  sones,  or  fceldis  for 
me  and  for  the  gospel, 

30  The  which  schal  not  taken  an  hun- 
ch-idfold  so  moche  now  in  this  tyme, 
housis,  and  bretheren,  and  sistris,  and 
modris,  and  sones,  and  fcldis,  with  per- 
secuciouns,  and  in  the  world  to  comynge 
euerlasting  lyf. 

31  Forsoth  many  schulen  be,  the  firste 
the  laste,  and  the  laste  the  firste. 

32  Forsothe  thei  weren  in  the  weye 
sti5}'nge  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  Jhesus  wente 
bifore  hem,  and  thei  wondriden,  and 
folowinge  dx'cdden.  And  eftsoone  Jhe- 
sus takingc  to  twelue,  bygan  to  seye 
to  hem,  what  thingis  weren  to  come  to 
him. 

33  For  lo  !  we  sti5en  to  Jerusalem, 
and  mannus  sone  schal  be  bitrayed  to 
the  princes  of  prestis,  and  to  scribis, 
and  to  cldcre  men ;  and  thei  schulen 
danipne  him  by  deeth,  and  thei  schulen 
bytake  him  to  hethene  men. 

34  And  thei  schulen  scorne  him,  and 
byspcete  him,  and  bcete  him ;  and  thei 
schulen  sle  him,  and  in  the  thridde  day 
he  schal  ryse  a5en. 

35  And  .James  and  Jon,  Zebedees  sones, 
camen  ny3  to  him,  seyinge,  Maistir,  we 
wolen,  that  what  eucre  wc  schulen  axe, 
thou  do  to  vs. 

36  And  he  seide  to  hem,  What  wolen 
5e  that  I  do  to  30U  ] 

37  And  thei  seidcn,  yjuc  to  vs,  that 
we  sitten  that  oon  at  thi  ri5thalf,  and 


TYNDALE,  152C. 


223 


thorowc  the  eye  of  an  nedlc,  then  for  a 
ryche  man  to  cutre  into  the  kyngdom 
of  God. 

26  And  they  were  astonnyed  out  of 
measure,  sayinge  betwenc  them  selves, 
AVho  then  can  be  saved  1 

27  Jesus  lokcd  apon  them,  and  sayd, 
With  men  it  is  vnpossible,  but  not  with 
God  ;  for  with  God  all  thinges  are  pos- 
sible. 

28  And  Petre  began  to  saye  vnto  hym, 
Loo !  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  have 
folowed  the. 

29  Jesus  answered  and  sayde,  Verely 
I  saye  vnto  you,  there  ys  no  man  that 
hath  forsaken  housse,  or  brethren,  or 
sisters,  or  father,  or  moder,  or  wyfe, 
other  chyldren,  or  londes,  for  my  sake 
and  the  gospellcs, 

30  Whych  shall  nott  receavc  an  houn- 
dred  foolde  nowc  in  thys  lyfe,  houses, 
and  brethren,  and  sisters,  and  mothers, 
and  children,  and  londes,  whith  persecu- 
cions,  and  in  the  worlde  to  come  etcrnall 
lyfe. 

3 1  Many  that  are  fyrst  shalbe  last,  and 
the  last  f3-rst. 

32  They  were  in  the  waye  goinge  vppe 
to  Jerusalem  ;  and  Jesus  went  before 
them,  and  they  were  amased,  and  as 
they  folowed  were  aflrayde.  And  Jesus 
toke  the  xij.  agayne,  and  began  to  tell 
tlK'm,  what  thinges  shuldc  happen  vnto 
him. 

33  Beholde !  we  goo  vppe  to  Jerusa- 
lem, and  the  Sonne  off  man  shalbe  de- 
lyvrcd  vnto  the  hye  preestes,  and  vnto 
the  scribbes  ;  and  they  shall  condempne 
hym  to  deeth,  and  shall  delyvre  hym  to 
the  gentyls. 

34  And  they  shall  mocke  hym,  and 
scourge  him,  and  spit  apon  hym  ;  and 
kill  him,  and  the  thirde  daye  he  shall 
ryse  agane. 

35  And  James  and  Jhon,  the  sons  off' 
Zcbede,  cam  vnto  hym,  sayinge,  ^Master, 
we  woldc,  that  thou  shuldcst  do  for  vs, 
what  soever  we  dcsyre. 

36  He  sayde  vnto  them,  What  wolde 
ye  I  shulde  do  vnto  you  "i 

37  They  sayd  vnto  hym,  Graunt  vnto 
V3,  that  we  maye  sitt  won  on  thy  ryght 


224 


GOTHIC,  360. 


hleidimiein    ))einai    sitaiwa,   'in    wulj^au 
J)einanima. 

38  Ij)  lesus  qajjuh  du  i'm,  Ni  witu})S 
whis  Lidyats ;  niagutsu  driggkan  stikl, 
jjanei  ik  driggka,  yah  daupeiiiai  Jjizaiei 
ik  daupyada,  ei  daupyaindau  1 

39  IJ5  eis  qejjun  du  imma,  Magu.  I]j 
lesus  qa})uli  du  im,  Swejjauh  Jjana  stikl 
]>anei  ik  driggka  driggkats,  yah  |)izai 
daupeinai,  ];izaiei  ik  daupyada,  [daup- 
yanda ;]  '•' 

40  1])  Jjata  du  sitan  af  taihswon  meiuai 
aijjjjau  af  hleidumeiu  nist  niein  du  gi- 
Tuan,  alya  Jjaimei  manwijj  was. 

41  Yah  gahausyandans  ]?ai  taihun  du- 
gunnun  unweryan  bi  lakobu  yah  lohau- 
nen. 

42  I|)  is  athaitands  ins,  qaj>  du  im, 
Witu)),  Jjatei  [jjaiei]'*'  })Uggkyand  reiklnon 
)jiudom,  gafrauyinond  im,  'i\>  J)ai  mikil- 
ans  ize  gawaldand  im. 


43  J]>  ni  swa  siyai  in  izwis,  ak  sa- 
AA'hazuh  saei  wili  wairpan  mikils  in  izwis, 
siyai  izwar  andbahts, 

44  Yah  saei  wili  izwara  wairjjan  frum- 
ists,  siyai  allaim  skalks. 

45  Yah  auk  sunus  mans  ni  qam,  at 
andbahtyam,  ak  andbahtyan,  yah  giban 
saiwala  seiua  faur  managans  lun. 

46  Yah  qemun  in  lairikon  ;  yah  us- 
gaggandin  imma  yain])ro,  m\p  siponyam 
seinaim,  yah  managein  ganohai,  sunus 
Teimaiaus,  Barteimaiaus,  blinda,  sat  faur 
wig  du  aihtron. 

47  Yah  gahausyands,  j^atei  lesus  sa 
Nazoraius  ist,  dugann  hropyan,  yah  qij)an, 
Sunau  Daweidis,  lesu,  armai  mik. 

48  Yah  whotidedun  imma  managai,  ei 
gajjahaidedi ;  ij?  is  filu  mais  hropida, 
Sunau  Daweidis,  armai  mik. 

49  Yah  gastandands  lesus  haihait  at- 
wopyan  ina  ;  yah  wopidedun  Jjana  blind- 
an,  qi)jandans  du  imma,  prafstei  })uk, 
urreis,  wopeijj  J)uk. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

swydran  healfe,  and  oder  on  dine  wyn- 
stran. 

38  Da  cwse)}  se  Hselend,  Gyt  nyton 
hwset  gyt  bidda)) ;  mage  gyt  drincan 
done  calic,  de  ic  drince,  and  beon  ge- 
fullod  on  dam  fulluhte,  de  ic  beo  ge- 
fullod  ? 

39  Da  cwsedon  hi,  Wyt  magon.  Da 
cw8e|>  se  Hselend,  Gyt  drincajj  done  calic 
de  ic  drince,  gyt  beo]>  gefuljode  dam 
fulluhte,  de  ic  beo  gefullod ; 

40  S5))lice  nis  hit  na  min  iiic  to  syl- 
lenne  dset  gyt  sitton  on  mine  swydran 
healfe  odde  on  da  wynstran,  ac  dam  de 
hit  gegearwod  ys. 

41  Dii  gebulgou  da  tyne  hi  be  lacobe 
and  lohanne. 

42  Da  clypode  se  H^lend  hi,  and 
cwsejj,  Wite  ge,  dset  da  de  on  Jjeodum 
ealdorscype  habbaj?,  djet  hyra  .  ealdras 
anweald  ofer  hi  habbajj. 


43  S6|)lice  on  eow  hit  nis  swa,  ac  swa 
hw^'lc  swa  wyle  mid  eow  yldest  beon, 
se  byf)  eower  ))en, 

44  And  se  de  wyle  on  eow  fyrmest 
beon,  se  hj\>  ealra  |ieow. 

45  S6]>lice  ne  com  mannes  sunn,  dset 
him  man  {lenode,  ac  dset  he  jjenode,  and 
his  sawle  sealde  for  manegra  alysed- 
nysse.''' 

46  Da.  comon  hi  to  Gericho  ;  and  he 
ferde  frara  Gericho,  and  his  leorning- 
cnihtas,  and  mycel  menegu,  Timeus 
sunu,  Bartimeus,  sset  blind,  wi^  done 
weg  wfedla. 

47  Da  he  gehyrde,  d?et  hit  w£es  se 
Nazarenisca  Hselend,  he  ongan  da 
clypian,  and  cwedan,  Heelend,  Dauides 
sunu,  gemiltsa  me. 

48  Da  budon  him  manega,  dset  he 
suwode ;  he  clypode  da  dees  de  ma, 
Miltsa  me,  Dauides  sunu, 

49  Da  setstod  se  Hselend  and  het  hine 
clypian  ;  da  ssedon  hi  dam  blindan,  Beo 
geheortra,  and  aris,  se  Hselend  de  clyp- 


X.  38-49-]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
the  tothir  at  the  left,  in  thi  glorie. 

38  Forsothc  Jhcsus  seith  to  licm,  )C 
witeu  not  what  56  sehulon  axe  ;  mown 
50  drynke  tlie  cuppc,  the  which  I  am  to 
drynke,  or  be  waischuu  with  the  bap- 
tym,  in  whicli  I  am  baptisid  1 

39  And  thei  seidcn  to  hiui,  We  mown. 
Sothli  Jhesns  seith  to  hem,  Treuli  5c 
schulen  drynke  the  cnppe  that  I  drynke, 
and  5e  schulen  be  waiscliun  with  the 
baptyni,  in  wliich  I  am  baptit^id  ; 

40  Sothli  for  to  sitte  at  my  I'ijthalf  or 
lefthalf  is  not  myn  to  5yue  to  30U,  but 
to  which  it  is  ordcyned. 

41  And  the  ten  heeringe  hadden  endig- 
nacioun  of  James  and  John. 

42  Sothli  Jhcsus  elepinge  hem,  seith 
to  hem,  5e  witen,  that  thei  that  semen ■*■ 
to  haue  princehed  on  folkis,  lordsehipen''' 
of  hem,  and  the  princes  of  hem  ban 
power  of  hem. 

43  Forsoth  it  is  not  so  in  50U,  but  who 
eucre  schal  wolle  be  maad  moi'e,  schal 
be  50ure  mynystre, 

44  And  who  euere  schal  wolle  be  the 
firste  in  50U,  schal  be  seruaunt  of  alle. 

45  Forwhi  and  mannis  sone  cam  not, 
that  it  schulde  be  mynystrid  to  him, 
but  that  he  schulde  mynystre,  and  jjnie 
his  soule^  redempcioun'''  for  manye. 

46  And  thei  camen  to  Jerico ;  and 
him  goynge  forth  fro  Jerico,  and  his 
disciplis,  and  a  ful  moche  cumpany  of 
peple,  the  sone  of  Tymey,  Barthymeus, 
blynd,  saat  bisydis  the  weye  beggynge. 

47  The  which  whanne  he  hadde  herd, 
for  it  is  Jhcsus  of  Nazareth,  bigan  to 
crie,  and  seye,  Jhesu,  the  sone  of  Dauith, 
haue  mercy  on  me. 

48  And  manye  thretnyden  liym,  that 
he  schulde  l)e  stille  ;  and  he  cricde 
luuchc  mpre,  Jhesu,  the  sone  of  Dauith, 
haue  mercy  on  me.   ' 

49  And  Jliesu  stondinge  comaundide 
liyin  for  to  be  clepid  ;  and  thei  clepiden 
the  blynde  man,  seiynge  to  him.  Be  thou 
of  betere  herte,  ryse  vp,  he  clepith  thee. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


225 


honde,  and  the  other  on  thy  lyftc  honde, 
in  thy  glory. 

38  Butt  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them,  Ye  wot 
not  what  ye  axe  ;  can  ye  dryncke  of  the 
euppe,  that  I  shall  drynke  of,  and  be 
baptised  in  the  baptim,  that  I  shalbe 
baptised  in  1 

39  And  they  sayd  vnto  him.  That  we 
can.  Jesus  sayde  Anto  them.  Ye  shall 
drynke  oil  the  cuppe  that  I  shall  drynke 
of,  and  be  baptised  with  the  baptim, 
that  I  shalbe  Ijaptiscd  in ; 

40  Ihit  to  sitt  on  my  right  honde  and 
on  my  lifte  honde  ys  not  myne  to  geve, 
but  to  them  for  whom  it  ys  prepared. 

41  And  when  the  .x.  herde  that  they 
began  to  disdayne  at  James  and  Jhon. 

42  Butt  Jesus  called  them  vnto  him, 
and  sayd  to  them.  Ye  knowe  welc,  that 
they  Avhych  seme  to  bearc  rule  amonge 
the  gentyls,  raygne  as  lordes  over  them, 
and  they  that  be  greate  men  amonge 
them  exercyse  auctorite  over  them. 

43  So  shall  it  not  be  a  monge  you,  but 
Avosoever  of  you  wilbe  greate  amonge 
you,  shalbe  youre  minster, 

44  And  Avosoever  Avilbe  ehefe,  shalbe 
serA'aunt  vnto  all. 

45  For  even  the  sonne  of  man  came 
nott,  that  other  shulde  minister  vnto 
hym,  but  to  minister,  and  to  geve  his 
lyfe  for  the  redempcion  of  many. 

46  And  they  cam  to  Hicrico  ;  and  as 
he  Avent  oute  off"  Hierico,  Avith  his  dis- 
ciples, and  a  greate  nombre  of  people, 
Barthimeus,  the  sonne  of  Thimeus,  Avhich 
Avas  blynde,  sate  by  the  hye  wayes  syde 
beggynge. 

47  And  Avhen  he  herde,  that  it  AA-as 
Jesus  oft'  Nazareth,  he  began  to  crye, 
and  to  saye,  Jesus,  the  sonne  off"  David, 
have  mercy  on  me. 

48  And  many  rebuked  hyme,  be  cause 
he  shulde  hoolde  is  peace ;  but  he  cryed 
the  moore  a  greate  deale,  Thou  sonne 
off"  David,  have  mercy  on  me. 

49  And  Jesus  stode  still  and  eom- 
maunded  hym  to  be  called ;  and  they 
called  the  blynde,  saynge  vnto  hym.  Be 
off"  good  comfort,  ryse,  lie  calleth  the. 

Q 


226 


GOTHIC,    360. 


50  iijj  is,  afwairpands  wastyai  seinai, 
ustlaupauds  qam  at  lesu. 

51  Yah  andhafyauds  qa]?  du  imma 
lesus,  WTia  wileis  ei  tauj-au  Jjusl  1]> 
sa  blinda  qa])  du  immaj  Eabbaunei,  ei 
ussaiwhau. 

52  I})  lesus  qa}>  du  imma,  Gagg,  ga- 
laubeins  J^eina  ganasida  }>uk.  Yah  suu- 
saiw  ussawh,  yah  laistida  in  wiga  lesu. 


Chap.  XI.  i  Yah  bi}>e  newha  wes- 
un  lairusalem  in  Be))sfagein  yah  B\p- 
aniin,  at  fairgunya  Ale^\yin,  insandida 
twans  siponye  seinaize, 

2  Yah  qaj)  du  im,  Gaggats  in  haim  ])0 
wijjrawairjjon  iggqis  ;  yah  sunsaiw  inn- 
gaggandaus  in  ]>o  baurg  bigitats  fulan 
gabundanana,  ana  J^ammei  nauh  ainshun 
manne  ni  sat ;  andbindandans  ina,  at- 
tiuhats. 

3  Yah  yabai  whas  iggqis  qijjai,  Duwhe 
|)ata  tauyats  1  qijjaits,  Jjatei  Frauya  }>is 
gairneij),  yah  sunsaiw  ina  insandei]? 
hidre. 

4  Galifiun  J)an,  yah  bigetuu  fulan  ga- 
bundanana at  daura  uta,  ana  gagga ; 
yah  audbundun  ina. 

5  Yah  sumai  ]?ize  yainar  standandane 
qejjun  du  im,  Wha  tauyats,  andbind- 
andans J)ana  fulan  1 

6  Ij)  eis  qe])nn  du  im,  swaswe  anabauj) 
im  lesus  ;  yah  lailotun  ins. 

7  Yah  brahtedun  ]}ana  fulan  at  lesua, 
yah  galagidedun  ana  wastyos  seinos,  yah 
gasat  ana  ina. 

8  Managai  ]>an  wastyom  seinalm  straw- 
idedun  ana  Aviga,  sumai  astans  mai- 
maitun  us  bagmam,  yah  strawidedun 
ana  wiga. 

9  Yah  Jjai  fauragaggandans,  hropide- 
dun,  qi|)andans,  Osanua,  ]>iu])ida  sa  qim- 
anda  in  namin  Frauyins  j 

I  o  piujjido  so  qimandei  Jjiudangardi  in 
namin  attins  unsaris  Daweidis ;  Osanna 
in  hauhistyam. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

50  He  da,  awearp  his  reaf,  and  for]j- 
VcEsde  and  to  him  com. 

51  Da  cwfej;  se  Hselend,  Hwpet  wylt 
du  da3t  ic  de  do*?  Da  cw8ej>  he,  Ltireow, 
deet  ic  geseo. 

52  Da  cwfe])  se  Hcelend  to  him,  Ga, 
din  geleafa  de  halne  gedyde.  And  he 
soua  geseah,  and  him  fyligde  on  wcge. 


Chap.  XL  i  tDa  he  genealsehte 
Hierusalem  and  Bethania,  to  Oliuetes 
dune,  he  sende  his  twegen  leorning- 
cnihtas, 

2  And  cw£e]j  to  him,  Faraj?  to  dam 
castele  de  [ongen]  inc  ys ;  and  gyt  dar 
sona  gemeta])  assan  folan  getigedne,  ofer 
dsene  nan  man  gyt  ne  sset ;  untigea]) 
hine,  and  to  me  gelceda]^. 

3  And  gyf  hwa  to  inc  hwaet  cwyj?, 
secgajj,  dcet  Drihten  hfefj)  his  neode, 
and  he  hine  sona  hider  Iset. 

4  And  da  hi  ut-ferdon,  hi  gemetton 
done  folan  ute,  on  twycenan,  bef5ran 
dura  getigedne  ;  da  untigdon  hi  hine. 

5  And  sume  de  dar  st5don  dus  Scedon 
him,  Hwoet  do  gyt,  done  folan  un- 
tigende  1 

6  Da  cwsedon  hi,  swa  se  Hselend  unc 
bead  ;  and  hi  leton  hi  da. 

7  Da  Iceddon  hi  done  folan  to  dam 
Hfelende,  and  hi  hyra  reaf  on-aledou, 
and  he  on-sret. 

8  ]\Ianega  hyra  reaf  on  done  weg 
strehton,  sume  da  [bogas]^  of  dam  treow- 
um  heowoUj  and  streowodon  on  done 
weg. 

9  And  da  de  beforan  eodon,  and  da  de 
tefter-folgodon,  cweedon  dus,  Osanna, 
sy  gebletsod  se  de  com  on  Drihtnes 
naman ; 

10  Si  gebletsod  dset  rice  de  com  ures 
freder   Dauides;    Osanna   on    heahnes- 


X.  50.-XT.  TO.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

50  The  whicli,  his  cloth  cast  away, 
sturtinge  cam  to  him. 

51  And  Jhesus  answeringe  scidc  to 
him,  What  wolt  thou  I  schal  do  to  thee  1 
The  blynde  man  scide  to  him,  Maistir, 
that  I  se. 

52  Sothli  Jhesus  scidc  to  him,  Go 
thou,  thi  fcith  hath  maad  thee  saaf. 
And  anon  he  373,  and  suede  him  in  the 
weye. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


227 


Chap.  XI.  i  And  whanne  Jhesus 
cam  ny5  to  Jerusalem  and  to  Bctanye, 
to  the  mount  of  Olyuete,  he  sendith  two 
of  his  disciplis, 

2  And  seith  to  hem,  Go  50  in  to  the 
castcl  that  is  a3ens  50U ;  and  anon  5e 
entrynge  in  thidur  schulcn  fynde  a  colt 
tycd,  on  the  which  non  of  men  sat  jit ; 
vnbynde  je,  and  bryng  him. 

3  And  if  ony  man  schal  seie  ony  thing 
to  50U,  seie  je,  that  he  is  nedeful  to 
the  Lord,  and  anon  he  schal  leeue  him 
hidur. 

4  And  thei  goynge  forth,  founden  a 
colt  bounden  l^j-fore  the  jate  Avith  oute- 
forth,  in  the  meeting  of  tweye  weyes ; 
and  thei  vnbounden  him. 

5  And  summe  of  men  stondinge  there 
seidcn  to  hem,  "What  don  je,  vnbynd- 
inge  the  colt  ? 

6  And  thei  seiden  to  hem,  as  Jhesus 
comaundide  to  hem  ;  and  thei  leften 
hem. 

7  And  thei  broujten  the  colt  to  Jhesu, 
and  thei  puttidcn  to  him  her  clothis, 
and  Jhesus  sat  vpon  him. 

8  Forsothe  manye  strewiden  her  clothis 
in  the  weye,  sothcli  othere  men  kittiden 
bowis^  fro  trees,  and  strewiden  in  the 
weye. 

9  And  thei  that  wenten  biforc,  and 
that  .sucden,  crycden,  seyinge,  Osanna, 
blessid  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord ; 

10  Blessid  the  kyngdom  that  cometh 
of  oure  fadir  Dauith  ;  Osanna  m  liijtees. 


50  He  threwe  uwaye  his  clookc,  and 
roose  and  cam  to  Jesus. 

51  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto 
hym,  What  wilt  thou  that  I  do  vnto 
the  I  The  blynde  sayde  vnto  hym.  Master, 
that  Y  myglit  see. 

52  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  Goo  thy 
waye,  thy  fayght  hath  saved  the.  And 
by  and  by  he  reccuved  his  sight,  and 
folowed  Jesus  in  the  waye. 


Chap.  XL  i  And  when  they  cam 
nye  to  Hierusalcm  vnto  Bcthphage  and 
Bethani,  be  sydes  mount  Olivte,  he  sent 
forth  .ij.  of  his  disciples, 

2  And  sayde  vnto  them.  Goo  youre 
wayes  into  the  toune  that  is  over  a- 
gaynste  you ;  and  as  sone  as  ye  entre 
into  it  ye  shall  fynde  a  coolte  bounde, 
where  on  never  man  sate ;  loose  hym, 
and  biynge  hym  bidder. 

3  xVnd  if  eny  man  saye  vnto  you.  Why 
do  ye  soo  1  saye,  that  the  Lorde  hath 
neade  of  him,  and  streight  waye  he  wyll 
sende  hym  bidder. 

4  They  went  their  waye,  and  found  a 
coolte  tyed  by  the  dore  with  out,  in  a 
place  where  two  wayes  mett ;  and  they 
losed  hym. 

5  And  divers  of  them  that  stode  there 
sayd  vnto  them  ;  What  do  ye,  loosynge 
the  coolte  1 

6  x\nd  they  sayd  vnto  them,  even  as 
Jesus  had  commaunded  them ;  and  they 
let  them  goo. 

7  And  they  brought  the  coolte  to  Jesus, 
and  caste  their  garmentes  on  hym,  and 
he  sate  apon  hym. 

8  And  many  spreede  there  garmentes 
in  the  waye,  other  cutt  doune  braunches 
of  the  trees,  and  strawed  them  in  the 
waye. 

9  And  they  that  went  before,  and  they 
that  folowed,  cryed,  saynge,  Hosianna, 
blessed  be  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
off  the  Lorde  ; 

10  Blessed  be  the  kyngdom  that  com- 
mcth  in  the  name  off  hym  tliat  is  Lorde 
off  oure  father  David  ;  Hosianna  in  the 
hyest. 

Q2 


228 


GOTHIC,  360. 


II  Yah  ,2;alai])  'in  lairusauhyma  lesus, 
yali  'in  alb  ;  yah  bisaiwhands  alia,  at 
andanabtya  yii))an  wisandiii  wbeilai,  us- 
iddya  iu  BejjaniaUj  mijj  J)aim  twalibim. 


T2  Yah  iftiimiii  daga,  usstandandam 
im  ns  Bej^aniin,  gredags  was. 

13  Yah  gasaiwhands  smakkabagm  fair- 
ra})ro  habandan  lauf,  atiddya,  ei  aufto 
bigeti  wha  ana  amma  ;  yah  qimands  at 
imma,  ni  waiht  bigat  ana  imma,  niba 
lauf;  ni  auk  was  mel  smakkane. 

14  Yah  usbairands  qnj?  du  imma,  M 
Jjanaseijjs  us  ])us  aiwmanna  akran  mat- 
yai.    Yah  gahausidedun  ]>&i  siponyos  is  ; 

15  Yah  iddyedun  du  lairusaulwmai. 
Yah  atgaggands  lesus  in  alh,  dugaun 
uswairpan  ]jans  frabugyandans  yah  bug- 
yandans  in  alh ;  yah  mesa  skattyane, 
yah  sitlans  J)ize  frabugyandaue  ahakini 
uswaltida ; 

16  Yah  ni  lailot,  ei  whas  ]/airhberi  kas 
Jjairh  ]>o  alh. 

17  Yah  laisida,  qij^ands  du  im,  Niu 
gameli]?  ist,  patei  razn  mein  razn  bido 
haitada  allaim  l^iudom?  i]>  yus  gatawi- 
dedujj  ita  du  filigrya  waidedyane. 

18  Yah  gahausidedun  }?ai  bokaryos  yah 
gudyane  auhumistans,  yah  sokidedun 
whaiwa  imma  usqistidedeina  ;  ohtedun 
auk  ina,  unte  alia  managei  sildaleik- 
idedun  in  laiseinais  is. 

19  Yah  ]n\>e  andanahti  Avai'j),  usiddya 
ut  us  jjizai  baurg. 

20  Yah  in  maurgin  faurgaggandans, 
gasewhun  Jjana  smakkabagm  ])aursyana 
us  waurtim. 

21  Yah  gamunands  Paitrus,  qa])  du 
imma,  Eabbei,  sai !  smakkabagms  Jjanei 
fraqast,  gajjaursnoda. 

22  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qajj  du  im, 
Habaij)  galaubein  Gu)>s  ; 

23  Amen  auk  qij^a  izwis,  Jjiswhazuh  ei 
qijjai  du  ]?amma  faii-gunya,  Ushafei  ])uk, 
yah  wairp  })us  in  mavein  ;  yah  ni  tuz- 
wei-yai    in    hairtin    scinamma,    ak    ga- 


ANGLO-SAXO^T,  995.     [St.  Mark 

1 1  And  he  eode  da  on  Hierosolima 
tempi ;  and  ealle  ])ing  he  besceawode, 
da  eefen  tima  Avaes,  he  ferde  to  Beth- 
aniam,  mid  his  twelf  leornina--cnihtum. 


12  And  Gclrum  dsege,  da  hi  ferdon 
fram  Bethania,  hine  hingrode. 

13  Dil  he  feorran  geseah  an  fic-treow 
de  leaf  ha?fde,  he  com,  and  sohte  hwieder 
he  dar  on  uht  fiinde;  da  he  him  to  com, 
ne  funde  he  dar,  biiton  leaf  ane ;  soli- 
lice  hit  wa?s  dies  f  ic-treowes  tima. 

14  Da  cwse})  he,  Heononfor}?  on  ec- 
nesse  ne  ete  senig  man  wsestm  of  de. 
And  his  leoi'ning-cnihtas  dset  gehyrdon; 

15  Da  comon  hi  eft  to  Hierusalem, 
And  da  he  on  diet  tempi  eode,  he  on- 
gan  drifan  of  dam  temple  syllende  and 
bicgende ;  and  mynetera  J^rocu,  and 
heah-setlu  de  da  culfrau  cypton  he 
tobrtec ; 

16  And  he  ne  gejiafode,  dtet  senig  man 
ctnig  fpet  );urh  doet  tempi  ban-e. 

17  And  he  da  Iserende,  dus  cwae]>  to 
liim,  Nis  hit  awriten,  Dtet  min  hiis 
fram  eallum  Jjeodum  bi]>  genemncd 
gebed-hiis?  s6})Hce  ge  dydon  dcet  to 
sceajjena  scrsefe. 

18  Da  dsera  sacerda  ealdras  and  da 
b5ceras  dis  gehyrdon,  hi  jjohton  hii  hi 
hine  forspildou ;  deh  hi  hira  adredon 
hine,  fordam  call  seo  menigu  wundrode 
be  his  hire. 

19  And  da  hit  sefen  w£es,  he  eode  of 
dtere  ceastre. 

20  On  merigen  da  hi  ferdon,  hi  ge- 
sawon  dset  fic-treow  forscruncen  of  dam 
wyrtruman. 

2 1  Da  cw9e|j  Petrus,  Lareow,  loca  !  hii 
forscrauc  da?t  fic-treow,  de  dii  wyrig- 
dest. 

22  Da  cwfej)  se  Hselend  him  aud- 
swarigende,  Habba)>  Godes  triiwan  ; 

23  Ic  secge  eow  to  s5})e,  swa.  hwylc 
swa  cwyj)  to  disum  miinte.  Si  du  afyr- 
red,  and  on  sse  aworpen  ;  and  on  liis 
heortan  ne  twynaj?,  ac  gelyfl?,  swa  hwtet 


XL  11-23.]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1  And  he  entridc  in  to  Jerusalem,  in 
to  the  temple ;  and  alle  thiniijis  seyu 
nhoute,  whanne  the  our  was  now  euen- 
ynij,  he  weute  in  to  Bctanye,  witli 
twclue. 

1 2  And  another  day,  whanne  he  wente 
out  of  Betanye,  he  hungride. 

13  And  whannc  he  hadde  scyn  a  fy^c 
tree  afer  hauynge  leeuys,  he  cam,  if 
happily  he  schulde  fynde  ony  thing 
therynne ;  and  whaniic  he  cam  to  it, 
ho  fond  no  thing,  out  taken  leeuys  ;  for 
it  was  no  tyme  of  fygis. 

14  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seide  to  it, 
Kow  no  more  with  outen  eudc  ony  man 
ete  fruyt  of  thee.  And  his  disciples 
herden ; 

15  And  thei  camen  to  Jerusalem.  And 
whanne  he  hadde  entrid  in  to  the  tem- 
]>le,  he  bigau  for  to  caste  out  men  sell- 
ingo  and  biggynge  in  the  temple  ;  and 
he  turnyde  vpsodoun  the  booi'dis  of 
chaungeris,  and  the  chaieris  of  men  sell- 
inge  culueris  ; 

1 6  And  he  suffridc  not,  that  ony  man 
schulde  here  a  vessel  thur5  the  tcm])le. 

1 7  And  he  tau5te  hem,  seyinge,  "NVhor 
it  is  not  writun,  For  myn  hous  schal  be 
clepid  the  hous  of  preiynge  to  alle  folkis  1 
forsoth  50  han  maad  it  a  den  of  theues. 

18  The  which  thing  herd,  the  princes 
of  prestis  and  scribis  sou-;ten  hou  thei 
schulde  leese  him  ;  forsoth  thei  dreden 
hym,  fur  al  the  cumpanyc  of  peple  won- 
dride  on  his  teching. 

19  And  whanne  euenyng  was  maad, 
he  wcnte  out  of  the  citee. 

20  And  whanne  thei  passlden  ecrly, 
thei  sy3en  the  fige  tree  maad  drye  fro 
the  rootis. 

21  And  Petrc  hauynge  raynde,  seide 
to  him,  Maistir,  lo  !  the  fyge  tree,  whom 
thou  cursed ist,  hath  dryed  vp. 

22  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seith  to 
him,  }Iaue  50  tlie  feith  of  God  ; 

23  Treuli  I  seie  to  50U,  that  who  euere 
seith  to  this  hil.  Take,  and  sende  in  to 
the  see  ;  and  doutith  not  in  his  herte, 
but  bileueth,  for  what   euere  he   schul 


TYNDALE,i52  6. 


229 


1  r  And  the  Lovdc  entrcd  into  Hieru- 
saleni,  and  into  the  tem])lc  ;  and  when 
he  had  loked  roundabout  apon  all 
thinges,  and  nowc  the  even  tyde  was 
come,  he  went  out  vnto  Lcthany,  with 
the  twelve. 

12  Anl  on  the  morowc,  when  they  Avere 
come  out  from  Bethany,  he  liungred. 

J  3  And  he  spyed  a  fygge  tree  a  farre 
off  havinge  leves,  and  went  to  se  whether 
he  myghc  fynde  eny  thinge  there  on  ; 
but  when  he  cam  there  to,  he  founde 
nothinge  butt  leves ;  for  the  tyme  off 
fygges  was  nott  yet. 

14  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  to  it, 
Never  man  eate  frute  of  the  here  after 
whill  the  worlde  stondith.  And  his 
disciples  herde  it ; 

1 5  And  they  cam  to  Hierusalcm.  And 
Jesus  went  into  the  temple,  and  began  to 
cast  out  them  which  soolde  and  bought 
in  the  temple  ;  and  overthrewe  the  tabels 
of  the  money  chaungers,  and  the  stoles 
of  them  that  sooklc  doves  ; 

16  And  wolde  not  suffrc,  that  eny  man 
caried  a  vessell  thorowe  the  temple. 

17  And  he  taught,  sayuge  vnto  tliem, 
Ys  it  not  written,  Howe  that  myne 
housse  shalbe  called  the  housse  of  prayer 
vnto  all  nacions  ?  butt  ye  have  made  it 
a  deen  of  theves. 

18  And  the  scribes  and  hye  prestes 
herde  yt,  and  sought  howe  to  distroye 
him  ;  for  they  feared  hym,  be  cause  all 
the  peple  marveld  at  his  doctrine. 

19  And  when  even  was  come,  he  went 
out  of  the  cite. 

20  And  in  the  mornynge  as  they  passed 
by,  they  sawe  the  fygge  tree  dryed  vpp 
by  the  rotes. 

21  And  Peter  rcmcmbred,  and  sayd 
vnto  hym,  ]\Iaster,  beholde  !  the  fygge 
tree,  wliich  thou  cursedes,  ys  widdred 
awaye. 

2  2  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them.  Have  confulcns  in  (Jod  ; 

23  Yerely  I  syc  vnto  you,  that  whoso- 
ever shall  saye  vnto  this  mountayne, 
Take  awaye  tliy  silfe,  and  cast  thy  silfe 
in  to  the  see;  and  shall  not  waver  in 


230 


GOTHIC,  360. 


laubyai,  ])ata   ei   ])atei   qi])l]j,  gagaggi]?, 
\vair}>ip  'imma,  ])iswhah  J^ei  qij'i]'. 


24  Du])])e  qijja  izwis,  allata  Jjiswhali  ]>ei 
bidyanclans  sokei]?,  galaubei]?  ])atei  nimi]?, 
yah  wairjjij)  izwis. 

25  Yali  })an  stanclaij?  bidyanclans,  aflet- 
ai}),  yabai  wlia  habaij?  wij^ra  whana,  ei 
yah  atta  izwar  sa  in  himinam,  afletai 
izwis  missadedins  azwaros. 

■26  Ip  yabai  yus  ni  afleti]?,  ni  ])au  atta 
izwar  sa  in  himinam,  afleti])  izwis  mis- 
sadedins izwaros. 

27  Yah  iddyedun  aftra  du  lairusaulw- 
mai.  Yah  in  alh  wharbondin  imma, 
atiddyedun  du  imma  jjai  auhumistans 
gudyans,  yah  bokaryos,  yah  sinistans, 

28  Yah  qe]jun  du  imma,  In  whamma 
waldufhye  Jjata  tauyis  ?  yah  whas  J)us 
pata  waldufni  atgaf,  ei  J)ata  tauyis  ? 

29  I])  lesus  andhafyands  qa])  du  im, 
Fraihna  yah  ik  izwis  ainis  waurdis,  yah 
andhafyi^  mis,  yah  qi})a  izwis,  in  wham- 
ma Avaldufnye  ])ata  tauya. 

30  Daupeins  lohannis  uzuh  himina 
Avas,  ])au  uzuh  mannam  1  andhafei]?  mis. 

31  Yah  jjahtedun  du  sis  misso,  qifsand- 
ans,  Yabai  qij^am  us  himina,  qi])ij)  ajjjjan, 
Duwhe  ni  galaubidedu]?  imma  ; 

32  Ak  qijjam  us  mannam,  uhtedun  ]jo 
managein  ;  allai  auk  alakyo  habaidedun 
lohannen,  ];atei  bi  sunyai  praufetes  Avas. 

33  Yah  andhafyandans  qe]>un  du  lesua, 
Ni  witum.  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa]> 
du  im,  Nib  ik  izwis  qijja,  in  whamma 
waldufnye  pata  tau}-a. 


Chap.  XII.  i  Yah  dugann  im  in 
gayukom  qij^an.  Weinagard  ussatida 
manna,  yah  bisatida  ina  fa))om,  yah  us- 
grof  dal  uf  mesa,  yah  gatimrida  kelikn, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

swa   he   cwyj),   gewurde   dis,   daet    ge- 
wyrj). 


24  Fordam  ic  eow  secge,  swa  hwset 
swa  ge  gyi'uende  biddajj,  gelyfaj?  diet  ge 
hit  onfoj),  and  hit  eoAV  becym}?. 

25  And  donne  ge  standa]?  eow  to  ge- 
biddenne,  forgifaj),  gif  ge  hwset  agen 
senigne  habba]),  dset  eow  eower  synna 
forgyfe,  eower  heofonHca  feeder  so  de 
on  heofonum  ys. 

26  Gyf  ge  ne  forgyfa)?,  ne  eow  eower 
synna  ne  forgyff),  eower  feeder       .     .     . 

27  Da  com  he  eft  to  Hierusalem.  And 
da  he  on  dam  temple  eode,  him  to  ge- 
nealsehton  da  heah-sacerdas,  and  bocer- 
as,  and  ealdras, 

28  And  dus  cwsedon,  On  hwylcum 
amvealde  dest  du  das  \>mg1  and  hwa 
sealde  de  disne  anweald,  dset  dii  dis 
do? 

29  Da  cwfej)  se  Hselend,  And  ic  ahsige 
eow  anre  sprsece,  andsAvaria]?  me,  and  ic 
secge  eoAv  donne,  on  hAvylcum  anwealde 
ic  dis  do. 

30  Hweder  wses  lohannes  fuUuht  de 
of  heofone,  de  of  mannum]  andswaria]> 
me. 

3 1  Da  Jjohton  hi,  and  CAveedon  betAveox 
him,  Gif  AA'e  secga])  of  heofone,  he  seg|> 
us,  Havi  ne  gelyfde  ge  him  ; 

32  Gif  Ave  secgajj  of  mannum,  Ave  on- 
dreedaj)  dis  folc  ;  ealle  hi  heefdon  lohan- 
nem,  dtet  he  Avaere  s6]>Hce  Avitega. 

33  Da  andswaredon  hi  dam  Hselende 
and  CAVEedon,  We  nyton.  Da  cwsejj  se 
Heelend,  Ne  ic  eoAv  ne  secge,  on  hAvylc- 
um  anwealde  ic  das  Jjing  do. 


Chap.  XII.  i  Da  ongan  he  him  big- 
spel  reccan.  Sum  man  him  plantode 
win-geard,  and  betynde  hine,  and  dealf 
anne  sea]?,  and  getimbrode  senne  stfpel. 


XI.  24.-XII.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

scyc,  be  it  maad,  it  sclial  be  maacl  to 
liim. 


124  Thcvfove  T  seie  to  5011,  alio  thinp^Is 
wliat  cucro  thingis  5c  prciynge  scbuleu 
axe,  bilouc  50  that  5c  schulcn  take,  and 
thei  schulcn  come  to  5011. 

25  And  whanne  5c  sclmlcn  stonde  foi* 
to  prcic,  for5yue  5c,  if  5c  han  ony  thing 
a5ens  ony  man,  that  and  50ure  fiidir 
that  is  in  heuencs,  fov5yuc  to  5011  50ure 
synncs. 

26  That  if  50  schulcn  not  for5}T.ie, 
neithei'  50ure  fadir  that  is  in  heuencs, 
schal  for5yue  50U  50urc  synnes. 

27  And  eftsoone  thei  camen  to  Jeru- 
salem. And  whanne  he  walkide  in  to 
the  temple,  the  hi3este  prestis,  and 
scribis,  and  eldere  men  camcn  ni3  to 
him, 

I  28  And  seien  to  him,  In  what  power 
doist  thou  thcs  thingis  ?  or  who  jaf  to 
thee  this  power,  that  thou  do  thes 
thingis  1 

29  Forsothe  Jhesus  answeringe  seith 
to  hem,  And  I  schal  axe  50U  o  woi'd, 
and  auswere  50  to  me,  and  I  schal  seie 
to  50U,  in  what  power  I  do  thes  thingis. 

30  "Whether  was  the  baptym  of  John 
of  heuene,  or  of  men  1  answere  ^e  to  me. 

31  And  thei  thou3ten  with  inne  hem 
seine,  seiynge,  If  we  schulcn  seie  of 
heuene,  he  schal  seie  to  vs,  Whi  ther- 
fore  bileuen  36  not  to  him  ; 

32  If  we  schulcn  seie  of  men,  we  dreden 
the  peple  ;  for  alio  men  hadden  John, 
for  he  was  verily  a  prophete. 

33  And  thei  answeringe  seyen  to  Jhesu, 
"We  witen  neuere.  And  Jhesu  answer- 
inge scith  to  hem.  Neither  I  seie  to  30U, 
in  what  power  I  do  thcs  thingis. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


231 


Chap.  XII.  i  ^Vnd  Jhesus  bigan  to 
speke  parably.'''  A  man  plauntide  a 
vyne3crd,  and  puttide  aljoute  an  hegge, 
and  dulf  a  lake,  and  bildide  a  tour,  and 


his  herte,  butt  shall  bclcve,  that  thoose 
thinges  which  he  sayeth,  shall  come  to 
l)asse,  what  soever  he  sayeth,  shalbc  done 
vnto  him. 

24  Thcrforc  I  saye  vnto  you,  what 
soever  ye  desyrc  when  ye  praye,  belevc 
that  ye  shall  have  it,  and  it  shalbe  done 
vnto  you. 

25  And  when  ye  stond  and  praye,  for- 
ycvc,  yf  ye  have  eny  thingc  agaynste  eny 
man,  that  youre  father  also  which  is  in 
heven,  maye  foryeve  you  yourc  tres- 
pases. 

26 


27  And  they  cam  againe  to  Hierusa- 
lem.  x\nd  as  he  walked  in  the  temple, 
there  cam  to  hym  the  bye  prestes,  and 
the  scribes,  and  the  seniours, 

28  And  sayd  vnto  hym,  By  what  auc- 
torite  doest  thou  these  thinges  1  and 
who  gave  the  this  auctorite,  to  do  these 
thinges 1 

29  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  I  wyll  also  axe  of  you  a  certcyno 
thynge,  and  answere  ye  me,  and  I  wyll 
tell  you,  by  what  auctorite  I  do  these 
thinges. 

30  ^Vhether  was  the  baptim  of  Jhon 
from  hevin,  or  of  men  1  answer  me. 

31  And  they  thought  in  them  selves, 
saynge,  Yf  we  shall  saye  from  heven, 
he  will  saye.  Why  then  did  ye  not  beleve 
hym ; 

3  2  But  yf  we  shall  saye  of  men,  then 
fearc  we  the  people  ;  for  all  men  counted 
Jhon,  that  he  was  a  veri  prophctt. 

33  And  they  answered  and  sayd  vnto 
Jesu,  We  cannot  tell.  And  Jesus  an- 
swered and  sayd  vnto  them,  Nether  wyll 
I  tell  you,  by  what  auctorite  I  do  these 
thyngcs. 


Chap.  XII.  i  And  he  began  to 
speakc  vnto  them  in  similitudes.  A 
certayne  man  planted  a  vineyardc,  and 
compascd  it  with  an  hedge,  and  ordeyn- 


232 


GOTHIC,  360. 


yah  anafalh  ma  waurstwyam,  yah  aflai]> 
alya]) ; 

2  Yali  insandicla  du  ]?aim  waurstwyam 
at  mel  skallc,  ei  at  jjaim  waurstwyam 
nemi  akranis  J)is  weinagardls. 

3  I})  eis  nimandans  ma  usbluggwun, 
yah  msandidedun  kiushandyau. 

4  Yah  aftra  iusandida  du  im  anjiarana 
skalk,  yah  Jjana  stainam  wairpandans 
gaaiwiskodeclun,  yah  haubij)  wuudan 
brahteduU;,  yah  insandidedun  ganaitid- 
ana. 

5  Yah  aftra  insandida  aii]jarana,  yah 
yainana  afslohun,  yah  managans  an|)ar- 
aiis,  sumans  usbliggwaiidans,  sumanzuh 
Jjan  usqimandans. 

6  panuh  nauhj;anuh  ainana  sunu  aig- 
ands  liubana  sis,  iusandida  yah  l^ana  du 
im  spedistana,  qi];ands,  patei  gaaistand 
sunu  meinana. 

7  i]>  yainai  }jai  Avaurstwyans  qe])un  du 
sis  misso,  patei  sa  ist  sa  arbinumya ; 
hiryij)  usqimam  imma,  yah  unsar  wair]jij> 
Jjata  arbi. 

8  Yah  undgreipandans  ina,  usqemuu, 
yah  uswaurpun  imma  ut  us  ])amma 
weinagarda. 

9  Wha  nuh  tauyai  frauya  ]jis  weinagard- 
is  1  Qimijj,  yah  usqistei]>  ]>ans  Avaurst- 
wyans,  yah  gibij)  Jjana  weiuagard  an- 
J)ai-aim. 

10  Nih  ])ata  gamelido  ussugg\vu|), 
Stains  Jjammei  uswaurpun  |)ai  timryans, 
sah  war])  du  haubida  waihstins  1 

XI  Fram  Frauyin  war]?  sa,  yah  ist 
siklaleiks  in  augam  unsaraim. 

12  Yah  sokidedun  ina  undgreipan,  yah 
ohtedun  ]>o  managein  ;  frojjun  auk  Jjatei 
du  im  ])0  gayukon  qa]) ;  yah  afletaudans 
ina,  galijjun. 

13  Yah  insandidedun  du  imma  sumai 
])ize  Fareisaie  yah  Herodiane,  ei  ina 
ganuteina  Avaurda. 

14  Ij)  eis  qimandans  qcjjun  du  imma, 
Laisari,  witum  ])atei  sunyeins  is,  yah  ni 
kara  }>uk  manshun  ;  ni  auk  saiwliis  in 
andwairj)ya  manne,  ak  bi  sunyai  wig 
Gu]3S    kiiseis.     Sliuklu    ist    kaisaragikl 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

and  gesette  hine  mid  eorjj-tilium,  and 
ferde  on  eljjeodignysse ; 

2  Da  sende  he  to  dam  tillum  his  ];eow 
on  tide,  dset  he  clses  win-geardes  wsestm 
onfenge. 

3  Da  swungon  hi  dsene,  and  forleton 
hine  idel-hende. 

4  And  eft  he  him  sende  oderne  jjeoAV, 
and  hi  done  on  heafde  gewundodon,  and 
mid  teonum  geswencton. 


5  And  eft  he  him  sumne  sende,  and 
hi  da'ue  ofslogon,  and  manega  odre, 
sume  hi  beoton,  sume  hi  ofslogon. 

6  Da  h»fde  he  da  gyt  senne  leofostne 
sunu,  da  sende  he  vet  nehstan  him 
dsene,  and  cw£ej),  Witodlice  minne  sunu 
hig  forwandiajj. 

7  Da  cwcedon  da  tilian  him  betweonan, 
Her  is  se  yrfenuma  ;  uton  ofslean  hine, 
donne  bijj  lire  seo  yrfweardnes. 

8  Hi  dT  ofslcgon  hine,  and  Avurpon 
Avidutan  done  Avin-geard. 

9  Hwfet  de|)  dpes  Avin-geardes  hkiford  1 
He  cym]>,  and  forde})  da  tiligean,  and 
sylj)  odron  done  AVin-geard. 

10  "Ne  rrudde  ge  dis  geAvrit,  Se  stan 
de  da  Avyrhtan  awurpon,  des  ys  ge- 
Avorden  on  dtere  hyrnan  heafod '? 

1 1  Dis  ys  fram  Drihtne  geAvorden,  and 
hit  is  AvundorliC  on  liron  eagum. 

12  Da  smeadon  hi  da^t  hi  gefengon 
hine,  and  hi  ondredon  da  menigu ;  hi 
oncncoAvon  da  da?t  he  dis  bigspel  to 
him  ssede ;  hi  ferdon  da,  and  hine 
forleton.''" 

13  Da  sendon  .hi  to  him  sume  of 
Phariseum  and  Herodiauum,  dnet  hi 
befengon  hine  on  his  worde. 

14  Da  comon  hi  and  dus  mid  facne 
cwctdon,  LareoAv,  Ave  witon  dset  dii  eart 
s6])fa3st,  and  dii  ne  recst  be  eenegum 
men  ;  ne  besceaAvast  du  manna  ansyne, 
ac  du  Godes  Aveg  Iserst  on  s5}>fsestnysse. 


XII.  2-14.]    AYYCLIFFE,  1389- 

liireilc   it  to  crtlic   tilicris,   aud  wcntc 
forth  ill  pilgrymuge ; 

2  And  sentc  to  the  orthc  tilicris  in 
tyinc  a  scruanut,  that  he  schukle  reocyue 
of  the  fruyt  of  the  vyue5erd  at  the  erthe 
tilicris. 

.■;  The  wliichc  bctcn  liiiu  tukun,  and 
k'ftcn  liiin  voydc. 

4  And  eftsoone  he  scnte  to  hem  a 
nothcr  soruaunt,  and  tlioi  wouiulidon 
him  in  the  heed,  aud  ponyschcdoii  with 
chidingis.''" 

5  And  eftsoone  he  sente  another,  and 
thei  sloweii  him,  and  othcre  mo,  betyngc 
sumnic,  but  sleynge  othere. 

6  Therfore  5it  he  hauynge  a  sone  most 
dcreworth,  and  to  hem  he  sente  him  the 
laste,  seyinge,  For  by  hap  thei  schulen 
schame  my  sone.^ 

7  Forsothe  the  tenauntis  seydcn  to 
hem  self,'*'  This  is  the  eier  ;  come  50,  sle 
we  him,  and  the  eritage  schal  be  oure. 

8  And  thei  takynge  him,  castidcn  out 
wlthoute  the  vyue5erd,  aud  slowcn. 

9  Therfore  what  schal  the  lord  of  the 
vyuejerd  do  1  He  schal  come,  and  leese 
the  teuauutis,  aud  5yue  the  vyuc5erd  to 
othcre. 

10  Wher  5e  han  not  rad  this  scripture. 
The  stoon  the  which  men  bildinge  han 
dispisid,  this  is  maad  in  to  the  heed  of 
the  corner  ? 

1 1  This  thing  is  maad  of  the  Lord,  and 
is  woudirful  in  oure  y5en. 

12  And  thei  sou5teu  for  to  holdc  him, 
1  tlici  dreden  the  cumpanye  of  pcple  ; 
hli  thei  kuewen  for  to  hem  he  seide 

this  pai'able ;  and  him  left,  thei  wentea 
away. 

13  And  thei  sendeu  to  him  summe  of 
tlic  Farisees  and  Erodians,  for  to  take 
livm  in  word. 

1 4  The  whiche  comynge  scyn  to  hym, 
Maistir,  we  witcn  for  thou  ert  sothfast, 
:;iiil  rcckist  not  of  ony  man  ;  sotlily 
luither  thou  sccst  in  to  face  of  man. 
but    thou   Icchist   the   woy  of  God    m 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2.'>3 


cd  a  wyne  ]iressc,  and  ])iU  a  toure  in 
hytt,  and  Ictt  itout  toliyic  viito  husbtuulij- 
nicn,  aud  went  into  a  strauiigo  countre  ; 

2  And  when  tyme  was  come  he  sciitt 
to  the  tennauntes  a  servaunt,  that  ho 
niyght  of  the  tenauntcs  I'eccave  of  the 
fruto  of  the  vyneyarde. 

3  And  they  caught  hym  and  bett  hym, 
and  sciitt  hym  agayne  empty. 

4  And  mooreover  he  scntt  vnto  them 
another  servaunt,  and  at  hym  they  cast 
stones  and  brake  hys  heed,  aud  sent 
liini  agayue  all  to  revylcd. 

5  And  agayne  he  sentt  another,  and 
hym  they  kylled,  and  many  other,  beet- 
ynge  some,  aud  kylliuge  some. 

6  Yet  had  he  one  sonne  whom  he  loved 
tenderly,  him  also  sent  he  att  the  last 
vnto  them,  sayinge,  They  wyll  feare  my 
Sonne. 

7  Butt  the  tenauntcs  sayde  with  in 
themselves,  Thys  ys  the  heyre  ;  come, 
lett  vs  kill  him,  and  the  inheritaunce 
shalbe  oures. 

8  And  they  toke  him,  and  killid  him, 
and  cast  hym  out  of  the  vyneyarde. 

9  What  shall  then  the  lorde  of  the 
vyneyarde  do  1  He  will  come,  and  dis- 
troye  the  tenauntcs,  aud  let  out  the 
vyneyarde  to  other. 

10  Have  ye  nott  redde  thys  scripture,' 
The  stoone  which  the  Ijyldcrs  did  refuse, 
ys  made  the  clicfe  stoone  iu  the  corner? 

1 1  Thys  was  done  off  the  Lorde,  and 
ys  merveyllous  in  oure  eyes. 

I  2  And  they  went  about  to  take  hym, 
butt  they  feared  the  i)co])lc  ;  for  they 
perceaved  that  he  spake  that  similitude 
agaynst  them  ;  and  they  left  hym,  aud 
went  their  waye. 

1 3  And  they  sent  vnto  hym  ccrtayne 
oft'  the  riiariscs  with  Herodes  servauntes, 
to  take  hym  iu  hys  wordcs. 

14.  And  iis  sone  as  they  were  come 
they  sayd  vnto  hym,  Master,  we  knowe 
that  thou  arte  true,  and  carestc  for  no 
man ;  for  thou  consydereste  nott  the 
dcgre  oil'  men,  butt  teachcste  the  waye 


234  GOTHIC,  360. 

friban  Kaisara?      .... 


15  pau  niu  gibalma'?  I]?  lesus  ga- 
saiwliaiuls  'ize  liutein,  qa|;  du  i'm,  Wha 
mik  fraisi))  ?  atbairijj  mis  skatt,  ei  ga- 
saiwliau. 

16  I]j  eis  atberun.  Yah  qa])  du  im, 
Whis  iist  sa  manleika,  yah  so  unfar- 
meleins  1  1\>  eis  qej)un  du  iiuma;  Kais- 
aris. 

17  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa|>  du  im, 
Usgibijj  \>o  Kaisaris  Kaisara,  yah  Jjo 
GuJjs  Gu];a.  Yah  sildaleikidedun  aua 
J)amma. 

18  Yah  at'iddyedun  Saddukaieis  du 
imina,  jjaiei  qij;and  usstass  ni  wisan, 
yah  frehun  iiia,  qij^andans, 

19  Laisari,  Moses  gamelida  unsis,  J'atei 
yabai  Avhis  broj^ar  gadauj^nai,  yah  bi- 
lei];ai  qenai,  yah  bai-ne  ui  bileij^ai,  ei 
nimai  l^roj^ar  is  J)0  qen  is,  yah  ussatyai 
barna  brojjr  seinamma. 

20  Sibuu  bro|)rahans  wesuu ;  yah  sa 
frumista  nam  qen,  yah  gaswiltauds,  ni 
bilaijj  fraiwa. 

2 1  Yah  an)5ar  nam  ]?o,  yah  gadau|)noda, 
yah  ni  sa  bilaij)  fraiwa.  Yah  |)ridya 
samaleiko. 

22  Yah  nemun  Jjo  samaleiko  }iai  sibun, 
yah  ni  bili})un  fraiwa.  Spedumista  al- 
laize  gaswalt  yah  so  qens. 

23  In  |)izai  usstassai,  pan  usstandand, 
wharyamma  ize  wair|)i|>  qens  ]  Jjai  auk 
sibun  aihtedun  ])0  du  qenai. 

24  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa]j  du  im, 
Niu  du)?e  airzyai  siyujj,  ni  kunnandans 
mela,  nih  maht  Gujjs  '? 

25  Allis  |)an  usstandand  us  daujjaim, 
ni  Hugand,  ni  liuganda,  ak  sind  swe 
aggilyus  J'ai  in  himinam. 

26  A];|)an  bi  daujjans,  J?atei  urreisand, 
niu  gakunnaidedu|>  ana  bokom  Mosezis, 
ana  aiwhatundyai,  whaiwa  imma  qa]j 
Gu)?,  qijjands,  Ik  im  Gu))  Abi-ahamis, 
yah  Gu]?  Isakis,  yah  lakobis  1 

27  Nist    Gujj    daujjaize,    ak   qiwaizc; 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 
A'lyfjj  gaful  to  syllanue  dam  Casere  1 

15  Hwseder  de  Ave  ne  sylla))?  Da 
cwjBJj  he,  and  heora  lot-wrenceas  wiste, 
Hwi  fandige  ge  min  1  bringap)  me  done 
pening,  dset  ic  hine  geseo. 

16  Da  brohton  hi  him.  Da  ssede  he 
him,  Hwses  is  deos  anlicnys,  and  dis 
gewrit?     Hi  cwsedon,  Dees  Caseres. 

1 7  Da  cwse])  se  Hselend  to  him,  Agyfa]? 
dam  Casere  da  ]>mg  de  dges  Caseres 
synd,  and  Gode  da  de  Godes  synd. 
Da  wundrodon  hi  be  dam. 

18  Da  comon  him  to  Saducei,  da 
secga})  dset  eerist  ne  sy,  and  hine  ah- 
sodon,  and  dus  cwsedon, 

1 9  Lareow,  Moyses  us  wrat,  gif  hwses 
brodor  dead  h\\>,  and  Isefjj  his  wif,  and 
nsefy  nan  beam,  dtet  his  brodor  nime 
his  wif,  and  his  brodor  ssed  wecce. 

20  Eornosthee  seofon  gebrodru  wseron; 
and  se  seresta  nam  wif,  and  wear}?  dead, 
na  laefedum  ssede. 

2 1  And  dii  nam  se  oder  hi,  and  Avear}) 
dead,  ne  se  ssed  ne  laefde.  Gehce  se 
])ridda. 

22  And  ealle  seofon  hi  hsefdon,  and 
ssbd  ne  Isefdon.  Eaka  seftemest  da 
for])ferde  dtet  wif. 

23  On  dam  Eeriste, 

.     .     .     .  hwylces  dara  seofona  bi])  da3t 
wif?  hi  ealle  hi  ha^fdon. 

24  Da  andswarode  him  se  Hselend.  Hu 
ne  dweliga))  ge,  fordam  de  ge  nyton  da 
halgan  gewritu,  ne  Godes  majgen  1 

25  S5j)lice  donne  hi  of  deajje  arisa]?,  ne 
wiflaj)  hi,  ne  ne  giftiajj,  ac  hi  synd 
swylce  Godes  englas  on  heofonum. 

26  Be  dam  deadum,  deet  hi  arison,  ne 
rfedde  ge  on  Moyses  bee,  hu  God  to 
him  cwfe)),  ofer  done  gorst-beam,  Ic  eom 
Abrahames  God,  and  Isaaces  God,  and 
lacobes  God? 

27  Nys  God  deadra,  ac  he  ys  lybbend- 


XII.  I5-27-]  WYCLIFFE,  J389. 

treuthe.  Is  it  Iccfful  lor  to  jyuc  tribute 
to  Cesar?     .... 

1 5  Or  we  sclmlcn  not  5yue  1  The  which 
witiiiijc  her  priuey  falsnesse,  scith  to 
hem,  What  teniptcu  5c  111c  1  bryngc  50 
to  mc  a  peny,  that  I  sc. 

1 6  And  thei  offriden  to  him.     And  he 

scith  to  hem,  Whos  is  this  ymagc,  and 
the  in  >\Ty tinge  ?  Thei  scicn  to  him, 
Cesar  is. 

17  Forsothe  Jhesus  answeringe  seith 
to  hem,  Therfore  5elde  ^c  to  Cesar  that 
ben  of  Cesar,  and  to  God  tho  thingis 
that  ben  of  God.  And  alle  wondriden 
on  him. 

18  And  Saducees,  that  seyen  no  resur- 
ecioun  to  be,  camen  to  him,  and  axiden 
him,  seyinge, 

19  ^laistir,  Moyses  ■\^TOot  to  vs,  that 
if  the  brother  of  a  man  were  deed,  and 
lefte  a  Avyf,  and  lefte  not  sones,  his  bro- 
ther take  his  wyf,  and  reyse  vp  seed  to 
his  brothir. 

20  Therfore  seuene  britheren  weren  ; 
and  the  firste  took  a  wyf,  and  is  deed, 
no  seed  left. 

21  And  the  secunde  took  Mr,  and  he 
is  deed,  and  neither  this  lefte  seed.  And 
the  thridde  also. 

22  And  seuene  tooken  hir,  and  lefte  not 
seed.  And  the  womman  the  laste  of  alio 
is  deed. 

23  Thanne  in  the  resureccioun,  whanne 
thei  sclmlcn  rise  a5en,  whos  wyf  of  these 
schal  sche  be  1  sothly  seuene  hadden  hir 
wyf. 

24  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seith  to 
hem,  Wher  50  crrcn  not  therfore,  not 
knowinge  the  scripturis,  nother  the 
vertu  of  God  1 

25  Forsothe  whanne  thei  sclmlcn  rise 
a3en  fro  deed  men,  neither  thei  wedden, 
nother  ben  wcddid,  but  thei  schulen  be 
as  aungels  of  God  in  hcuenes. 

26  Suthli  of  deed  men,  that  thei  rysen 
a5ein,  han  je  not  rad  in  the  book  of 
Moyses,  on  the  bouschc,  hou  God  scide 
to  him,  seiynge,  I  am  God  of  Abraham, 
and  God  of  Ysaac,  and  God  of  Jacob  ? 

27  He  is  not  God  of  dccde  men,  but 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


235 


off  God  truly.     Ys  yt  laufull  to  payc 
tribute  to  Cesar,  or  nott  ? 

15  Ought  wo  to  geve,  or  ought  we 
nott  to  gcve?  He  knewe  their  dis- 
siumlacion,  and  sayd  vnto  them,  Why 
tempte  yc  mc  1  brynge  me  a  peny,  that 
I  maye  se  yt. 

1 6  And  they  brought  hym  one.  And  he 
saydc  vnto  them.  Whose  ys  thys  ymagc, 
and  supcrscripcion  1  And  they  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Ccsars. 

17  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Then  geve  to  Cesar  that 
which  belongcth  to  Ccsai',  and  geve  God 
that  which  pertcyncth  to  God.  And 
they  mervelled  att  hym. 

18  And  the  Saduces  cam  vnto  hym, 
which  saye  there  is  no  resurrection,  and 
they  axed  hym,  sayinge, 

19  Master,  IMoses  wroote  vnto  vs,  yff 
eny  mans  brother  dye,  and  leve  hys  wyf 
behynde  him,  and  levc  no  chyldren,  that 
then  hys  brother  shulde  take  hys  wyfe, 
and  reyse  vppe  seed  vnto  his  brother. 

20  There  were  seven  brethren ;  and 
the  fyrst  toke  a  wyfe,  and  when  he  dyed, 
leeft  no  seede  behinde  hym. 

21  And  the  scconde  toke  her,  and 
dyed,  nether  leeft  he  eny  seede.  And 
the  thyrdc  lyke  wyse. 

22  And  seven  had  her,  and  leeft  no 
seed  behynde  them.  Last  of  all  the 
wyfe  dyed  also. 

23  In  the  rcsurrecion  then,  when  they 
shall  rysc  agaync,  whose  wyfe  shall  she 
be  of  them  ?  for  seven  had  her  to  wyfe. 

24  Jesus  answered  and  saydc  vnta 
them.  Are  ye  not  ther  fore  deccaved, 
be  cause  ye  knowe  not  the  scryptures, 
nether  the  power  of  God  1 

25  For  when  they  shall  rysc  agayne 
from  decth,  they  nether  mary,  nor  arc 
maryed,  butt  are  as  the  angels  whicli 
are  in  hcven. 

26  As  touchyngc  the  deed,  that  they 
shall  rysc  agaync,  have  ye  nott  redde  in 
the  bokc  off  Moses,  howe,  in  the  busshe, 
God  spake  vnto  him,  sayinge,  I  am  the 
God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Ysaac, 
and  the  God  of  Jacob  1 

27  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  deed,  butt 


23G  GOTHIC,  360. 

ttj.Jian  yus  filu  airzyai  slyu]). 

28  Yah  duatgaggands  aiiis  J)ize  bok- 
nrye,  galiausyands  ins  samana  sokyand- 
ans,  gasaiwhands  Jjatei  Availa  im  andiiof, 
frah  ina,  wharya  ist  allaizo  anabusne 
frumista. 

29  Ij;  lesus  andhof  imma,  )>atei  frum- 
ista allaizo  auabusns,  Hausei,  Israel, 
Frauya  Gujj  uiisar  Frauya  ains  'ist ; 

30  Yah  friyos  Frauyan  Gu}?  jjeinana  us 
allamma  hairtiu  Jjeinamma,  yah  us  allai 
saiwalai  }jeinai,  yah  us  allai  gahugdai 
Jjeinai,  yah  us  allai  mahtai  ))eiuai.  So 
frumista  auabusns. 

31  Yah  anjjara  galeika  J)izai,  Friyos 
newhundyan  |?einana  swe  ]>uk  silban. 
Maizei  jjaim  anjjara  auabusns  nist. 

32  Yah  qa))  du  imma  sa  bokareis, 
Waila,  laisari,  bi  sunyai  qast ;  jjatei  ains 
ist;  yah  nist  anj^ar,  alya  imma ; 

33  Yah  )ata  du  friyon  ina  us  allamma 
hairtin,  yah  us  allamma  fra)iya,  yah  us 
allai  saiwalai,  yah  us  allai  mahtai,  yah 
j)ata  du  friyon  newhundyan  swe  sik 
silban,  managizo  ist  allaim  ];aim  ala- 
brunstim  yah  saudim. 

34  Yah  lesus  gasaiwhands  ina  |;atei 
frodaba  andhof,  qaj)  du  imma,  Ni  fairra 
is  })iudangardyai  Gu})S.  Yah  ainshun 
J^anaseijjs  ni  gadaursta  ina  fraihnan. 

35  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa]),  lais- 
yands  in  alh,  Whaiwa  qi})and  Jjai  bokaryos, 
jjatei  Christus  sunus  ist  Daweidis  1 

36  Silba  auk  Daweid  qaJ;  in  Ahmin 
Weiliamma,  Qi))i])  Frauya  du  frauyin 
meinamma,  Sit  af  taihswon  meinai,  unte 
ik  galagya  fiyands  Jjeinans  fotubaurd 
fotiwe  })einaize. 

37  Silba  raihtis  Daweid  qij'i)'  ina 
frauyan,  yah  whajjro  imma  sunus  ist  1 
Yah  alia  so  mauagei  hausidedun  imma 
gabauryaba. 

38  Yah  qa|5  du  ini  in  iaiseinal  seinai, 
Saiwhi]>  faura  .... 


ANGLO-SAXON,  095.     [St.  Marb; 
ra  :  soj^lice  swyde  ge  dw^eligea]'.''' 

28  Da  geneahvhte  him  an  of  dam 
bocerum,  de  gehyrde  hi  smeagende,  and 
geseah  dtet  he  him  wel  andswarode,  and 
ahsode  hine,  hwset  wserc  ealra  beboda 
msest. 

29  Da  andsAvarode  he  him,  Doet  is  ct*t 
mseste  bebod  ealra,  Israhel,  gehyr,  urne 
Drihten  God  he  is  an  God  ; 

30  And  lufa  dinne  Drihten  God  of  ealre 
dinre  heortan,  and  of  ealre  dinre  sawle, 
eallum  dinum  mode,  and  of  callum  din- 
um  msegene.  Dset  is  daet  fyrmeste 
bebod. 

31  S5j5lice  is  oder  dissum  gelic,  Lufa 
dinne  nehstan  swa  de  sylfne.  Nys 
oder  mare  bebod. 

32  Da  cwse]^  se  b5cere,  L.ireow,  well 
dii  on  s6}je  cwsede ;  da3t  an  God  is,  and 
nys  oder,  biitan  him  ; 

33  And  dfet  he  si  gelufod  of  ealre 
heortan,  and  of  eallum  andgyte,  and  of 
ealre  sawle,  and  of  ealre  strong  J.  e,  and 
lufigean  his  nehstan  swa.  hine  sylFiie, 
d?et  is  mare  eallum  onsregdnyssum  and 
offrungum. 

34  Da  se  Hselend  geseah  dast  he  him 
wislice  andwyrde,  he  ssede  him,  Ne  eart 
dii  feor  fram  Godes  rice.  And  hine  ne 
dorste  nan  man  acsian. 

35  Da  cwpe])  se  Hcvlend,  on  dam  tem- 
ple Iserende,  Hii  secgaj)  da  boceras,  dset 
Crist  sy  Dauides  sunn  1 

36  Dauld  sylf  cwajjj  to  dam  Halgan 
Gciste,  Drihten  cwre|)  to  minum  drihtne, 
Site  on  mine  swydrau  healfe,  od  ic 
dine  fyud  asette  to  fot-sceamole  dinra 
fota. 

37  Dauid  sylf  nemde  hine  drihten, 
and  hwanon  is  he  his  sunu"?  And  mycel 
menegu  hine  luflice  gehyrde. 

38  Da  sjede  he  him  on  his  hire,  War- 
nia[)  fram  bocerum,  da  Avyllajj  on  ge- 
gyrlum  gan,  and  beon  on  strsetum 
grete, 


XII.  28-38.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

God  of  lyuyngc  men ;  thcrforc  5c  crrcn 
moclie. 

28  Aiul  oon  of  the  scnl)i;i,  that  hiiihlc 
herd  hem  sekynge  to  giilere,  cam  ni;, 
unci  seyingc  that  he  hadde  wcl  answcrid 
liem,  axiile  hym,  which  >Yas  the  firste 
iiiauiidement  of  allc. 

20  JliesiLS  answeride  to  him,  that  tlio 
firstc  of  alio  eomaundomcntis  is,  Hecre, 
Israel,  the  Lord  thi  Goil  is  oon  ; 

30  And  thon  schal  lone  the  Lord  thi 
Goil  of  al  thin  herte,  and  of  al  tin  sonle, 
snc.  of  al  thi  mynde,  and  of  al  thi  vertu.^ 
This  is  tlie  firste  mauudement. 

3 1  Forsothe  the  secnndc  is  lyk  to  this, 
Thou  schalt  loue  thi  nci5chore  as  thi 
silf  Ther  is  non  othir  mauudement 
more  than  these. 

32  And  the  scribe  seith  to  him,  Maister, 
in  trcuthe  thou  hast  wcl  scid  ;  for  o 
God  is,  and  ther  is  non,  out  taken  him  ; 

33  And  that  he  be  loued  of  al  herte, 
and  of  al  thou5t,'''  and  of  al  vndirstond- 
inge,  and  of  al  the  sonle,  and  of  al 
strengthe,  and  to  loue  the  nei3ebore  as 
him  silf,  is  more  than  alle  brend  of- 
fi-ingis  and  sacrificis. 

34  Jhesus  forsothe  seyinge  that  he 
hadde  answerid  wysely,  seide  to  him, 
Thuu  ert  not  fer  fro  the  kyngdom  of 
God.  And  now  no  man  durste  axe 
him. 

35  And  Jhcsns  answeringe  seide,  tcch- 
inge  in  the  temi)le,  Tlierfore  hoAV  seyn 
scribis,  Crist  for  to  be  the  sone  of 
Dauith  ? 

36  To  whom  Dauith  him  silf  seide  in 
the  Hooly  Gost,  The  Lord  seide  to  my 
lord,  Sitte  on  my  ri3thalf,  til  I  puttc 
thin  enemyes  the  stool  of  thi  feet. 

37  Tlierfore  Daiiith  him  silf  seith  him 
a  lord,  and  whcrof  is  he  his  sone  ?  And 
mochc  cumpany  gladli  herdo  him. 

38  And  he  seide  to  hem  in  his  tcching, 
Be  50  war  of  scribis,  tliat  wolon  wandre 
in  stoolis,  and  be  salutid  in  chepinge, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2;}; 


the  God  of  the  livyngc ;  ye  are  thcrforc 
greatly  dccoavcil. 

28  And  there  cam  Avon  off  the  scrybc-^, 
and  when  he  had  licrde  them  disputyufc 
to  gedder,  and  pcrccaved  that  he  had 
answered  them  well,  lie  axed  hym,  which 
is  the  fyrste  of  all  the  commaundc- 
mentes. 

29  Jesus  answered  hym,  The  fyi'ste  of 
all  the  commaundcmentcs  is,  Ileare, 
Israhel,  ourc  Lorde  God  is  wonc  Lorde  ; 

30  And  thou  shaltt  love  thy  Lorde 
God  with  all  thy  herl:,  and  with  all  thy 
sonic,  and  with  all  thy  mynde,  and  with 
all  thy  strengthe.  This  is  the  fyrste 
commaundcment. 

31  And  the  seconde  is  lykc  vnto  this, 
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neghbour  as  thy 
silfc.  There  is  none  other  commaundc- 
ment greater  then  these. 

32  And  the  scribe  sayde  vnto  hym. 
Well,  master,  thou  hast  sayde  the  truthe; 
thatt  there  ys  one  God,  and  that  there 
is  none  but  he  ; 

33  And  to  love  hym  with  all  the  herte, 
and  with  all  the  mynde,  and  with  all 
the  soule,  and  Avith  all  the  strengthe, 
and  to  love  a  mans  nehbour  as  hym  silfe, 
ys  a  greater  thynge  then  all  holocaustes 
and  sacrifises. 

34  And  Avhen  Jesus  sawe  howe  that  he 
answered  discretly,  he  sayd  vnto  hym, 
Thou  arte  nott  farre  from  the  kyngdome 
of  God.  And  no  man  after  that  durst 
axe  hym  eny  question. 

35  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayd,  teach- 
yngc  in  the  temple,  Howe  saye  the 
scribes,  that  Christ  is  the  sonne  off 
David  % 

36  For  David  hym  silfe  inspyred  with 
the  Holy  Goost  sayd,  The  Lorde  sayde 
to  my  lorde,  Sytt  on  my  right  honde, 
tyli  I  make  thyne  enemys  thy  fote  stole. 

37  Then  David  hym  silfe  calleth  hym 
hjrdc,  and  by  what  mcancs  ys  he  then 
his  Sonne  %  And  mochc  people  herdc 
hvni  gladly. 

38  And  he  sayd  vnto  them  in  his  doc- 
tnne.  Be  ware  off  the  scribes,  which 
love  to  goo  in  longe  clothynge,  and  love 
salutacions  in  the  market  places, 


^38 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  C)C)^.  [St.  Mark 

39  And  on  fyi'mestum  lareow-setlum 
sittan  on  gesamnungum,  and  da  fyrmest- 
an  setl  on  gebeorscipum ; 

40  Da  de  wudewena  hus  forswelga]?, 
mid  lieora  langsuman  gebede  ;  (3a  onfojj 
lengestne  dom. 

41  Da  seet  se  Hselend  ongen  done  toll- 
sceamol,  and  geseali  liu  dost  folc  liyra 
feoh  torfode  on  done  toll-sceamul;  and 
manega  Avelige  torfodon  fela. 

42  Ds  com  an  earm  wuduwe,  and 
wearp  twegen  feordlingas. 

43  Da  clypode  he  his  leorning-cnihtas, 
and  Scede  him,  Sojjlice  ic  eow  secge,  dpet 
deos  earme  wuduwe  eallinga  msest  sealde, 
dara  de  on  toll-sceamul  sealdon. 


44  Ealle  sendon  of  dam  de  hi  genoh 
hsefdon  ;  sojjlice  deos  of  hyre  yrmj^e  eall 
daet  heo  hsefde  sealde,  ealle  hyre  and- 
lyfene. 


Chap.  XIII.  i  Da  he  of  dam  temple 
eode,  da  cwsej?  an  of  his  leorning-cnih- 
tum  to  him,  Lareow,  loca,  hwylce  stanas 
her  synd,  and  hwylce  getimbrunga  disses 
temples. 

2  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend,  Ne  geseo  ge 
ealle  das  mycelan  getimbrunga  1  ne  bij) 
her  Isefed  stan  ofer  stan,  de  ne  beo 
toworpen. 

3  Da  hi  Sceton  on  Oliuetes  dune  ongen 
dset  tempel,  synderlice  bine  Petrus,  and 
lacobus,  and  lohannes,  and  Andreas 
acsodon, 

4  Sege  us,  hwsenne  das  ]jing  gewurdon, 
and  hwylc  tacen  bi]>,  doanne  ealle  das 
ping  onginna))  beon  ge-endod. 

5  Da  ongan  se  Hselend  him  andswar- 
igende  to  cwedan,  Warniaf),  da^t  eow 
nan  man  ne  beswice  ; 

6  S6]?lice  manega  cuma])  on  minum 
naman,  and  cweda]),  Ic  eom  Crist ;  and 
beswica])  manega. 

7  And  donne  ge  gehyraj)  gefeohtu  and 
gefeohta  hlisan,  ne  ondrcede  ge  eow ; 
hit  gebyrajj  doet  hit  gebelimpe,  ac  donne 
gyt  nis  ende. 


XII.  39-XIII.  7.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

39  And  sittc  in  synagogis  in  the  fii'ste 
cliairos,  aiul  the  firstc  sitting  places  in 
sojicris ; 

40  The  wliicho  dciiourcn  the  housis  of 
wiilewis,  vndii-  colour  of  long  prcicr ; 
thei  taken  lenger  Jom. 

41  And  Jhcsiis  sittingc  a5eins  the 
treserie,  biheld  hou  the  cunipany  of 
peple  caste  money  in  to  the  tresorie  ; 
and  nianye  riche  castiden  many  thingis. 

42  Sothli  whanne  o  pore  widowe  haddc 
comen,  sche  scnte  twcye  mynutis,  that 
is,  a  ferthing. 

43  And  his  disciplis  clepid  to  gidei'e, 
he  seith  to  hem,  Trculy  I  seie  to  50U, 
for  this  pore  widowe  scnte  nioi'e  than 
allc,  that  scnte  in  to  the  tresorie. 

44  Sothli  alle  scnte  of  that  thing  that 
was  plentcuous  to  hem  ;  but  this  of  hir 
myscste  sente  alle  thingis  that  she  hadde, 
al  hir  lyflode. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


239 


Chap.  XIII.  i  And  whanne  he  wente 
out  of  the  temple,  oon  of  his  disciples 
seith  to  him,  ]\Iaistir,  bihold,  what  maner 
stoones,  and  what  manere  bildingis. 

2  And  he  answermge  seith  to  him, 
Seeste  thou  alle  thes  greete  bildingis  1 
ther  schal  not  be  left  a  stoon  vpon  a 
stoon,  the  which  schal  not  be  distroyed. 

3  And  whanne  he  sat  in  the  mount  of 
Olyucte  a5ens  the  temple,  thei  axiden 
hym  by  hem  silue,  Petre,  and  James, 
and  John,  and  Andrew, 

4  Scie  thou  to  vs,  whanne  thes  thingis 
schulen  be  maad,  and  Avhat  tokene, 
whanne  alle  thes  thingis  schulen  bigynne 
for  to  be  cudid. 

5  And  Jhcsus  answcringe  bigan  for  to 
seie  to  hem,  Se  50,  that  no  man  disceyue 
50U; 

6  For  many  schulen  come  in  my  name, 
6ei}Tige,  For  I  am;  and  thei  schulen 
disceyue  manye. 

7  Sothli  whanne  56  schulen  hcere  batels 
and  opyniouns  of  bateils,  drede  5e  not ; 
forsotlic  it  bihoueth  these  thingis  for  to 
be  don,  but  not  jit  anon  the  end. 


39  And  the  chefc  scates  in  the  sina- 
goges,  and  to  sit  in  the  vppcrmost 
roumcs  att  feastcs ; 

40  And  devoure  widowcs  houses,  and 
vndcr  a  colour  jiraye  lunge  prayers ; 
these  shall  have  greater  damnacion. 

41  And  Jesus  sat  over  agaynst  the 
treasury,  and  bchelde  howe  the  people 
putt  money  into  the  treasury ;  and 
many  that  were  ryche  cast  in  moch. 

42  And  there  cam  a  ccrtayne  povre 
widowe,  and  she  thrcwe  in  two  mytes, 
whiche  make  a  tarthynge. 

43  And  he  called  vnto  hym  his  dis- 
ciples, and  sayd  vnto  them,  Vcrcly  I 
save  vnto  you,  that  thys  povor  widowe 
hath  cast  moare  in  then  all  they  Avhich 
have  caste  into  the  treasury. 

44  For  they  all  putt  in  off  their  super- 
fluite ;  but  she  off  her  poverte  cast  in 
all  that  she  had,  even  all  her  livynge. 


Chap.  XIII.  I  And  as  he  went  out 
of  the  temple,  Avon  of  his  disciples  sayd 
vnto  hym,  Master,  se,  what  stones,  and 
what  bildynges  are  here. 

2  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Seist  thou  these  greate  byldynges? 
there  shall  not  be  leefte  one  stone  apon 
a  nother,  that  shall  not  be  thi'owen 
doune. 

3  And  as  he  sate  on  mounte  Olivete 
over  ayenst  the  temple,  Peter,  and 
James,  and  Jhon,  and  Andrew,  axed 
liym  secretly, 

4  Tell  vs,  when  these  thinges  shalbe, 
and  what  is  the  signe,  when  all  these 
tiiingcs  shalbe  fulfilled. 

5  And  Jesus  answered  them  and  began 
to  sayc.  Take  hede,  lest  cny  man  deceave 
you; 

6  For  many  shall  come  in  my  name, 
sayinge,  I  am  Chi-ist ;  and  shall  deceave 
many. 

7  When  ye  shall  heare  off  warre  and 
tydinges  off  warre,  be  ye  not  troubled  ; 
for  they  muste  nedes  be,  butt  the  cude 
is  nott  yctt. 


240 


GOTHIC,  360. 


wastya  sema. 


17  A}i])an  wfvi  |iaim  qi))uliaftom,  yali 
daddyaiideim  in  yainaim  dagam. 

1 8  Ajjjjan  Lidyaijj,  ei  ni  Avairjjai  sa 
Jjlauhs  'izwar  wintrau. 

1 9  Wair])and  auk  Jjai  dagos  yainai  agio 
swaleika,  swe  ni  was  swaleika  fram 
anastodeinai  gaskaftais,  )?oei  gaskop  Gu]), 
uud  hita,  yah  ni  wairj^il?. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

8  S5]5lice  JjGod  arist  ilgen  )?eode,  and 
rice  ongen  rice,  and  beo]?  eorJ?an  styr- 
unga  geond  stowa  and  hungor  ;  dis-synd 
ssra  angin. 

9  Warnia])  eow  sylfe,  hi  sylla]?  eow  on 
gejiealite,  and  swinga}?  on  gesamnunguni ; 
and  ge  standab  beforan  demum  and 
cyningum  for  minum  naman,  him  on 
cewitnesse. 

10  And  on  ealle  j^eoda  merest  gebyra]; 
beon  cJtet  godspel  gebodod. 

1 1  And  donne  hi  syllende  eow  Iseda]^, 
ne  foi'e-smeage  ge  hwtet  ge  specon,  ac 
specaj)  clset  eow  on  dvere  tide  geseald 
bi}) ;  ne  synd  ge  na  specende,  ac  se 
Halofa  Gast. 


12  So})lice  se  brodor  done  br5dor  to 
deaj^e  syl)',  and  se  feeder  his  sunu,  and 
da  beam  arisaj?  agen  hyra  magas,  and 
mid  dea])e  hi  gewseceajj. 

13  And  ge  beo]>  eallum  on  hatunge  for 
minum  naman ;  s6})lice  se  bij)  hal,  se 
de  od  ende  ])urh-Avuna]j. 

14  Donne  ge  geseo]?  deere  toworpen- 

nysse  asceonunge, 

standan  dar  heo 

ne  sceal ;  donne  ongyte  se  de  rset ; 
fieon  donne  on  muntas,  da  de  synd  on 
ludea. 

15  And  se  de  is  ofer  j'ecene,  ne  stlge 
he  on  his  hiis,  ne  he  in  ne  ga,  dset  he 
aht  on  his  hiise  nime ; 

16  And  se  de  bijj  on  recere,  ne  cyri-e 
he  ongean  dset  he  his  reaf  nime. 


17  Wa  cennendum  on  dam  dagum, 


18  Bidda)),  dset  dis  on  wintra  ne  ge- 
weorde. 

1 9  Sojjlice  on  dam  dagum  beo|>  swylce 
gedrefednessa,  swylce  ne  gewurdon  of 
frym}>e  dsere  gesceafte,  de  God  gesceop, 
od  nu,  ne  na  ne  geweorde]?. 


XIII.  S-I9.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

8  For  folk  sclial  rise  vpon  folk,  and 
rewine  vpon  rewme,  and  crthe  niouyug 
solirtl  be  by  places  and  luui2;ur ;  bigyn- 
nyugis  of  sorwis  these  thiugis. 

9  Sothli  se  5e  50U  silf,  for  thci  soluilen 
take  50U  in  counceils,  and  je  scluileu 
be  bcten  in  synagogis ;  and  5c  schulcn 
stonde  bifore  kyngis  and  domesuien  for 
me,  in  to  witnessing  to  hem. 

10  And  in  to  alle  folkis  it  bihoueth 
first  the  gospel  for  to  be  ])rcchid. 

11  And  whanne  thei  scliulen  lede  50U 
bitrayinge,  nyle  je  tlicnke  what  56  schulen 
speke,  but  speke  50  that  thing  that  schal 
be  3ouen  to  50U  in  that  our ;  sothli  56 
ben  not  spekinge,  but  the  Hooly  Gost. 


12  Forsothe  a  brother  schal  bitraye 
the  brother  in  to  deeth,  and  the  fadir 
the  sone,  and  sones  schulen  ryse  to  gidre 
ajens  fadris  and  niodris,  and  ponysche 
hem  by  deeth. 

13  And  56  schulen  be  in  hate  to  alle 
men  for  my  name  ;  but  he  that  schal 
susteyne  in  to  the  eude,  this  schal  be  saf. 

14  Forsothe  Avhaune  5e  schulen  se  the 
abhomyuacioun  of  discomfort, 

stondinge  wher  it 

owith  not ;  vndirstonde  he  that  redith  ; 
thanne  thei  that  be  in  Judee,  flee  in 
to  hillis. 

1 5  And  he  that  is  aboue  the  roof,  come 
he  not  doun  in  to  the  hous,  neithir  entre 
be,  that  he  take  ony  thing  of  his  hows ; 

16  And  he  that  schal  be  in  the  feeld, 
turne  not  ajen  byhynde  for  to  take  his 
cloth. 

17  Sothli  wo  to  hem  tliat  ben  with 
childe,  and  norischingc  in  tho  dayes. 

18  Therfore  preie  je,  that  thei  ben  not 
don  in  wyntir. 

19  Forsoth  the  ilke  dayes  of  tribula- 
cioun  schulen  be  suche,  whichs  manere 
weren  not  fro  the  bygynnynge  of  crea- 
ture, the  which  God  made,  til  now, 
neither  schulen  be. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


241 


8  For  there  shall  nacion  aryse  agaynste 
nacion,  and  reahnc  agaynste  realme,  and 
there  shalbe  erthquakes  in  all  quarters 
and  famysshmcnt  and  troubles  ;  these 
arc  the  bogynnynge  off  sorowcs. 

9  Ikitt  take  yc  hede  to  yourc  selves, 
for  they  shall  brynge  you  vppe  to  the 
counsels,  and  into  the  synagoggcs,  and 
ye  shalbe  beetcn  ;  and  ye  shalbe  brought 
before  rulers  and  kjniges  for  my  sake, 
for  a  testimouiall  vnto  them. 

10  And  the  gospell  muste  fyrste  be 
publysshed  amonge  all  nacions. 

1 1  Butt  when  they  leade  you  and 
presentt  you,  take  noo  thought  afore 
honde  what  ye  shall  saye,  nether  yma- 
gion,  butt  whatsoever  is  geven  you  att 
the  same  tyme,  that  speake  ;  for  it  shall 
nott  be  ye  that  shall  speake,  butt  the 
Holy  Goost. 

12  Ye  and  the  brother  shall  delyvre 
the  brother  to  deeth,  and  the  father  the 
Sonne,  and  the  chyldren  shall  ryse  a- 
gayuste  their  fathers  and  mothers,  and 
shall  putt  them  to  deeth. 

13  And  ye  shalbe  hated  off  all  men  for 
my  names  sake ;  butt  Avhosoever  shall 
endure  vnto  the  ende,  shalbe  safe. 

1 4  Moreover  when  ye  se  the  abominable 
desolacion,  wdiere  oft'  is  spoken  by  Daniel 
the  prophete,  stonde  were  itt  ought 
nott ;  let  hym  that  redeth  it  vnder- 
stonde  itt ;  then  let  them  which  be  in 
lewry,  fie  to  the  mountaynes. 

15  And  let  hym  that  is  on  the  housse 
toppe,  nott  descende  doune  into  the 
housse,  nether  entre  there  in,  to  fetche 
eny  thynge  oute  oft'  his  housse  ; 

16  And  lett  hym  thatt  is  in  the  felde, 
not  tourne  backe  agayne  vnto  tho 
thynges  which  he  leefte  behynde  hym, 
for  to  take  his  eloothes  with  hym. 

1 7  Butt  woo  is  then  to  them  that  are 
with  chylde,  and  to  them  that  geve 
soucke  in  thooso  dayes. 

18  But  praye,  that  youre  flyght  be  not 
in  the  wynter. 

19  For  there  shalbe  in  those  dayes 
suche  tribulacion,  as  was  not  from  the 
begynnynge  off  creatures,  which  God 
created,  vnto  this  tyme,  nether  shalbe. 


242 


GOTHIC,  360. 


20  Yah  ni  Frauya  gamaurgidedi  |)ans 
dagans,  ni  Jjauli  ganesi  ainhun  leike ; 
akei  in  \nze  gawalidane  j^anzei  gawalida, 
gamaurgida  Jjans  dagans, 

21  Yah  ])an  yabai  whas  'izwis  qlj^ai, 
Sai !  her  Christus,  ai}))3au  sai !  yaiuar, 
ni  galaubyaijj. 

22  Unte  urreisand  galiugachristyus 
yah  galiugapraufeteis,  yah  giband  taik- 
nins  yah  fauratanya,  du  afairzyan,  yabai 
mahteig  siyai,  yah,  jjans  gawalidans. 

23  I])  yus  saiwhij; ;  sai !  fauragataih 
izwis  allata. 

24  Akei  in  yainans  dagans,  afar  |jo 
aglon  yaiua,  sauil  riqizei}?,  yah  mena  ni 
gibi}>  liuhaj)  sein, 

25  Yah  staii'nons  himinis  wairjjand 
driusandeins,  yah  mahteis  ])0s  in  hiniin- 
am,  gawagyanda. 

26  Yah  J)an  gasaiwhand  sunu  mans 
qimandan  in  milhmam,  mi})  mahtai 
managai  yah  wuljjau. 

27  Yah  )jan  insandei})  aggiluns  seinans, 
yah  galisij)  j^ans  gawalidans  seinans 
af  fidwor  windam,  fram  andyam  air])OS 
und  andi  himinis. 

28  A})j)an  af  smakkabagma  ganimi|>  ]>o 
gayukon.  pan  ])is  yujjan  asts  f'laqus 
wairjji]?,  yah  uskeinand  laubos,  kunnuj) 
jjatei  uewha  ist  asans. 

29  Swah  yah  yus,  ]>an  gasaiwhi})  ))ata 
■wairjjan,  kunneij?  j^atei  newha  siyuj)  at.  . 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Mark 

20  And  gif  Drihten  das  dagas  ne  ge- 
scyrte,  nan  fleesc  ne  wiirde  hal ;  ac  for 
dam  gecorsnum  de  he  geceas,  he  ge- 
scyrte  da  dagas. 

2  1  And  gif  80  w  hwylc  seg]>,  Witodlice! 
her  is  Crist,  witodHce !  dter  lie  is,  ne 
gelyfe  ge. 

22  Sojjh'ce  lease  Ci-istas  and  lease  wit- 
egan  arisaj),  and  AvyrcaJ)  fore-beacnu,  to 
beswicanne,  eac,  gif  hit  beon  mseg,  da 
gecorenan. 

23  Warnia})  eow  ;  mi!  ealle  ])ing  de 
ic  eow  fore-saede. 

24  Ac  on  dam  dagum,  sefter  dsere 
geswencednysse,  byj)  sunne  a|)eostrod, 
and  se  mona  his  beorhtnesse  ne  sylj), 

25  And  heofones  steorran  beoj)  feal- 
lende,  and  beoj)  astyrode,  da  megenu 
de  on  heofonum  synd. 

26  Donne  geseoj)  hi  mannes  sunu  cum- 
endne  on  genipum,  mid  mycelum  mseg- 
ene  and  wuldre. 

27  Donne  sent  he  his  engias,  and  hi 
gaderia|)  his  gecorenan  of  feower  wind- 
um,  of  eorjjam  heahnesse  od  heofones 
heahnesse. 

28  Leornia))  an  bigspel  be  dam  fic- 
treowe.  Donne  his  twi  hi]>  mearu,  and 
leaf  beo})  acennede,  ge  witon  dset  sumor 
is  geliende. 

29  And  wite  ge,  donne  ge  das  \>'mg 
geseoj),  dset  he  is  dui-a  gehende. 

30  S5|'lice  ic  eow  secge,  dset  deos 
cneores  ne  gewit,  jerdam  ealle  das  ])ing 
geweordon. 

31  Heofon  and  eor))e  gewitaj),  witod- 
lice mine  Avord  ne  gewita)?. 

32  Be  dam  doege  and  dsere  tide  nan 
man  nat,  ne  engias  on  heofone,  ne  man- 
nes sunu,  biiton  feeder  ana. 

33  Warnia}),  and  waciaj>,  and  gebiddaj) 
eow  ;  ge  nyton,  hwsenne  seo  tid  ys. 

34  Swa  se  man  de  seljjeodihce  ferde, 
forlet  his  hus,  and  sealde  his  })eowum 
dsene  anwald  gehwylces  weorccs,  and 
beode  dam  dure-wearde,  dset  he  wacige. 

35  Eornostlice    wacigea]?,    ge    nyton, 


XIII.  20-35.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

20  Anil  no  but  tlic  Lord  liaddc  brcig- 
giil  tho  daycs,  al  flciscli^  hatUle  not  be 
saf ;  but  for  the  choscne  wbom  bo  dices, 
tbo  Lord  batb  breiggid  dayes.^ 

2 1  And  tlianne  if  ony  man  scbulde  seie 
to  ;ou,  Lo !  here  is  Crist,  loo !  there, 
belouc  50  not. 

22  For  fals  Cristis  and  fals  projdictis 
schulen  rysc  vp,  and  sfhulou  5yuc 
tolvones  and  grctc  ■\vondris,  to  disccyuc, 
if  it  may  be  don,  5he,  the  choscne. 

23  Therfore  se  50  ;  loo  !  I  hauc  bifore 
scid  to  50U  alle  thingis. 

24  But  in  tho  daycs,  aftir  that  tribula- 
cioun,  the  sunnc  schal  be  maad  derk, 
and  the  mone  schal  not  5yue  hir  schyn- 

25  And  sterris  of  heuenes  schal  be  full- 
inge  doun,  and  vertues  that  be  in  he- 
uenes, schulen  be  mouyd. 

26  And  thanne  thei  schulen  se  mannis 
sone  comynge  in  cloudis  of  heuenc,  with 
greet  vertu  and  glorie. 

27  And  thanne  he  schal  sende  his 
aungels,  and  schal  gedre  his  chosene  fro 
foure  wyndis,  fro  the  loweste  thing  of 
erthe  vnto  the  hi5este  thing  of  heuene. 

28  Forsothe  of  the  fyge  tree  lerne  50 
the  parable.  Whanne  now  his  braunche 
sclial  be  tendre,  and  leeuys  ben  sprongen 
out,  50  witen  for  somer  is  in  the  nexte. 

29  So  and  whanne  50  schulen  se  alle 
these  thingis  ben  maad,  wite  50,  that  it 
is  in  the  nexte  in  the  doris. 

30  Trculy  I  seye  to  50U,  for  this  gene- 
racioun  schal  not  passe  awey,  til  alle 
these  thingis  be  don. 

31  Heuene  and  erthe  schal  passe,  for- 
sothe my  wordis  schulen  not  passe. 

32  Treuly  of  that  day  or  our  no  man 
"woot,  nethir  aungelis  in  heuene,  nether 
the  sone,  no  but  the  fadir. 

33  Se  50,  wake  3e,  and  preie  36 ;  sothli 
5c  witen  not,  whanne  tyme  is, 

34  For  as  a  man  the  which  gon  fer  in 
pilgrimage,  Icfte  his  hous,  and  jaf  to  his 
seruauntis  power  of  eucry  work,  and 
comaundide  to  the  porter,  that  he  schulde 
wake. 

35  Therfore  wake  je,  forsothe  36  witen 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


243 


20  And  cxcepte  that  the  .Lord  had 
shortened  those  daycs,  no  man  shulde 
be  saved  ;  but  for  the  elcctcs  sake  which 
he  hath  chosen,  he  hath  shortened  thoose 
daycs. 

21  And  then  yff  cny  man  saye  vnto 
you.  Loo !  here  is  Christ,  loo  !  he  is 
there,  beleve  nott. 

22  For  falce  Christes  shall  aryse  and 
falce  propctcs,  and  shall  shcwc  myracles 
and  wonders,  to  deccavc,  yf  it  were  pos- 
sible, cvyn  the  clecte. 

23  But  take  ye  hcde  ;  bcholde  !  I  have 
shewed  you  all  thinges  before. 

24  ]\Ioreover  in  thoose  dayes,  after  that 
tribulacion,  the  sunne  shall  wexe  darke^ 
and  the  mone  shall  not  geve  her  light, 

25  And  the  starres  off  heven  shall  fall, 
and  the  powers  which  are  in  heven, 
shall  move. 

26  And  then  shall  they  se  the  sonne  of 
man  commynge  in  the  cloudcs,  Avith 
greate  power  and  glory. 

27  And  then  shall  he  sende  his  angels, 
and  shall  gaddre  to  gedder  his  electe 
from  the  fouare  wyndes,  and  from  the 
one  ende  off  the  worlde  to  the  other. 

28  Learne  a  similitude  of  the  fy gge 
tree.  When  his  brauuches  are  yett 
tender,  and  hath  brought  forthe  leves, 
ye  knowe  that  sommer  ys  neare. 

29  So  in  lyke  maner  when  ye  se  these 
thinges  come  to  passe,  vnderstond,  that 
it  ys  nye  even  att  the  dox'es. 

30  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  thys 
gencracion  shall  nott  passe,  tyll  all  these 
thynges  be  done. 

31  Heven  and  erth  shall  passe,  butt 
my  wordes  shall  nott  passe. 

32  Butt  of  the  daye  and  the  houre 
knoweth  no  man,  no  nott  the  angels 
which  are  in  heven,  nether  the  sonne 
hym  silfc,  save  the  father  only. 

33  Take  hedc,  watche,  and  praye ;  for 
ye  knowe  nott,  when  the  tyme  ys. 

34  As  a  man  which  ys  gone  in  to  a 
straungc  countrcy,  and  hath  lefte  hys 
housse,  and  gcven  auctorite  to  hys  scr- 
vauntes  and  to  every  man  hys  worke, 
and  commaundcd  the  porter  to  watche. 

35  Watche  therfore,  for  ye  knowe  not, 

R2 


244 


GOTHIC,  360. 


.     .  teins  ]>\s  balsanis  war]j  ? 

5  Maht  wesi  auk  Jjata  balsan  frabugyan 
in  managizo  jjau  Jjriyahunda  skatte,  yah 
giban  unledaim.     Yah  andstaurraidedun 

K..     .. 

6  I))  lesus  qaj>,  Letij)  )?o  ;  duwhe  izai 
usjji-iuti]??  Jiannu  goj?  waurstw  waurhta 
bi  mis. 

7  Sinteino  auk  J^ans  unledans  habaijj 
mi])  izwis,  yah  j^an  wilei)?,  maguj)  im 
waila  tauyau;  ij)  mik  ni  sinteino  habaij). 

8  patei  habaida  so  gatawida ;  faursnau 
salbon  mein  leik  du  usfilha. 

9  Amen  qijja  izwis,  ))iswharuh  ]>ei 
meryada  so  aiwaggelyo  and  alia  manas- 
e]>,  yah  })atei  gatawida  so,  rodyada  du 
gamundai  izos. 

10  Yah  ludas  Iskarioteis,  ains  ])ize 
twalibe,  galaij?  du  Jjaim  gudyam,  ei  ga- 
lewidedi  ina  im. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

hwsenne  dtes  buses  hlaford  cym]>,  (3e 
on  sefen,  de  on  midre  nihte,  de  on  han- 
crede,  de  on  mergen  ; 

36  De-lses   he  eow  slapende   geraete, 
donne  he  feeringa  cym)). 

37  Sojjlice  dset  ic  eow  secge,  eallum 
ic  hit  secge,  Wacia]). 


Chap.  XIV.  ''^i  Sojjlice  da  sefter  twara 

dagum  wseron  eastron And  da 

sohton  da  heah-sacerdas  and  da  bocer- 
as,  hu  hi  hine  mid  facne  namon,  and 
ofslogon. 

2  Da  cwsedon  hi,  Nses  na  on  freols- 
dsege,  de-lses  dses  folces  gehlyd  weorde. 

3  And  da  se  Heelend  wses  on  Bethama, 
on  Simones  hiise  anes  hreoflan,  and  dar 
sset,  da  com  an  wif,  and  hsefde  hyre 
sealf-box  deorwyrj^es  nardes ;  and  to- 
brocenum  sealf-boxe,  ofer  his  heafod 
aget. 

4  Sume  hit  unweordlice  forbseron,  and 
betwux  him  sylfum  cwsedon,  Forhwi 
wses  disse  sealfe  forspillednes  geworden  1 

5  Deos  sealf  mihte  beon  geseald  to 
J)i'lm  bund  penegum,  and  beon  jjearfum 
geseald.     And  yrsodon  agen  hi. 

6  Da  cwse])  se  Hselend,  Lseta])  hi ; 
hwi  synd  ge  hyre  grame  1  god  weorc 
heo  on  me  worhte. 

7  S6})lice  symble  ge  habba})  jjearfan 
mid  eow,  and  donne  ge  wylla]),  ge  mag- 
on  him  teala  don ;  me  ge  symble  nab- 
ba)). 

8  Deos  sealde  dfet  heo  hsefde ;  heo 
com  to  smyrianne  minne  lichaman  on 
byrgene. 

9  S5j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  swa  hwar  swa 
dis  godspell  gebodod  bij)  on  eallum 
middan-earde,  bij)  gebodod,  daet  heo  dis 
on  his  gemynde  dyde. 

10  Da  ludas  Scarioth,  d^et  is  wider- 
saca,  an  of  dam  twelfum,  ferde  to  dam 
heah-sacerdum,  deet  he  hine  beleewde. 


Xin.36.-XIV.10.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

not,  wliannc  the  lord  of  the  lious 
conicth,  in  the  ouontide,  or  in  the  niyd- 
n^^t,  or  kockis  crowynge,  or  morwynge  ; 

;^6  Lest  whannc  he  schal  come  sudenly, 
lie  fynde  50U  slepinge. 

37  Forsothe  that  that  I  seic  to  50U,  I 
seie  to  alle,  "Wake  5e. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


245 


Chap.  XIV.  i  Forsothe  pask  and  the 
feeste  of  therf  looues  ^  was  aftir  the 
secnnde  day.  And  the  hi5este  prestis 
and  scribis  sou5ten,  hon  thei  schulden 
lidhle  him  with  gile,  and  sle. 

2  Sothli  thei  seidcn,  Not  in  the  feeste 
day,  lest  ])erauenture  noyse  were  maad 
in  the  peple. 

3  And  whanne  he  was  at  Betanye,  in 
the  hous  of  Symount  leprous,  and  restid, 
a  womnian  comynge,  hauynge  a  box  of 
precious  oynement  spikanard  ;  and  the 
box  brokun,  helde  out  on  his  heed. 


4  Forsoth  ther  weren  summe  beringe 
vnworthily''"  with  ynne  hem  si  if,  and 
seyinge,  Wherto  is  this  loss  of  oynement 
maad  ? 

5  For  this  oynement  my3te  haue  be 
sold  more  than  for  thre  hundrid  pens, 
and  be  5ouun  to  pore  men.  And  thei 
groyneden  in  to  hii*. 

6  Sothli  Jhesus  seide,  Suflfre  hir  ;  what 
be  50  hcuy  to  hir  ?  she  hath  wrou5t  good 
work  in  me. 

7  For  euer  more  56  scludcn  haue  pore 
men  with  50U,  and  whanne  ^e  schulen 
woUe,  56  mown  do  wel  to  hem  ;  foi'soth 
56  schulen  not  euermore  haue  me. 

8  iSlie  dide  that  that  she  hadde  ;  sche 
bifore  cam  for  to  anoynte  my  body  into 
buriynge. 

9  Treuli  I  seie  to  50U,  where  euere  this 
gospel  schal  be  prechid  in  al  the  world, 
and  that  this  womman  hath  done,  schal 
be  told  in  to  mynde  of  hir. 

10  And  Judas  Scarioth,  oon  of  the 
twelue,  wente  to  the  hi3este  prestis,  that 
he  schulde  bitray  him  to  hem. 


when  the  master  of  the  houssc  wyll  come, 
whether  att  even,  or  at  mydnyglit,  whe- 
ther att  the  cocke  crowynge,  or  in  the 
daunynge  ; 

■^6  Lestyffhe  come  sodenly,  he  shuldc 
fynde  you  slejiynge. 

37  And  that  I  saye  vnto  you,  I  saye 
vnto  all  men,  Watche. 


Chap.  XIV.  i  After  two  dayes  fol- 
owed  ester  and  the  dayes  of  swcte  breed. 
And  the  hye  pvestes  and  scrybes  sought 
meanes,  howe  they  myght  take  hym  by 
crafte,  and  putt  hym  to  deeth. 

2  Butt  they  sayde,  Nott  on  the  feaste 
daye,  leest  eny  busynes  aryse  amonge 
the  people. 

3  When  he  was  in  Bethania,  in  the 
housse  off  Simon  the  leper,  even  as  he 
sate  att  meate,  there  cam  a  woman,  with 
an  alablaster  boxe  of  oyntment  called 
narde  that  was  pure  and  costly ;  and 
she  brake  the  boxe,  and  powred  it  on 
his  heed. 

4  There  were  some  that  disdayned  in 
them  selves,  and  sayde.  What  neded  this 
waste  of  oyntment  1 

5  For  it  myght  have  bene  soolde  for 
more  then  two  houndred  pens,  and  bene 
geven  vnto  the  povre.  And  they  grudged 
agaynste  her. 

6  And  Jesus  sayd,  Lett  her  be  in  recst ; 
why  gi'eve  ye  her  1  she  hath  done  a 
goode  worke  on  nie. 

7  Ye  and  ye  shall  have  povre  with  you 
all  wayes,  and  when  soever  ye  will,  ye 
maye  do  them  goode ;  butt  me  ye  shal 
not  have  ahvaycs. 

8  She  hath  done  that  she  coulde ;  she 
cam  a  fore  honde  to  anoynt  my  boddy 
to  his  buryinge  warde. 

9  Verely  I  saye  vnto  you,  wheresoever 
thys  gospell  shalbe  preached  thorow  out 
the  whole  worlde,  thys  also  that  she 
hath  done,  shalbe  rehearsed  in  rcmem 
braunce  of  her. 

10  And  Judas  Iscarioth,  won  off  the 
twelve,  went  awaye  vnto  the  bye  prcstes, 
to  betraye  him  vnto  them. 


246 


GOTHIC,  360. 


II  I]j  eis  galiausyandans  faginodedun, 
yah  galiailiaitun  imma  faihu  giban.  Yali 
sokida  whaiwa  gatilaba  ina  galewidedi. 


1 2  Yah  Jiainma  frumistin  daga  azwme, 
]jan  paska  salidedun,  qejjun  du  imma  pai 
siponyos  is,  Wliar  wileis  ei  galeij^andans, 
manwyaima,  ei  matyais  paska  ] 

13  Yah  insandida  twaiis  siponye  seiu- 
aize,  qajjuh  du  im,  Gaggats  in  po  baurg, 
yah  gamoteijj  igqis  manua  kas  Avatins 
bairands ;  gaggats  afar  Jjamma. 

14  Yah  ])adei  inngaleijjai,  qijjaits  |iam- 
ma  heiwafrauyin,  patei  laisareis  qi]>i[', 
Whar  sind  salijjwos,  Jjarei  paska  mi]j 
siponyam  meinaim  matyau  1 

15  Yah  sa  izwis  taikneijj  kelikn  mikil- 
ata  gastra\vi]j  manwyata,  yah  yainar 
manwyaij)  unsis. 

1 6  Yah  usiddyedun  Jiai  sipon      .     .     . 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.    [St.  Maek 

II  Da  hi  dtis  gehyrdon  hi  fahnodon, 
and  beheton  him  feoh  to  syllanne.  And 
he  smeade  hu  he  hine  digellice  sealde. 


12  And  dam  forman  dsege  azimorum, 
da  hi  easti'on  ofFrodon,  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  him  ssedon,  Hwyder  wyit  cJu 
dpet  we  faron,  and  gegearwian  de,  dset 
du  eastron  ete  1 

13  Da  sende  he  twegen  of  his  leoniing- 
cnihtum,  and  seede  him,  Gaj?  on  da 
ceastre,  and  inc  agen-yrn|)  sum  man 
berende  sume  w^ter-flaxan ;  folgiajj 
him. 

14  And  swa  hwyder  swa  he  in-gse}?, 
secga})  does  buses  hlaforde,  U're  lareow 
seg}),  Hwar  is  min  gyst-lius  and  niai 
gereord,  hwar  ete  ic  eastron  mid  min- 
um  leorning-cnihtum  1 

15  And  he  inc  geswutela])  mycele 
healle  gedtefte,  and  gcgearwia])  us  dara. 

16  Da  ferdon  his  leorning-cnihtas,  and 
comon  on  da  ceastre,  and  fiindon  hit 
call  swa  he  SEede ;  and  gegearwodoii  da 
eastron. 

17  S6))lice  da  ccfen  com,  him  twelfum 
mid  him 

18  Sittendum,  and  etendum,  Sccde  se 
Hselend,  Sojjhce  ic  eow  secge,  dset  eovver 
an  de  mid  me  yt,  gesylj)  me. 

19  Da  ongunnon  hi  beon  dreorige,  and 
betwux  him  cwedan,  Cwyst  dii  com  ic 
hit? 

20  Da  ssede  he  him,  An  of  eow  twelf- 
um me  syljj,  se  de  his  hand  on  disce 
mid  me  dyp]?. 

21  And  witodlice  mannes  sunu  gEe]>, 
swii  be  liim  awriten  is  ;  wa  dam  men, 
})urli  done  de  mannes  sunu  geseald  bijj. 
Betere  him  wsere,  dset  se  man  acenned 
nsei'e. 

22  Him  da  etendum,  afeng  se  Hselend 
hlaf,  and  hine  bletsiende  brasc,  and 
sealde  him,  and  dus  cwfe]?,  Nima]) ;  dis 
ys  min  lichama. 

23  And  onfeng  calice,  and  Gode  piancas 
dyde  and  sealde  him,  and  ealle  him  of 
druncon. 

24  Da  S£ede  he  him,  Dis  ys  min  blod 


XIV.  1 1-24.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1  The  whiche  heerynge  ioycdcn,  and 
bilii;ton  hem  to  5yuc  him  nioiioy.  And 
he  sou^tc  how  he  schukle  bitruyc  him 
couenably. 

12  And  the  firste  day  of  thcrue  loucs, 
whcnnc  pask  "was  oftrid,  disciplis  seyn 
to  him,  ^Vhidir  wolfc  thou  we  go,  and 
make  redy  to  thee,  that  thou  cte  pask  1 

13  And  he  scndith  twcyne  of  his  dis- 
cipHs,  and  seith  to  hem,  Go  56  in  to  the 
citce,  and  a  man  beringe  a  galoun  of 
watii"  sthal  renne  to  50Uj^  suwe  50 
him. 

14  And  whidir  cuere  he  schal  entre, 
seye  50  to  the  lord  of  the  hous,  For  the 
maister  seith,  AV'hcr  is  my  fulfiUing,''' 
where  I  schal  ete  pask  with  my  dis- 
cijilis  ? 

15  And  he  schal  shcwe  to  50U  a  greet 
souping  place  strewid,  and  there  make 
5e  redy  to  vs. 

16  And  his  disciplis  w'enten  forth,  and 
camen  in  to  the  citee,  and  foimde  as  he 
hadde  seid  to  hem ;  and  thei  maden 
redy  pask. 

17  Sothli  euen  maad,  he  cam  with 
twelue. 

I  8  And  hem  sittinge  at  the  mete,  and 
otinge,  Jhesus  seith,  Treuli  I  seie  to  50U, 
for  oon  of  50U  that  etith  with  me,  sclial 
bitraye  me. 

19  And  thei  bigunnen  for  to  be  sori, 
and  to  seicj  ech  by  hym  silf,  Whether  1 1 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


247 


20  The  which  seith  to  hem,  Oon  of 
twelue  that  puttith  yn  the  hond  with 
me  in  the  plater. 

21  And  sothli  mannis  sone  goth,  as  it 
is  writun  of  him  ;  forsoth  wo  to  that 
man,  bi  whom  mannis  sone  schal  be  bi- 
trayd.  It  Avere  good  to  him,  if  that 
ilke  man  hadde  not  be  borun. 

22  And  hem  etinge,  Jhesus  took  bred, 
and  blessinge  brak,  and  5af  to  hem,  and 
seith,  Take  30 ;  this  is  my  body. 

23  And  the  cuppe  takun,  he  doynge 
gracis  5af  to  hem,  and  alle  drunkun 
therof. 

24  And  he  seith  to  hem.  This  is  my 


11  When  they  herde  that  they  were 
gladde,  and  promised  that  they  wt»lde 
gcvc  hym  money.  And  he  sought 
howe  he  myght  convenyently  betrayc 
hym. 

1 2  And  the  fyrst  dayc  of  swcte  breed, 
when  they  oficred  the  pascal  lambe,  his 
disciples  sayd  vnto  hym.  Where  wylt 
thou  that  we  goo,  and  prcjiare,  that  thou 
mayste  cate  the  ester  lambe  1 

13  And  he  sent  fourth  two  of  his  dis- 
ciples, and  sayde  vnto  them,  Goo  ye  into 
the  cite,  and  there  shall  a  man  mete 
you  beringe  a  pitcher  of  water  ;  folowe 
hym. 

14  And  whidthersoever  he  goeth  in, 
saye  ye  to  the  good  man  off  the  housse, 
Tlie  master  axeth,  Where  is  the  gccst 
chambrc,  where  I  shall  eate  the  ester 
lambe  with  my  disciples  ? 

15  And  he  Avyll  shcwe  you  a  greate 
parlour  paved  and  prepared,  there  make 
reddy  for  vs. 

16  And  his  disciples  went  forth,  and 
cam  in  to  the  cite,  and  founde  as  he  had 
sayd  vnto  them ;  and  made  rcddy  the 
ester  lambe. 

17  And  att  even,  he  cam  with  the 
twelve. 

1 8  And  as  they  sate  att  borde,  and  ate, 
Jesus  sayde,  Verly  I  saye  vnto  you,  that 
won  off"  you  shall  betraye  me,  which 
eateth  with  me. 

19  And  they  began  to  morne,  and  to 
saye  to  hym,  won  by  won,  Ys  it  1 1  and 
another  sayde,  Ys  it  I  ? 

20  He  answered  and  sayd  vnto  them. 
It  is  Avon  of  the  .xij.  and  the  same 
depeth  Avith  me  in  the  platter. 

2 1  The  Sonne  of  man  goeth,  as  it  is 
AATittcn  of  hym  ;  but  avoo  be  to  that 
man,  by  Avhome  the  sonne  of  man  is 
betrayed.  Goode  Avcre  hitt  for  hym,  if 
that  man  had  never  bene  borne. 

22  And  as  they  ate,  Jesus  toke  breede, 
gave  thankes,  brake  it  and  gave  it  to 
them,  and  sayd,  Take,  cate ;  thys  ys  my 
body. 

23  And  he  toke  the  coppe,  gave 
thankes  and  gave  it  to  them,  and  they 
dronke  all  off  it. 

24  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Thys  ys 


248 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

dfere  niwan  cydnesse,  dset  bij)  for  man- 
egum  agoten. 

25  S6])lice  ic  eow  secge,  dset  ic  lieonon- 
forj>  ue  drince  of  dyses  win-geardes 
cynne,  od  done  dseg  donne  ic  bine 
niwne  drince  on  Godes  rice. 

26  And  gecwedenum  lofe,  bi  ferdon  on 
Ele-bergena  miint. 

27  Da  cwsejj  se  Hselend,  Ealle  ge  beof) 
ge-untreowsode  on  disse  nibte  ;  fordam 
de  bit  awriten  is,  Ic  slea  dsene  byrde, 
and  beoj)  da  seep  todreefede. 

28  Ac  sefter  dam  de  ic  arise,  ic  cume 
beforan  eow  on  Galileam. 

29  Da  ssede  Petrus  him,  Deab  de 
ealle  swlcion,  ne  swicige  ic  de  na. 

30  Da  cw0e|)  se  Hselend,  S6]>lice  ic  de 
secge,  dast  du  on  disse  nilite  ser  bana 
tuwa  crawe,  ))riwa  wid-sa?cst  min. 

31  And  he  dses  dc  mare  sprsec,  And 
deab  me  gebyi-ige  mid  de  to  sweltanne, 
ne  setsace  ic  din.  And  swa  hi  cwsedon 
ealle. 

32  Da  comon  hi  to  aniim  tune,  dnes 
nama  wxs  Gezemani.  And  he  cwsej?  to 
bis  leorning-cnibtum,  SittaJ)  her,  od  dset 
ic  me  gebidde. 

33  And  be  nam  da  mid  him  Petrum 
and  lacobum  and  lohajmem,  da  ongan 
be  forhtian,  and  sargian. 

34  And  saede  him,  Unrot  is  min  sawl 
od  dea{) ;  geb;da}>  her,  and  wacia)'. 

35  Da  he  l}i;-h\von  for})-stop,  be  a- 
strehte  bine  ofer  da  eor|;an,  and  he  baed, 
gif  hit  beon  mihte,  dset  he  on  dsere  tide 
fram  him  ge^yite. 

36  And  da  cw9e|)  he,  Abba,  dset  is, 
Fseder,  on  lire  gefjeode,  ealle  |)ing  de 
synd  mihtiglice,  afyr  dysne  calic  fram 
me ;  ac  na  dset  ic  wylle,  ac  dset  du. 

37  Dii  com  he,  and  funde  hi  slsepende. 
And  cwfe)>  to  Petre,  Simon,  slaepst  dii? 
ne  mihtest  dii  ane  tide  waciau  1 

38  Wacia}?,  and  gebidda]',  dset  ge  on 
costnunge  ne  gan  ;  witodlice  se  gast  is 
gearu,  ac  dast  tlsesc  is  untrum. 


XIV.  25-38.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

blood  of  the  newc  testanicnt,  tlie  which 
schal  1)C  shoiUl  out  for  inaiiyc. 

25  Treiily  I  seie  to  ;oii,  for  now  I  schal 
not  drviike  of  this  fruit  of  vyne,  til  in 
to  that  dayc  whannc  I  schal  drynke  it 
ncwc  in  the  rewme  of  God. 

26  And  the  ynipne^  seid,  thci  wcntcn 
out  in  to  the  liil  of  Olyues. 

27  And  Jhesus  seith  to  hem,  AUe  50 
schulcn  be  sclaundrid  in  me  in  this  ni3t ; 
for  it  is  writun,  I  schal  smyte  the  schep- 
herde,  and  the  scheep  of  the  floe  schulcn 
be  dis|)arplid. 

28  r>ut  aftir  that  I  sehal  rysc  a5cn,  I 
schal  j^o  biforc  5011  in  to  Galilee. 

?9  F(.)r.soth  Pctre  scith  to  him,  And  if 
alle  schulcu  be  sclaundrid,  but  not  I. 

30  And  Jhesus  seith  to  him,  Treuly  I 
seie  to  thee,  for  thou  to  day  bifore  the 
cok  in  this  ny5t  twj'cs  5yue  vols,  thrics 
thou  ert  to  denye  me. 

3 1  And  he  spak  more,  And  if  it  bihoue 
me  to  dye  to  gidere  with  thee,  I  schal 
not  denye  thee.  Sothli  and  lyk  mauere 
alle  seiden. 

32  And  thei  camen  in  to  a  place,  to 
whom  the  name  Gethsamany.  And  he 
seith  to  his  disciplis,  Sitte  36  here,  the 
while  I  preie. 

33  And  he  takith  Petre  and  James 
and  John  with  him,  and  bigan  for  to 
drede,  and  to  heuye. 

34  And  he  scith  to  hem.  My  soule  is 
sorwful  til  to  the  decth  ;  susteyne  5e^ 
here,  and  preie  30  with  me. 

35  And  whanne  he  hadde  gon  forth  a 
litel,  he  felde  down  on  the  erthe,  and 
preiede,  that,  if  it  my3te  be,  the  our 
schulde  passe  fro  him. 

36  And  he  seide,  Fadir,  alle  thingis 
Ijen  possible  to  thee,  turne  fro  me  this 
cuppe  ;  but  not  that  I  wole,  but  that 
that  thou. 

37  And  he  cam,  and  fond  hem  slep- 
ynge.  And  he  seith  to  Petre,  Symount, 
slepist  thou  ]  my3tist  thou  not  wake 
with  me  oon  our? 

38  Wake  3e,  and  preie  30,  that  30  entre 
not  in  to  temptacioun  ;  forsothe  the 
spii-it  is  rcdy,  but  the  fleisch  syk. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


249 


my  blonde  of  the  ncwc  testament,  which 
shalbe  sliced  for  many. 

25  Vcrely  I  saye  vnto  you,  I  wyll 
drynke  no  moore  off  this  frute  off  the 
vyne,  vntyll  that  dayc  that  I  shall 
drynke  it  newe  in  the  kyngdom  of  Ciod. 

26  And  when  they  had  sayd  grace, 
they  went  out  in  to  the  mount  Olivcte. 

27  And  Jesus  sayde  A-nto  them,  All  ye 
shalbe  hurtt  thorowe  me  thys  nyght ; 
for  it  is  written,  I  wyll  smyte  the  shep- 
heerd,  and  the  sheepe  shalbe  scattered. 

28  Butt  after  that  I  am  rysen  agayne, 
I  Avyll  goo  into  Gallic  before  you. 

29  Peter  sayde  vnto  hym,  And  though 
all  men  shulde  be  hurte,  yett  wolde 
nott  I. 

30  And  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  Verely 
I  saye  vnto  the,  thys  daye  even  in  this 
nyght  before  the  cocke  crowe  twyse, 
thou  shallt  deney  me  thryse, 

31  And  he  spake  boldlyer,  I^o,  if  I 
shulde  dey  with  the,  I  woll  not  deny 
the.     Lyke  wyse  also  sayd  they  all. 

32  And  they  cam  in  to  a  place,  named 
Gethsemani.  And  he  sayde  to  his  dis- 
ciples, Sitt  ye  here,  whyll  I  goo  aparte 
and  praye. 

33  And  he  toke  "with  hym  Peter  James 
and  Jhon,  and  he  began  to  waxe  abassh- 
ede,  and  to  be  in  an  agony. 

34  And  sayde  vnto  them,  My  soule  is 
very  hevy  even  vnto  the  deetli ;  tary 
hei-e,  and  watche. 

35  And  he  went  forth  a  lytic,  and  fell 
dounne  on  the  groundc,  and  prayede, 
that,  yf  it  were  possible,  the  houre  myght 
passe  from  hym. 

36  And  he  sayde,  Abba  Father,  all 
thinges  are  possible  vnto  the.  take  awaye 
this  cuppe  from  me ;  neverthelesse  nott 
that  I  wyll,  butt  that  thowe  wilt  be 
done. 

37  And  he  cam,  and  founde  them  slep- 
inge.  And  sayd  to  Peter,  bimon,  slepest 
thou  1  coudest  not  thou  watche  with  me 
one  houre ] 

38  Watche  ye,  and  praye,  least  ye  entre 
into  temptacion  ;  the  sprete  is  redy,  but 
the  flessh  is  weeke. 


250 


GOTHIC,  360. 


41 


,     .     .     sai !  galewyada  sunus  mans  iu 
handuns  frawaurlitaize. 


42  Urreisi]),  gaggam;  sai!  sa  leAvyands 
mik  atnewLida. 

43  Yah,  sunsaiw  nauhjjanuh  at  imma 
rodyandin,  qam  ludas,  sums  Jjize  twalibe, 
yah  mi])  "imma  managei  mij)  hairum  yah 
triwam,  fram  jjaim  auhumistam  gud- 
yam,  yah  bokaryam,  yah  sinistam. 

44  Atuh  ])an  gaf  sa  le-\vj'ands  im 
bandwon,  qi}'ands,  pammei  kukyau,  sa 
I'st  j  gi'eipi^  Jjana,  yah  tiuhi])  arniba. 

45  Yah  qimands,  sunsaiw  atgaggands 
du  imma,  qa]),  Kabbei,  rabbei ;  yah 
kukida  imma. 

46  1])  eis  uslagidedun  handuns  ana  ina, 
yah  undgripun  ina. 

47  I]j  ains  sums  J)ize  atstandandane 
imma,  uslukands  hairu,  sloh  skalk  auhu- 
mistins  gudyins,  yah  afsloh  imma  auso 
jjata  taihswo. 

48  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qaj?  du  im, 
Savc  du  waidedj'in  uirunnu))  mi^  hairum 
yah  triwam,  greipan  mik  ? 

49  Daga  whammeh  was  at  izwis,  in  alh 
laisyands,  yah  ni  gripuj;  mik ;  ak  ei 
usfuUnodedeina  bokos. 

50  Yah  afletandans  ina,  ga]?lauhun 
allai. 

51  Yah  ains  sums  yuggalau]js  laistida 
afar  imma,  biwaibijis  leina  ana  naqad- 
ana ;  yah  gripun  is  ]jai  yuggalaudeis. 

52  1))  is  bileij'ands  ))amma  leina,  naqaj^s 
gaj)lauh  faura  im. 

53  Yah  gatauhun  lesu  du  auhumistin 
gudyin.      Yah    garunnun    mijj     imma, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  ?,Iaek 

39  And  eft  he  gebsed  da  ylcan  spraece. 

40  And  da  he  hine  eft  agen-bewende, 
he  funde  hi  slsepende  ;  hyra  eagan  waer- 
on  gehefegode.  And  hi  nyston,  hwaet 
hi  him  andswaredon. 

41  Da  com  he  J)viddan  side,  and  ssede 
him,  Slapa])  nu,  and  resta|>  ;  gen5h  hit 
ys,  Tima  ys  cumen ;  nu  !  is  mannes 
sunu  geseald  on  synfuh-a  handa. 


42  A'l-isa}),  uton  gan  ;  nu !  is  gehende 
se  de  me  syljj. 

43  Him  da  da  gyt  sprecendum,  com 
ludas  Scarioth,  daet  ys  widersaca,  an  of 
dam  twelfum,  and  mid  him  mycel  men- 
egeo  mid  swurdum  and  mid  sahlum, 
fram  heah-sacerdum,  bocerum,  and  eald- 
rum. 

44  S6|)Hce  his  Isewa  him  tacen  sealde, 
and  dus  cwsejj,  Swii  hwylcne  swa  ic 
cysse,  he  hit  ys  ;  nima]',  and  IsedaJ)  hine 
waerlice. 

45  And  sona  swa  he  com,  he  ge- 
nealsehte  him  to,  and  cwa3|),  Lareow ; 
and  cyste  hine. 

46  And  hi  hyra  handa  on  hine  wairpon, 
and  namou  hine. 

47  Sojjlice  an  of  dam  de  dar  embe 
uton  stodon,  his  swurde  abraed,  and 
sloh  dses  sacerdes  Jjeow,  and  his  eare 
of-aceai-f. 

48  Da  cwpe})  se  Heelend  him  and- 
swariende,  8wa  swa  to  anum  sceajian 
ge  ferdon  mid  swurdum  and  treowum, 
me  gefon  1 

49  Donne  ic  dseghwamlice  mid  eow 
wses,  on  temple  Iserende,  and  ge  me  ne 
namon ;  ac  daet  da  gewritu  sj'-n  gefyl- 
lede. 

50  Da  forleton  his  leorning-cnihtas 
ealle  hyne,  and  flugon. 

5 1  Sum  iungling  him  fyligde,  mid  anre 
scytan  bewaefed  nacod;  and  hi  namon 
hine. 

52  Da  aworpenre  dsere  scytan,  nacod 
he  him  fram  fleah. 

53  And  hi  Iseddon  dsene  Hselend  to 
dam  heah-sacerde.     And    comon    ealle 


XIV.  39-53-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

39  And  cftsoone  he  gojTige  preiede, 
the  same  word  seyiiige. 

40  And  he  turnyd  a5cu  cftsoone,  fond 
hem  slepiuge  ;  sothli  her  yjen  were 
grcuyd.  And  thei  knewen  not,  what 
thci  sehulden  answere  to  liim. 

41  And  he  cam  the  thridde  tyme,  and 
seith  to  hem,  Slepe  5c  nowe,  and  reste 
3e  ;  sothli  it  sufKcith.  The  our  comoth  ; 
loo !  mannis  sone  schal  be  bitrayed  in 
to  houdis  of  syuful  men. 

42  Eyse  5e,  go  we  ;  loo  !  he  that  schal 
bytraye  me  is  ny5. 

43  And,  ^it  him  spekiugc,  Judas  Sca- 
rioth,  oon  of  the  twelue,  cam,  and  with 
him  moche  cumpeny  wilh  swerdis  and 
staues,  sent  fro  the  hijeste  prestis,  and 
scribis,  and  fi'o  the  eldere  men. 

44  Forsothe  the  ti-aitour  hadde  3ouun 
to  hem  a  tokene,  seyinge,  Whom  euere 
I  schal  kisse,  he  it  is ;  holde  5e  him, 
and  lede  56  warly.^ 

45  And  whanue  he  cam,  anon  he  com- 
inge  to  him,  seith,  Maistir ;  and  he 
kisside  him. 

46  And  thei  layden  hondis  in  to  him, 
and  heeiden  him. 

47  Sothli  oon  of  men  stondinge  aboute, 
ledinge  out  a  swei'd,  smot  the  seruaunt 
of  the  hi5este  prest,  and  kitte  of  to  him 
an  eere. 

48  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seith  to 
hem,  As  to  a  thef  ■^e  han  gon  out  with 
swerdis  and  staues,  for  to  take  me  1 

49  Foi*soth  day  by  day  I  was  at  50U, 
techinge  in  the  temple,  and  50  heeiden 
not  me  ;  but  that  the  scripturis  be  ful- 
fillid. 

50  Thanne  him  forsakun,  alle  his  dis- 
ciplis  fledden. 

51  Sothli  sum  5ong  man,  clothid  with 
lynncn  cloth  on  the  bare,  suede  him ; 
and  thei  heeiden  him. 

52  And  the  IjTinen  cloth  forsakun,  he 
nakid  flei5  awey  fro  hem. 

53  And  thei  ledden  Jhesu  to  the  hi5este 
prcst.     And  all  camen  to  gidere  in  to 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


251 


39  And  agayne  he  went  awaye  and 
prayde,  and  spake  the  same  wordcs. 

40  And  he  returned,  and  founde  them 
aslepe  agayne  ;  for  their  eyes  were  hcvy. 
Nether  coulde  they  tell,  what  they 
myght  answere  to  hym. 

41  And  he  cam  the  thyrde  tyme,  and 
sayd  vnto  them,  Slepe  hens  forth,  and 
take  youre  case ;  it  is  ynough.  The 
houre  is  come  ;  bcholde  !  the  sonne  of 
man  shalbc  ilclyvred  into  the  hondes 
of  synncrs. 

42  Piyse  vppe,  let  vs  goo  ;  loo  !  he 
that  bctrayeth  me  is  come  nye. 

43  And  immediatly,  whill  he  yett  spake, 
cam  Judas,  won  oft"  the  twelve,  and  with 
hyme  a  greate  nomber  off"  ])eople  with 
sweardes  and  staves,  from  the  hye  prestes, 
and  scribes,  and  seniours. 

44  He  that  betrayed  hym  gave  them 
a  generall  token,  sayinge,  Whosoever  I 
do  kisse,  he  it  is  ;  take  hym,  and  leade 
hym  awaye  ward)'. 

45  And  as  sone  as  he  was  come,  he 
went  streight  wave  to  him,  and  sayd 
vnto  hym.  Master,  master ;  and  kissed 
him. 

46  And  they  leyde  their  hondes  on 
him,  and  toke  him. 

47  Won  off"  them  that  stode  by,  drue 
out  a  swearde,  and  smote  a  servaunt  off" 
the  hye  prcste,  and  cutt  off'  hys  care. 

48  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto 
them,  Ye  cam  out  as  vnto  a  thefe  with 
swcavdes  and  with  staves,  ffor  to  take 
me] 

49  I  was  dayly  with  you  in  the  temple, 
teachinge,  and  ye  toke  me  not  ;  but 
that  the  scriptures  shulde  be  fulfilled. 

50  And  they  all  forsoke  hym,  and 
ranne  awaye. 

51  And  there  was  a  certeyne  yonge 
man  thatt  folowed  hym,  cloothed  in 
linncn  apon  the  bare  j  and  the  yonge 
men  caught  hym. 

52  And  he  Icfte  his  Ij-nnen,  and  fleed 
fi-om  them  nakeed. 

53  And  they  leedde  Jesus  awaye  to  the 
hyest  preste  off"  all.     And  to  hym  came 


252 


GOTHIC,  360. 


auhumistans  gudyans  allai  yali  ]>&[  sinis- 
tans  yah  bokai-yos. 

54  Yah  Paitrus  fairra);ro  laistida  afar 
irama  unte  qam  'in  garda  J)is  auhumistins 
gudyins.  Yah  was  sitands  mij?  and- 
bahtam,  yah  warmyauds  sik  at  liuhada. 

55  Ij)  Jiai  auhumistans  gudyans,  yah 
alia  so  gafaurds,  sokidedun  ana  lesu 
weitwodifia,  du  afdaujjyan  ina  ;  yah  ni 
bigetun. 

56  Managai  auk  galiug  weitwodidedun 
ana  'ina,  yah  samaleikos  Jjos  weitwodijjos 
ni  wesun. 

57  Yah  sumai  usstandandans  galiug 
weitwodidedun  ana  ina,   qij?andans, 

58  patei  weis  gahausidedum  qij^andan 
'ina,  patei  'ik  gataira  alh  ))0  hauduwaurh- 
ton,  yah  bi  ]jrins  dagans  anj?ara  uu- 
handuwaurhta  gatimrya. 

59  Yah  ni  swa  samaleika  was  weit- 
wodijja  'ize. 

60  Yah  usstandands  sa  auhumista 
gudya  in  midyaim,  fi-ah  lesu,  qi})ands, 
Mu  andhafyis  waiht  wha  |)ai  ana  J)uk 
weitwodyand  1 

61  I])  'is  j^ahaida,  yah  waiht  ni  andhof. 
Aftra  sa  auhumista  gudya  frah  ina,  yah 
qa|)  du  'imma,  pu  'is  Christus,  sa  sunus 
Jiis  piujjeigins  1 

62  I})  'is  qa})uh,  Ik  'im ;  yah  gasai- 
Vfhi]>  jjana  sunu  mans  af  taihswon 
sitandan  mahtais,  yah  qimandan  mijj 
milhmam  himinis. 

63  Ij)  sa  auhumista  gudya,  disskreit- 
ands  wastyos  seinos,  qa}>,  Wha  ))anamais 
})aurbum  weis  weitwode  1 

64  Hausideduj)  |)o  wayamerein  'is.  AVha 
'izwis  luigkeijj'?  paruh  eis  allai  ga- 
domidedun  ina  skulan  wisan  daujjau. 

65  Yah  dugunnun  sumai  speiwan  ana 
wlit  'is,  yah  hulyan  audwair|)i  'is,  yah 
kaupatyan  ina,  yah  qejnin  du  'imma, 
Praufetei.  Yah  andbahtos  gabauryaba 
lofam  slohun  'ina. 

66  Yah  wisandin  Paitrau  'in  rohsnai 
dala}ia,  yah  afiddya  aina  j^iuyo  jjis  auhu- 
mistins gudyins. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

I  sacerdas    and   boceras    and    ealdras  to- 
j  gsedere. 

54  Petrus  him  fyligde  feorran  od  dses 
heah-sacerdes  cafer-tdu.  And  he  stet 
mid  ctam  j^enum,  and  Avyrmde  hine  ait 
dam  fyre. 

55  Da  heah-sacerdas  sohton,  and  eall 
gejjeaht,  tale  agen  done  Heelend,  cla-t 
hi  hine  to  deajje  sealdon ;  and  hi  ne 
fundon. 

56  Manega  ssedon  lease  gecyttnysse 
agen  hine,  and  da  cydnessa  naevon 
dseslice. 

57  Da  arison  sume  and  ssedon  lease 
cydnesse  agen  hine,  and  dus  cweedon, 

58  Sojjes  we  gehyrdon  hine  secgan,  Ic 
towurpe  dis  hand-worhte  tempel,  and 
tefter  Jjrim  dagum  ic  oder  unhand-worht 
getimbrie. 

59  And  hyra  cydnys  nses  dseslic. 

60  Da  aras  sum  heah-sacerd  on  hyra 
midlene,  and  alisode  dfene  Hseleud,  Ne 
andswarast  dii  nan  })ing  agen  daet  dds 
de  onwurpajj  1 

61  He  suwode,  and  mlht  ne  and- 
swarode.  Eft  hine  acsode  se  heah- 
sacerd,  Eart  du  Crist,  daes  gebletsodan 
Godes  sunu  1 

62  Da  ssede  se  Hjelend,  Ic  eom ;  and 
ge  geseo)?  mannes  sunu  on  swydran 
healfe  sittan  his  msegenes,  and  cumende 
mid  heofones  genipum. 

63  Da  cwpej)  se  heah-sacerd,  his  reaf 
slitende,  Hwi  gewilnige  we  gyt  cydera  ] 

64  Ge  gehyrdon  his  bysmer.  Hwjet 
])inc))  eow  1  Da.  hyrwdon  hi  ealle  hine 
and  cw*don  dset  he  wsere  deajjes  scyl- 
dig. 

65  And  sume  agunnon  him  on  spsetan, 
and  ofer-wreon  his  ansyne,  and  mid 
fystum  hine  beoton,  and  him  to  cwsedon, 
A'rsed.  And  da  |)enas  hine  mid  haudum 
beoton. 

66  And  da  Petinis  wses  on  cafer-tune, 
da  com  to  him  an  })inen  dses  heah- 
sacerdes. 


XIV.  54-66.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

0011,    the    prcstis    and  the   scribis   and 
eldere  men. 

54  Forsoth  Petre  suede  liini  afer  til 
with  ynne  in  to  the  Iialle  of  the  hi5cste 
l)rest.  And  he  sat  with  the  niynystris, 
and  warmyde  him  at  the  iier. 

55  Forsothe  the  hi5csto  prestis,  and  al 
the  counceil,  sou5ten  witnessinge  ajens 
Jhesu,  that  thai  schulen  jyue  him  to 
deeth  ;  nether  thei  founden. 

56  Sothli  manye  seiden  fals  witness- 
inge a5ens  him,  and  the  witnessingis 
weren  not  coucnable. 

57  And  summe  risynge  sou5teu  fals 
witnessing  a3ens  hym,  seyinge, 

58  For  we  hau  herd  him  seiynge,  I 
schal  vndo  this  temple  maad  with  hondis, 
and  aftir  the  thridde  day  I  schal  bilde 
a  nother  not  maad  with  hondis. 

59  And  the  witnessing  of  hem  was  not 
couenable. 

60  Forsothe  the  hi5este  prest  rysinge 
vp  in  to  the  myddel,  axide  him,  sey- 
inge, Answerist  thou  not  ony  thing  to 
tho  thingis  that  ben  put  to  thee  of 
these  1 

61  Sothli  he  was  stille,  and  no  thing 
answeride.  Eftsoone  the  hi3est  prest 
axide  him,  and  seide  to  him,  Ert  thou 
Crist,  the  sone  of  blessid  God  1 

62  Sothli  Jhesus  seide  to  him,  I  am ; 
and  5e  schulen  se  mannis  sone  sittinge 
on  the  rijt  half  of  the  vertu  of  God, 
and  comynge  in  cloudis  of  heuene. 

6^  Forsoth  the  hi3est  prest,  kittinge 
his  clothis,  seith.  What  jit  desyren  we 
witnessis  ? 

64  3e  han  herde  blaspheraye.  What 
semeth  to  50U 1  The  whiche  alle  con- 
dempneden  him  for  to  be  gilty  of  deeth. 

65  And  summe  bigunnen  for  to  bispitte 
him,  and  to  hide  his  yjen,  and  smyte 
him  with  boffatis,  and  seie  to  him,  Pro- 
phecie  thou.  And  the  mynystris  beeten 
him  with  strokis.^ 

66  And  whanne  Petre  was  in  the  halle 
bynethen,  oon  of  the  hand  maydens  of 
the  hijcst  prest  cam. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


253 


all,  the  hye  prestes  and  the  scniours  and 
the  scribes. 

54  And  Peter  folowed  a  gi-eate  way  of 
even  into  the  pallys  of  the  hye  prcste. 
And  he  was  there  and  sat  with  the  scr- 
vauntes,  and  warmed  hymsilfc  att  the 
fyre. 

55  And  the  hye  prestes,  and  all  the 
counsell,  sought  for  witnes  agaynstc 
Jesu,  to  putt  hym  to  deeth  ;  and  they 
founde  noone. 

56  Yett  many  bare  falce  witnes  a- 
gaynste  hym,  butt  their  witnes  aggreed 
not  to  gedder. 

57  And  there  aroose  certayne  and 
brought  falce  witnes  againste  hym,  say- 
inge, 

58  We  herde  hym  saye,  I  wjdl  destroyc 
this  temple  made  with  hondes,  and  with 
in  thre  dayes  I  wyll  bildc  another  made 
with  out  hondes. 

59  And  there  witnes  aggreed  not  to 
gedder. 

60  And  the  hyeste  preste  stode  vppe 
before  them  all,  and  axed  Jesus,  say- 
inge,  Answerest  thou  nothinge,  ho  we  is 
it  that  these  beare  witnes  agaynst  the  ? 

61  And  he  helde  his  peace,  and  an- 
swered noothynge.  Agayne  the  hyeste 
preste  axed  hym,  and  sayde  vnto  hym. 
Arte  thou  Christ,  the  soune  off  the 
Blessed  ? 

62  And  Jesus  sayde,  I  am  ;  and  ye 
shall  se  the  sonne  off  man  sitt  on  the 
ryght  honde  of  power,  and  come  in  the 
cloudes  off  heven. 

63  Then  the  hyest  preste  rent  his 
cloothes,  and  sayd,  What  nede  we  eny 
further  of  witnes  1 

64  Y'^e  have  herde  the  blasphemy.  What 
thinke  ye  1  And  they  all  gave  sentence 
that  he  was  worthy  of  deeth. 

65  And  some  began  to  spit  at  hym, 
and  to  cover  his  face,  and  to  bet  hym 
with  their  fistes,  and  to  saye  vnto  him, 
Arede  vnto  vs.  And  the  scrvauntes 
boffeted  him  on  the  face. 

66  And  Peter  was  beneeth  in  the  pallys, 
and  there  cam  won  off  the  wenches  off 
the  hyest  pi-este. 


254 


GOTHIC,  360. 


67  Yah  gasaiwhandei  Paitru  wai-m- 
yanclan  sik,  insaiwhandei  du  imma  qajj, 
Yah  ])U  mi])  lesua  Jjamma  Nazoreinau 
wast.^ 

68  I])  'is  afaiaik,  qipiands,  Wi  wait,  ni 
kann,  wha  ])U  qij)is.  Yah  galaij)  faur 
gard  ;  yah  hana  wopida. 

69  Yah  jjiwi  gasaiwhandei  ina,  aftra 
dugann  qi})an  Jjaim  faurastandandam, 
patei  sa  ])izei  ist. 

70  iijj  is  aftra  laugnida.  Yah  afai' 
leitil,  aftra  ])ai  atstandandans,  qe})un  du 
Paitrau,  Bi  sunyai  ))izei  is,  .... 
yah  auk  razda  peina  galeika  ist. 

71  Ij)  is  dugann  afaikan  yah  swaran, 
patei  ni  kann  Jmna  mannan,  J^anei  qi}>i)>. 

72  Yah  anj^aramma  sin])a  hana  wopida. 
Yah  gamunda  Paiti'us  jjata  waurd  swe 
qa|)  imma  lesus,  patei  faur|)ize  hana 
hrukyai  twaim  sinj^am,  inwidis  mik  Jjrim 
sinjjam.     Yah  dugann  greitan. 


Chap.  XV.  i  Yah  sunsaiw  in  maur- 
gin,  garuni  tauyandans  \>a.i  auhumistaus 
gudyans,  mij?  {'aim  sinistam,  yah  bok- 
aryam,  yah  alia  so  gafaurds,  gabindand- 
ans  lesu,  brahtedun  ina  at  Peilatau. 

2  Yah  frah  ina  Peilatus,  pu  is  ])iudans 
ludaie  1  I]>  is  andhafyands  qa]?  du  imma, 
pu  qijjis. 

3  Yah  wrohidedun  ina  }iai  auhumistans 
gudyans  filu. 

4  IJ)  Peilatus  aftra  frah  ina,  qi];ands, 
Niu  andhafyis  ni  waiht  ?  »Sai,  whan 
filu  ana  Jjuk  weitwodyand  ? 

5  I])  lesus  jjanamais  ni  andhof,  swaswe 
sildaleikida  Peilatus. 

6  I);  and  dul]j  wharyoh  fralailot  im 
ainana  bandyan,  Jjanei  bedun. 

7  Wasuh  }3an  sa  haitana  Barabbas,  mij) 
Jiaira  mi)>  imma  drobyandam  gabundans, 
J^aiei  in  auhyodau  maur|jr  gatawidedun. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

67  And  dfi  heo  geseah  Petrum  vryrvn- 
ende,  da  cwtejj  heo,  Du  waere  mid  dam 
Nazareniscan  Haelende. 

68  Da  setsoc  he,  and  cwse]),  Ic  nat,  ne 
ne  can,  hwset  du  segst.  And  he  eode 
da  of  dam  cafer-tiiue ;  and  se  hana 
creow. 

69  Eft  da  hine  gecneow  oder  ])inen, 
heo  ongan  cwedan  to  dam  de  dar  abutan 
stodon,  S6]jlice  des  ys  of  dam. 

70  And  he  eft  setsoc.  And  eft  da 
ymbe  lytel,  da  de  set-stodon  cwsedon 
to  Petre,  Sojjlice  dii  eart  of  dam,  Ga- 
lileisc  du  eart 

7 1  Da  ongan  he  setsacan  and  swerian, 
Soj^es  ne  can  ic  dsene  man,  de  ge  secga]j. 

72  And  da  eft-sona  creow  se  hana. 
Da  gemunde  Petrus  dses  HEelendes 
worde  de  he  him  seede,  M'r  se  hana 
crawe  tuwa,  J^riwa  du  me  setssecst.  Da 
ongan  he  wepan. 


Chap.  XV.  i  Da  s5na  on  mergen, 
worhton  da  heah-sacerdas  byra  gemot 
mid  ealdrum,  and  bocerum,  and  eallum 
werodum,  and  Iseddon  dsene  Heelend, 
gebundenne,  and  sealdon  hine  Pilato. 

2  Da  acsode  Pilatus  hine,  Eart  dii 
ludea  cyning  ?  Da  andswarode  he  him, 
Du  hit  segst. 

3  Da  wregdon  hine  da  heah-sacerdas 
on  manegum  Jjingum. 

4  Eft  Pilatus  hine  acsode,  Ne  and- 
swarast  dii  nan  ]>hig  1  L5ca,  hii  micel- 
um  hi  de  wregeaj)  1 

5  Da  ne  andswarode  se  Hselend  him 
na  mare,  swa  dset  Pilatus  wundrode. 

6  On  symbel-dsege  wses  his  gewuna 
dset  he  him  forgeafe  senne  gebundenne, 
swa  hwylcne  swa  hi  beedon. 

7  Da  bgedon  hi  Barraban,  se  wses  ge- 
bunden  mid  dam  rseplingum,  se  jjurh 
swic-croeft  man-slyht  geworhte. 


XIV.  67.-XV.  7-]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

67  And  wlianne  sclic  hadde  scyn  I'otrc 
•\vaniiyn<:![e  him,  schc  biholdinifc  him 
scith,  Ami  thou  wiist  with  Jhesii  of 
Nazareth. 

68  And  he  dcnyede,  scyinc^c,  Ncthir  I 
Avoot,  ncthoi-  I  haue  knowun,  what  thou 
seist.  And  he  wcntc  forth  blfore  the 
halle  ;  and  anon  the  cok  song. 

69  Eftsone  forsotlic  wlianne  a  nother 
hand  maydc  haddo  seyn  him,  she  bigan 
for  to  seic  to  meu  stoudiugc  aboute,  For 
this  is  of  hem. 

70  And  he  eftsone  denyede.  And  aftir 
a  litil,  eftsooue  thei  that  stoodeu  ny3, 
seidcu  to  Pctre,  Verily  thou  ert  of  hem, 
forwhi  and  thou  ert  of  Galilee.      .     . 

7 1  Sothli  he  bigan  for  to  curse  and 
swere.  For  I  knowe  not  this  man,  whom 
5e  seyn. 

72  And  anon  eftsoones  the  cok  song. 
And  Petre  bithou5te  on  the  werd  that 
Jhesus  hadde  seid  to  him,  Bifore  the 
cok  synge  tAvyes,  thries  thou  schalt 
denye  me.     And  he  bigan  for  to  wepe. 


Chap.  XV.  i  And  anon  the  morwe 
maad,  the  hi5este  prestis,  makinge  coun- 
ceil  with  the  eldere  men,  and  scribis, 
and  al  the  counceil,  byndinge  Jhesu, 
ledden,  and  bitooken  to  Pilat. 

2  And  Pilat  axide  him,  Art  thou  kyng 
of  Jewis  1  And  he  answcringe  seith  to 
him,  Thou  seyst. 

3  And  the  hi5este  prestis  accusiden 
him  in  manye  thingis. 

4  Pilat  forsothe  eftsoone  axide  him, 
seylnge,  Thou  answerist  not  ony  thing  1 
Seest  thou,  in  how  manye  thingis  thei 
accusen  theel 

5  Forsothe  Jhesus  more  no  thing  an- 
sweride,  so  that  Pilat  sclmldc  wondre. 

6  Forsoth  by  a  solenme  day  he  was 
wont  to  lecue  to  hem  oon  bounden, 
whom  cuere  thei  axiden. 

7  Forsoth  there  was  he  that  was  seid 
Barabas,  that  was  boundun  with  sleeris 
of  men,  and  that  hadde  don  maiislau3tre 
in  seducioun.''' 


TYNDALE,  1526.  255 

67  And  when  she  sawe  Peti'e  warm- 
ynge  hym  silfe,  she  lokcd  on  hym  and 
sayd,  AVast  not  thou  also  with  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  1 

68  And  he  denyed  it,  sayinge,  I  knowe 
hym  not,  nether  wott  I,  what  thou  sayest. 
And  he  went  out  in  to  the  poorche  ; 
and  the  cockc  crewe. 

69  And  a  damsell  saw^c  hym,  and 
agaync  began  to  saye  to  them  that  stodc 
b}',  Thys  ys  won  of  them. 

70  And  he  denyed  yt  agaync.  And 
anon  after,  agayne  they  that  stode  by, 
sayde  to  Peter,  Sucrly  thou  arte  won  off 
them,  for  thou  arte  of  Galile,  and  thy 
speache  agrcth  therto. 

71  And  he  began  to  coursse  and  to 
sweare,  sayinge,  I  knowe  nott  thys  man, 
off  whom  ye  speake. 

7  2  And  agayne  the  cocke  crewe.  And 
Peter  remembred  the  worde  that  Jesus 
sayd  vnto  him,  Before  the  cocke  crowe 
twyse,  thou  shalt  deny  me  thryse.  And 
began  to  wepe. 


Chap.  XV.  i  And  anon  in  the  dawn- 
yhge,  heckle  the  hye  prestes  a  counsell 
Avith  the  seniours,  and  the  scribes,  and 
also  the  Avhoole  congregacion,  and  bounde- 
Jesus,  and  ledde  hym  aw^aye,  and  de- 
lyvered  hym  to  Pilate. 

2  And  Pilate  axed  hym.  Arte  thou  the- 
kynge  off  the  Jewes  ?  And  he  answered, 
and  sayde  vnto  hym,  Thou  sayest  yt. 

3  And  the  hye  prestes  accused  hym  off. 
many  thynges. 

4  Pylate  axed  hym  agaync,  sayinge^ 
Answerest  thou  nothyngc  1  Behoolde, 
howe  many  thinges  they  lay  vnto  tliy 
charge  ? 

5  Jesus  yett  answered  never  a  worde, 
so  that  Pilate  mcrvclcd. 

6  Att  the  feast  Pilate  was  wont  to 
delyvre  att  their  pleasure  a  presoncr, 
whomsoever  they  wolde  desyre. 

7  And  there  was  one  named  Barrabas, 
Avhich  laye  bounde  with  them  that 
caused  in  surrettion.  and  in  the  in.  sue- 
rection  committed  murther. 


256 


GOTHIC,  360. 


8  Yah  usgagganclei  alia  managei,  du- 
gunnun  bidyan,  swaswe  sinteino  tawida 
im, 

9  iij)  Peilatus  andliof  i'm,  qi|)ands, 
Wileidu  fraleitan  izwis  Jjana  J^iudan 
ludaie  1 

10  Wissa  auk,  jjatel  in  nei|)is  atgebun 
iina  ))ai  auhumistans  gudyans. 

11  Ij)  }iai  auhumistaus  gudyans  in- 
wagidedun  \>o  managein,  ei  mais  Barab- 
ban  fralailoti  im. 

12  I})  Peilatus  aftra  andhafyands  qajj 
du  im,  Wha  nu  wilei))  ei  tauyau  jjammei 
qi})ijj  })iudan  ludaie  ? 

13  Ijj  eis  aftra  hropidedun,  TJshramei 
ina, 

14  I))  Peilatus  qa]?  du  im,  Wha  allis 
ubilis  gatawidal  !]>  eis  mais  hropi- 
dedun, Ushramei  ina. 

1 5  Il>  Peilatus  wilyands  ])lzai  managein 
fullafahyan,  fralailot  im  j^ana  Barabban, 
ijj  lesu  atgaf,  usbliggwands,  ei  ushramijjs 
wesi. 

16  Ij)  gadrauhteis  gatauhun  ina  innana 
gardis,  jjatei  ist  praitoriaun,  yah  ga- 
haihaitun  alia  hansa, 

17  Yah  gawasidedun  ina  pam'purai. 
Yah  atlagidedun  ana  ina  Jjaurneina  wipya, 
uswindandans ; 

18  Yah  dugunnun  golyan  ina,  Hails, 
J)iudan  ludaie. 

19  Yah  slohun  is  haubi}?  rausa,  yah 
bispiwun  ina;  yah  lagyaudans  kniwa 
inwitun  ina. 

20  Yah  bij>e  bilailaikun  ina,  andwasi- 
dedun  ina  jjizai  jjaurpurai,  yah  gaAvasi- 
dedun  ina  wastyom  swesaim,  yah  ustauh- 
un  ina,  ei  ushramidedeina  ina. 

21  Yah  undgi'ipun  sumana  manne, 
Seimona  K\vi-einaiu,  qimandan  af  akra, 
attan  Alaiksandraus  yah  Bufaus,  ei  nemi 
^•algan  is. 

22  Yah  attauhun  ina  ana  Gaulgaujja 
sta]>,  patei  ist  gaskeiri]>,  Whairneins 
stajps. 

23  Yah  gebun  imma  drigkan  wein  mi]> 
smwrna,  ip  is  ni  nam. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Mark 

8  And  dl  he  ferde,  cl'i  ongan  seo 
menegeu  hiue  biddan,  swa  heo  symle 
dyde. 

9  Da  cwfejj  Pilatus,  AVylle  ge  dtet  ic 
eow  forgyfe  ludea  cyning  1 

10  He  wiste,  fet  \>nv\\  andan  hine 
sealdon  3a  heahsacerdas. 

1 1  Da  astyredou  cla  bisceopas  da  men- 
egu,  dtet  he  him  Barraban  forgefe. 

12  Eft  Pilatus  him  andswarode,  Hwset 
d5  ic  be  ludea  cyninge  1 


13  Hi  eft  hiymdon  and  cwsedon,  Hoh 
hine. 

14  Dii  ssede  Pilatus,  Hwa3t  yfeles  dyde 
he  ?  Hi  dses  de  ma  clypedon,  A'hoh 
hine. 

15  Pilatus  wolde  da  dam  folce  ge- 
cweman,  and  forgef  him  Barraban,  and 
sealde  him  done  Hyelend,  beswungenne, 
dait  he  ahangen  wsere. 

16  Da  Iseddon  da  cempan  hine  on  dtes 
d5m-ernes  cafer-tiin,  and  hi  tosomne 
call  werod  clypedon, 

17  And  scryddon  hine  mid  purpuran. 
And  him  onsetton  Jjyrneune  helm,  awiin- 
denne ; 

18  And  ongunnon  hine  dus  gretan, 
Hal  Aves,  dil  ludea  cyning. 

19  And  beoton  hine  on  dset  heafod 
mid  hreode,  and  spsetton  him  on ;  and 
heora  cneow  bigdon  and  hine  ge-ead- 
meddon. 

20  And  syddan  hi  hine  bysmrydon, 
unscryddon  hine  dam  purpiu-an,  and 
scryddon  hine  mid  his  reafiim,  and 
laeddon  hine,  dset  hi  hine  ahengon. 

21  And  genyddon  sumne  wegferendne, 
Simonem  Cyreneum,  cumende  of  dam 
tune,  Alexandres  fiseder  and  Rufi,  dset 
he  his  rode  bsere. 

22  And  hi  Iseddon  hine  on  da  st5we 
Golgotha,  dtet  is  on  ure  gejjcode  gei'eht, 
Heafodpannena  stow. 

23  And  sealdon  him  gebiterod  win, 
and  he  hit  ne  onfeng. 


XV.  S-23.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

8  Ami  wliaiuie  tlie  cumpany  liadile 
sti5e  \[>,  lie  bigau  for  to  preyo,  as  he 
euormore  diile  to  hem. 

9  Sotholy  Pilat  answerido  to  honi,  and 
seide,  Woleii  je  I  leeue  to  50U  the  kyng 
of  Jewis  ] 

10  Sothli  he  wistc,  that  the  liijcste 
prcstis  hadden  taken  him  by  enuye. 

11  Forsothe  the  bischopis  stireden  the 
cumponye  of  ]>eple,  that  more  he  schulde 
leeue  to  hem  Barabas. 

1 2  Forsoth  eftsoone  Pilat  answeringe 
seith  to  hem,  ^Vhat  therfore  wolen  50  I 
schal  do  to  the  kyng  of  Jewis  ] 

13  And  thci  eftsoone  criedcn,  Crucifie 

14  Forsoth  Pilat  seide  to  hem,  Sothli 
what  of  j-uel  hath  he  don  1  And  thei 
criedcn  more,  Crucifie  him. 

15  Sothli  Pilat  willinge  for  to  do  ynow 
to  the  peple,  lefte  to  hem  Barabas,  and 
bitook  to  hem  Jhesu,  smytcn"''  with 
scourgis,  that  he  schulde  be  crucified. 

16  Forsothe  kny5tis  ledden  him  with- 
ynne,  in  to  the  floor  of  the  moot  halle, 
and  clepiden  to  gidere  al  the  cumpenye 
of  kny5tis, 

17  And  clothiden  him  with  purpur. 
And  thei  foldinge  a  corowne  of  thornes, 
puttidcn  to  him  ; 

18  And  bigunnen  for  to  greet  him, 
sayinge,  Hail,  thou  kyng  of  Jewis. 

19  And  thei  smyten  his  heed  with  a 
reede,  and  bispatten  him ;  and  puttinge 
her  knees  thei  worshipiden  him. 

20  And  aftir  that  thei  hadden  scornyd 
him,  thei  vnclothiden  him  fro  purpur,  and 
clothedyn  him  with  his  clothis,  and  led- 
den him,  that  thei  schulde  crucifie  him. 

21  And  thci  constreyneden  sum  man 
passynge  forth,  Symount  of  Syrenen, 
comynge  fro  the  town,  the  fadir  of  Alys- 
andre  and  Rufe,  that  he  schulde  take 
his  cross. 

22  And  thei  ledden  him  in  to  a  place 
(^iolgotha,  that  is  interpretid,^  the  place 
<  f  Caluarie. 

2^  And  thei  5aucn  him  for  to  drynke 
wyn  meddelid  with  myrrc,  and  he  took 
not. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2.-7 


8  And  the  people  called  vnto  hyni,  and 
began  to  desyre  off  hym,  accordinge  as 
he  had  ever  done  vnto  them. 

9  P\late  answered  them,  and  sayd, 
Wyll  ye  that  I  loose  vnto  you  the  kyngc 
oft'  the  Jewes  ? 

10  For  he  kncwc,  that  the  hye  prestes 
had  delyvcred  hym  off"  envy. 

1 1  Butt  the  hye  prestes  had  moved 
the  people,  that  he  shulde  rather  delyvre 
Barrabas  vnto  them. 

1 2  Pylate  answered  agayne  and  sayd 
vnto  them.  What  wyll  yc  then  that  I  do 
with  hym  whom  ye  call  the  kynge  of 
the  Jewes  1 

13  And  they  cryed  agayne,  Crucify 
hym. 

14  Pylate  sayde  vnto  them,  What 
harme  hath  he  done  %  And  they  ciyed 
the  moore  fervently,  Crucifi  hym. 

15  Pylate  willinge  to  content  the  peo- 
ple, loused  Barrabas,  and  delyvcred  Je- 
sus scourged,  for  to  be  crucifyed. 

16  And  the  souddeers  ledde  hym  a- 
waye,  in  to  the  commen  hall,  and  called 
togedder  all  the  whoole  multitude, 

17  And  they  clothed  hym  wyth  purple. 
And  they  plated  a  croune  oft'  thornes, 
and  crouned  hym  with  all ; 

18  And  began  to  salute  hym,  Hayl, 
kynge  off"  the  Jewes. 

1 9  And  they  smoote  hym  on  the  heed 
with  a  rede,  and  spatt  apon  hym  ;  and 
kneled  doune  and  worsheped  hym. 

20  And  when  they  had  moocked  him, 
they  toke  the  purple  off"  him,  and  put 
his  awne  cloothes  on  him,  and  ledde  him 
oute,  to  crucify  him. 

21  And  they  compelled  won  that 
passed  by,  called  Simon  of  Cerene, 
which  cam  oute  of  the  fclde,  and  was 
father  off  Alexander  and  Piufus,  to 
beare  hys  crosse. 

22  And  they  brought  him  to  a  place 
named  Golgotha,  which  is  by  interpre- 
tacion,  the  place  off  deed  mens  scoulles. 

23  And  they  gave  him  to  drynke  wync 
myngled  with  mirre,  butt  he  receaved 
it  not. 


258 


GOTHIC,  360. 


24  Yali  ushramyandans  'ina  disclail- 
yand  wastyos  is,  wairpandans  lilauta  ana 
jjos,  wharyizuli  wlia  nemi. 

25  "Wasuh  l^an  wlieila  |)ridyo,  yah 
ushi-amidedun  ina. 

26  Yah  was  ufarmeli  fairinos  is  ufar- 
meli]>,  Sa  jjiudans  ludaie. 

27  Yah  mi)?  imma  ushramidedun  twans 
waidedyaus,  ainana  af  taihswon,  yah 
ainana  af  hleidumein  is. 

28  Yah  usfullnoda  }}ata  gamelido  ]'ata 
qifiano,  Yah  mijj  uusibyaim  rahni])S  was. 

29  Yah  jjai  faurgaggandans  Avayameri- 
dedun  ina,  wifiondans  haubida  seiua,  yah 
qij^andans,  0  !  sa  gatairands  |io  alh,  yah 
bi  Jjrius  dagans  gatimryands  jw  ; 

30  ISTasei  ])uk  silban,  yah  atsteig  af 
J)amma  galgin. 

31  Samaleiko  yah  |)ai  auhumistans 
gudyans  bilaikandans  ina,  mi})  sis  misso, 
mi]?  })aim  bokaryam,  qe)mn,  Anjjarans 
_ganasida,  ij;  sik  silban  ni  mag  ganasyan. 

32  Sa  Christus,  sa  ]?iudans  Israelis, 
atsteigadau  nu  af  jjamma  galgin.  ei  ga- 
saiwhaima,  yah  galaubyaima.  Yah  |jai 
mi))ushramidans  imma,  idweitidedun  im- 
ma. 

33  Yah  bijie  warjj  wheila  saihsto,  riqis 
wai'})  ana  allai  airj^ai  und  wheila  niun- 
don. 

34  Yah  niundon  wheilai  wopida  lesus 
stibnai  mikilai,  qij^ands,  Ailoe,  Ailoe, 
hma  sibak|)anei,  })atei  ist  gaskeiriji,  Gu]? 
meins,  Gu]>  meins,  duwhe  mis  bilaist  1 

35  Yah  sumai  Jjize  atstandandane  ga- 
hausyandans  qe];un,  Sai!  Helian  wopei]?. 

36  pi-agyands  ]?an  ains,  yah  gafullyands 
swam  akeitis,  galagyands  ana  raus,  dragk- 
ida  ina,  qijjands,  Let,  ei  saiwham,  qimaiu 
Helias  athafyan  ina. 

37  I])  lesus,  aftra  letands  stibna  mikila, 
uzon. 

38  Yah  faurahah  alhs  disskritnoda  in 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Mark 

24  And  da  hi  hine  aliengon  hi  dceldon 
his  reaf,  and  hlotu  wurpon,  hwset  gehwa 
name. 

25  Da  wses  undern-tid,  and  hi  ahengon 
hine. 

26  And  ofer-gewrit  his  gyltes  wf^s 
a^vriten,  luDEA  cyning. 

27  And  hi  ahengon  mid  him  twegen 
sceajjan,  aune  on  his  swydran  healfe, 
and  oderne  on  his  Avynstran. 

28  Da.  waes  dset  gewrit  gefylled  doet 
CAvy|5,  And  he  wa3S  mid  unrihtwisuni 
geteald. 

29  And  da  de  for)3-st5pon  hine  gremc- 
don,  and  liyra  heafod  cwehton,  and  Ctus 
cwsedon,  Wala  !  se  towyrp])  dset  tempel, 
and  on  prhn  dagum  eft  getimbrajj ; 

30  Gehsel  de  sylfne,  of  deere  rode 
stigende. 

31  Eall-swa  da  heah-sacerdas  bysm- 
riende,  betwux  dam  bocerum,  cwsedon, 
O'dre  he  hale  gedyde,  hine  sylfne  he  ne 
mfeg  halne  gedon. 

32  Crist,  Israhela  cyning,  astige  nu 
of  rode,  d?et  Ave  geseon,  and  gelyfon. 
And  da  de  him  mid  hangodon,  wsei'on 
him  mid  gebundene. 

33  And  dsere  syxtan  tide,  wurdon 
jiystru  gewordene  geond  ealle  eorj^an 
od  non-tide. 

34  And  to  non-tide  se  H?elend  clypode 
mycelre  stemne,  Heloi,  Heloi,  lema  sab- 
battani,  dajt  is  on  lire  ge}>eode,  Min 
God,  min  God,  hwi  forlete  dii  me  ? 

35  And  sume  de  dar  abuton  stodou 
and  dis  gehyrdon,  hi  cwsedon,  Nii !  des 
clypaj)  Heham. 

36  Da  arn  hyra  an,  and  fylde  ane 
spingan  mid  ecede,  and  on  hreod  sette, 
and  him  drincan  sealde,  and  cwjb]', 
Lseta]?,  dtet  we  geseon,  hAvt^der  Helias 
cume  hine  nyder  to  settanne. 

37  Se  H^lend,  da  asende  his  stefne, 
and  forjj-ferde. 

38  And    daes    temples    Avah-rift   wses 


XY.  24-3S.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

24Amlthei  cvucifij'ngc  him  departidcn 
his  clotliis,  sendingc  lot,  Avho  what 
schuklc  take. 

25  Forsoth  it  was  thethridile  our,'''  and 
thci  crucifiodou  him. 

26  And  tlic  title  of  his  cause  wa.s  writ- 
un,  Jhcsus  of  Nazareth,  kyng  of  Jewis. 

27  And  thci  crucificn  with  him  twcy 
thcucs,  oon  at  the  rijthalf,  and  oon  at 
bis  Icfthalf. 

28  And  the  prophecle  is  fulfild  that 
scitll^  And  he  is  gcsside'''  with  wickidc 
men. 

29  And  passinge  forth  thei  blasfcm- 
ydeu  him,  mouyuge  her  hcedis,  and  sey- 
iuge,  Fy3  !  thou  that  distroyest  the 
temple  of  God,  and  in  thre  dayes  a3en 
bildest  it ; 

30  Thou  comynge  down  fro  the  cros, 
make  thi  self  saf. 

31  Also  and  the  hi5este  prestes  scorn- 
ynge  him,  ech  to  other,  with  scribis, 
seidcn,  Crist,  kyng  of  Yrael,  maade 
othere  men  saf,  he  maye  not  saue  him 
silue. 

32  Come  be  down  now  fro  the  cross, 
that  we  se,  and  bileue.  And  thei  that 
weren  crucified  with  him,  puttedyn 
wrong'''  to  him, 

33  And  the  sixte  our '''  maad,  derk- 
nessis  ben  maad  vpon  rd  the  erthe  til  in 
to  the  nynthe  our.''" 

34  And  in  the  nynthe  our  Jhesus 
cricde  with  greet  vols,  seyynge,  Ileloy, 
Heloy,  lamazabatany,  the  which  intei-- 
inxtid  is,  'My  God,  my  God,  whi  l"  bast 
thou  forsake  me  ? 

35  And  summe  of  men  stondinge 
aboute  beeringc  seidcn,  Lo  !  be  clcpith 
Hely. 

36  Sothli  oon  rcnnynge,  and  fillingc  a 
sponge  with  vynegre,  and  puttinge  a- 
l)uute  to  a  rccdc,  5aue  him  drynkc,  sey- 
inge,  Suffre  5c,  se  we,  if  Hely  come  for 
to  do  hym  down. 

37  Forsoth  .Jhesus,  a  greet  vois  sent 
out,  dciede.^ 

38  And  the  veil  of  the  temple  is  kitt 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


259 


24  And  when  they  bad  crucified  hym 
they  parted  hys  garmentes,  castinge 
loottes  for  thcni,  what  every  man  shulde 
have. 

25  And  it  was  aboute  the  thyrdcbourc, 
and  they  crucifyed  hym. 

26  And  the  title  of  the  cause  of  hys 
decth  was  wrytten.  The  kyngc  of  the 
lewis. 

27  And  they  crucifyed  with  him  two 
thcvcs,  the  one  on  his  ryght  hondc,  and 
the  other  on  hys  liftc  hondc. 

28  And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled 
which  sayetb,  And  be  Avas  counted 
amonge  the  wicked. 

29  And  they  that  Avent  by  rayled  on 
byra,  waggynge  their  heedes,  and  say- 
inge,  A !  ■vvretche  that  destroycst  the 
temple,  and  byldest  yt  in  thre  dayes  ; 

30  Save  thy  silfe,  and  come  doune 
from  the  crosse. 

31  Lyke  Avyse  also  mocked  bim  the 
bye  preestes,  amonge  themselves,  Avbyth 
the  scribes,  and  sayde.  He  saved  other 
men,  hym  silfe  he  cannot  save. 

32  Lett  Christ,  the  kynge  of  Israel, 
nowe  descende  from  the  crosse,  that  we 
maye  se,  and  beleve.  And  they  that 
were  crucified  Avith  bim,  checked  hym 
also. 

33  And  when  the  sixte  boure  was 
come,  darknes  aroose  over  all  the  erth 
vntill  the  nynthe  boure. 

34  And  att  the  nynthe  boure  Jesus 
crycd  Avith  a  loude  voyce,  sayinge,  Eloi, 
Eloi,  lama  sabaththani,  Avhicb  is  yf  yt 
be  interpreted,  My  God,  my  God,  Avhy 
bast  thou  forsaken  me  1 

35  And  some  off  them  that  stode  by 
Avhen  they  berde  that  sayde,  Behoolde ! 
be  calletb  for  Hclias. 

36  And  won  ran,  and  filled  a  sponge 
full  off  vcneger,  and  putt  yt  on  a  rede, 
and  gave  it  hym  to  drynkc,  sayinge, 
Lett  hym  alone,  let  vs  se,  AA'hither  Helias 
wyll  come  and  take  hym  doune. 

37  Butt  Jesus  crycd  Avith  a  loude  voyce, 
anfl  gaAT  vppe  the  goostc. 

38  And  the  vaylc  off  the  temple  did 

S2 


260  GOTHIC,  360. 

■;wa  iupa|)i'0  unci  clala}). 

39  Gasaiwliands  ]?an  sa  ]iundafa])S,  sa 
atstandands  'in  and\vair])ya  is,  |?atei  swa 
hropyands  uzon,  qaj;,  Bi  sunyai,  sa  manna 
sa  sunus  was  Gujjs. 

40  Wesunu)3-]jan  qinons  fairra}iro  saiwli- 
andeins,  in  j^aimei  was  Marya  so  Mag- 
dalene, yah  Marya  lakobis  J^is  minniz- 
ins,  yali  losezis  aij^ei,  yah  Salome. 

41  Yah  J'an  was  in  Galeilaia,  yah 
laistidedun  ina,  yah  andbahtidedun  im- 
ma,  yah  anjjaros  manages,  J^ozei  mi])id- 
dyedun  imma  in  lairusalem. 

42  Yah  yu|)an  at  andanahtya  waurjj- 
anamma,  unte  was  paraskaiwe  saei  ist 
fruma  sabbato, 

43  Qimands  losef  af  Areimafjaias,  ga- 
guds  ragineis,  saei  was  silba  beidands 
|)iudaugardyos  Gujjs;  anananjjyands  ga- 
lai|5  inn  du  Peilatau,  yah  ba^  JjIs  leikis 
lesuis. 

44  i\>  Peilatus  sildaleikida,  ei  is  yujjan 
gaswalt.  Yah  athaitands  jjan  hundafa]?, 
I'rah  ina,  yujjan  gadaujjnodedi  ; 

45  Yah  fin})ands  at  j^amma  hundafada, 
fragaf  Jjata  leik  losefa. 

46  Yah  usbugyands  lein,  yah  usnim- 
ands  ita,  biwand  })amma  leina,  yah  ga- 
lagida  ita  in  hlaiwa  |jatei  was  gadraban 
us  staina,  yah  atwalwida  stain  du  daura 
j^is  hlaiwis. 

47  I]j  Marya  so  Magdalene,  yah  Marya 
losezis  sewhun,  whar  galagijjs  wesi. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  Yah  inwisandins  sab- 
bate  dagis,  Marya  so  Magdalene,  yah 
Marya  so  lakobis,  yah  Salome  usbauht- 
edun  aromata,  ei  atgaggandeins  gasalb- 
odedeina  ina. 

2  Yah  filu  air  })is  dagis  afarsabbate, 
atiddyedun  du  j'amma  hlaiwa,  at  urrinn- 
andin  sunnin. 


ANGLO-SAXOK,  995.     [St.  Mark 

tosliten  on  twa  of  ufeweardum  od  neotle- 
weard. 

39  Da  se  hundred-man,  de  dar  stod 
agen,  geseah  dajt  se  Heplend  swa  clyp- 
iende  forjj-ferde,  he  cwiejj,  Scjjlice,  des 
man  wses  Godes  suim, 

40  And  da  wif  weeron  feon'an  beheald- 
ende,  and  betsvux  dam  wses  seo  Mag- 
dalenisce  Maria,  and  Maria  lacobes 
modor  [d?es  gingran,  and  losepes  mcd- 
er,]'''  and  Salomeai. 

41  And  da  he  wpbs  on  Galilea,  hi 
fyligdon  him,  and  him  ];enedon,  and 
raanega  odre,  de  him  mid  ferdon  on 
lerusalem. 

42  And  da  Eefen  wses  geworden,  dset 
w?es  parasceue  dset  is  8er  sseter-dsege, 

43  Da.  com  losep,  se  pedela  gerefa,  of 
Arimathia,  se  sylfa  Godes  rices  ge- 
anbidode ;  and  he  dyrstiglice  in  to 
Pilate  eode,  and  bsed  dfes  Hselendes 
lichaman. 

44  Da  wundrode  Pilatus,  gif  he  da 
gyt  for])-ferde.  Dil  clypode  he  dasne 
hundredman,  and  hine  ahsode,  hwseder 
he  dead  wsere  ; 

45  Da  he  wiste  dset,  da  agef  he  done 
lichaman  losepe. 

46  Da  bohte  losep  ane  scytan,    .     . 
and  hine  dar-on  befeold,  and  on  byrgene 
lede    seo    Wfes    of   stane    aheawen,   and 
wylte  anne  stan  to  dsere  byrgene  duraj 


47  Da  com  Maria  Magdalene,  and 
losepes  Maria  and  beheoldon,  hwar  he 
geled  wsere. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  And  da  sseternes 
dseg  wpes  agan,  seo  Magdalenisce  Maria, 
and  lacobes  Maria,  and  Salomese  bohtou 
wyi't  gemang,  dset  hi  comon  and  hine 
smyredon. 

2  And  swyde  £er  anum  reste-dsege, 
comon  to  dsere  byrgene,  up-asprungeure 
sunnan. 


XV.  39->^VI.  2.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

in  to  tweyiic  fro  tlio  lii5estc  til  to 
tlown.^ 

39  Forsoth  ccntuiio  seynge,  tiie  wliicli 
stood  cuenc  ii^enst,  for  so  criyngo  lie 
hailile  dciecl,  seith,  Verrili,  this  iiiaii  was 

[    Goddis  sone. 

40  Sotlili  tliere  weren  and  otlicrc  wym- 
nu'n  bilioldinge  fro  attbr,  among  wliichc 
was  3Iary  Mawdelcyn,  and  Mari  of 
James  the  lasse,  and  modir  of  Joseph, 
and  SaUnne. 

41  And  whannc  Jhesus  was  in  Galilee, 
thei  folowiden  him,  and  mynystridcii  to 
him,  and  manye  othcre  icymmen,  that 
to  gidere  sti5eden  vp  with  him  to  Jeru- 
salem. 

42  And  whannc  encntyd  Avas  now 
maad,  for  it  was  the  euentyd  biforc  the 
saboth, 

43  Joseph  of  Armathie,  the  noble  de- 
curioun,^  cam,  the  which  and  he  was 
abidinge  the  rewme  of  God  ;  and  hardily 
he  entride  in  to  Pilat,  and  axide  the 
body  of  Jhesu. 

44  Forsothe  Pilat  wondi'ide,  if  he  hadde 
now  deied.  And  centurio  axid  to,'''  he 
axide  him,  if  he  were  now  deed  ; 

45  And  whanne  he  hadde  knowun  of 
centurio,  he  5af  the  body  of  Jhesu  to 
Joseph. 

46  Sothli  Joseph  byiuge  him  lynneu 
cloth,  and  doynge  him  doun,  Avlappede 
in  the  lynen  cloth,  and  puttide  in  a 
newe  sepulcrc  that  was  hewen  in  a 
stoon,  and  walcwid  to  a  stoon  at  the 
mouth  of  the  sepulcrc. 

47  Marie  Mawdeleyn  forsothe,  and 
Marie  of  Joseph  biheelden,  where  he 
was  j)utt. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2G1 


Chap.  XVI.  i  And  whanne  the  sab- 
oth hadde  passid,  Marie  Mawdcleyn,  and 
Marie  of  James,  and  )Salorae  bou3ten 
oyncmentis,  that  thei  comynge  sclmlden 
anoynte  Jhesu. 

2  And  ful  cerly  in  oon  of  woke  dayes, 
thei  camen  to  the  sepulcre,  the  sunne 
now  sprungen  vp. 


rent  in  two  parties  from  the  toppe  to 
the  boottome. 

39  And  the  vndcr  cnptayne,  which  stodc 
before  hym,  sawe  that  he  so  cryed  and 
gave  vppe  the  gooste,  and  he  sayd, 
Truelv,  this  man  was  the  sonue  of 
God. ' 

40  Thci'c  Avcrc  also  wemen  a  good  waye 
of  behohlinge  him,  amonge  whom  was 
Mary  ]\Iagdalcn,  and  Llary  the  mother 
of  James  the  lytic,  and  of  Joscs,  and 
Mary  Salome. 

41  Which  alsoo  when  he  was  in  Galile, 
folowcd  hym,  and  minstrcd  vnto  him, 
and  many  other  wcmen,  which  cam  vppe 
with  hym  to  ilierusalcm. 

42  And  uowe  when  nyght  was  come, 
because  it  was  the  even  that  goeth  be- 
fore the  saboth, 

43  Joseph  of  Arimathia,  a  noble  senatour, 
which  also  loked  for  the  kyngdom  of 
God,  cam  ;  and  went  booldly  vnto  Pylatc, 
and  begged  the  boddy  off  Jesu. 

44  Pylate  merveled,  that  he  was  alredy 
deed.  And  called  vnto  hym  the  vnder 
captayne,  and  axed  of  him,  whether  he 
had  bene  eny  whyle  deed  ; 

45  And  when  he  knewe  the  trueth  off 
the  vnder  captayne,  he  gave  the  boddy 
to  Joseph. 

46  And  he  bought  a  linnen  cloothe, 
and  toke  hym  doune,  and  wrapped  hym 
in  the  lynnen  cloothe,  and  layde  hym  in 
a  tombe  that  was  hewen  oute  of  the 
rocke,  and  roolled  a  stone  vnto  the  dore 
oft"  the  sepulcre. 

47  And  Mary  Magdalen,  and  Mary 
Jose  beheld^  where  he  was  layde. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  And  when  the  sabboth 
daye  was  past,  !Mary  Magdalen,  and 
Mary  Jacobi,  and  Salome  bought  oynt- 
mentes,  that  they  myght  come  and 
anoynt  him. 

2  And  yerly  in  tlie  morningc  the  nexte 
daye  after  the  sabboth  day,  they  cam  vnto 
the  sepulcre,  when  the  sun  was  risen. 


262  GOTHIC,  360. 

3  Yali  qe];iui  du  sis  misso,  "Whas  af- 
walwyai  unsis  |)ana  stain  af  daurom  })is 
hlaiwis  1 

A  Yah  insaiwhandeins  gaumidedun  Jjani- 
mei  afwalwi];s  ist  sa  stains,  was  auk 
mikils  abraba. 

5  Yah  atgaggandeins  in  Jjata  hlaiw 
gasewhun  yuggalauj)  sitandan,  in  taihs- 
wai  biwaibidana  wastyai  wbeitai ;  yah 
usgeisnodedun. 

6  paruh  qaj)  du  im,  Ni  faurhteij>  izwis; 
lesu  sokeijj  Nazoraiu  J^ana  ushramidan  ; 
nist  her,  urrais  :  sai !  ]jana  sta|)  jjarei 
galagidedun  ina. 

7  Akei  gaggil?,  qi])iduh  du  siponyam 
is,  yah  du  Paitrau,  jjatei  faurbigaggij? 
izwis  in  Galeilaian ;  Jjaruh  ina  gasaiwhij), 
swaswe  qa]?  izwis. 

8  Yah  usgaggandeins  af  |)amma  hlaiwa 
ga))lauhun ;  dizuh  }mn  sat  iyos  reiro 
yah  usfilmei,  yah  ni  qejjun  mannhun 
waiht,  ohtedun  sis  auk. 

9  Usstandands  J^an  in  maurgin  frumin 
sabbato,  ataugida  frumist  Maryin  Jiizai 
Magdalene,  af  |)izaiei  uswarp  sibun  lui- 
hulJ)ons. 

10  Soh  gaggandei  gataih  Jjaim  m\\>  im- 
ma  wisandam,  qainondam  yali  gretaud- 
am. 

11  Yah  eis  hausyandans  jjatei  libaijj, 
yah  gasaiwhans  waij?  fram  izai,  ni  ga- 
laubidedun. 

12  Afaruh  V/an  J)ata 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St  Mark 

3  And  cwBedon  him  betwynan,  Hwa 
awylt  us  ctysne  stan  of  dsere  byrgene 
dura  1 

4  Da  hi  hi  besawon  hi  gesawon  dsene 
stiin  aweg  awyltne,  sojjlice  he  wses 
swyde  mycel. 

5  And  da  hi  eodon  on  da  byrgene  hi 
gesawon  anne  geongne,  on  da  swydran 
healfe  sittende,  hwitum  gegyrlan  ofer- 
wrogenne  ;  and  hi  da  forhtodon. 

6  Da  cwpe]?  he  to  him,  Ne  forhtige  ge 
na;  ge  seca})  dsene  Nazareniscan  Hselend 
ahangenue  ;  he  aras,  nis  he  her  j  her  is 
seo  stow  dter  hi  bine  ledon. 

7  Ac  fara)),  and  secgajj  his  leorning- 
cnihtum,  and  Petre,  dset  he  gee])  toforan 
eow  on  Galileam ;  dar  ge  hine  geseojj, 
swa  he  eow  ssede. 

8  And  hi  ut-eodon  and  fiugon  fram 
dsere  byrgene ;  and  WEeroii  afserede  for 
dfere  gesyh})e  de  hi  gesawon,  and  big 
nanum  men  naht  ne  ssedon,  sojjHce  hi 
him  adredon.''' 

9  Da  he  aras  on  ffirne  morgen  on 
reste-dfege,  eeryst  he  fetywde  dsere  J\fag- 
daleniscan  Marian,  of  dsere  he  ut-adraf 
seofon  deofol-seocnyssa. 

10  And  heo  da  ilt-eode  and  hit  dam 
cydde  de  mid  him  w£eron,  heofendum 
and  wependum. 

11  Da  K\  gehyrdon  dset  he  leofode, 
and  hi  hine  gesawon,  da  ne  gelyfdon 
hi  him. 

12  iEfter  dam  him  twain  he  wses 
fetywed  on  odrum  hiwe,  him  on  done 
tun  fareudum. 

13  And  hi  da  foron  and  da3t  odrum 
cyddon,  and  hi  him  ne  gelyfdon. ^ 

14  Da  set  nehstan,  he  retywde  him 
gendlefene,  dar  hi  setgfedere  sseton,  and 
tselde  hyi-a  ungeleafFulnesse,  and  hyra 
heortan  heardnesse,  fordam  de  hi  ne 
gelyfdon  dam,  de  hine  gesawon  of  deajje 
arisan. 

15  And  he  ssede  him,  Fara])  into  ealue 
niiddan-eard,  and  bodia])  godspell  ealre 
gesceafte. 

16  Se  de  gelyf[j,  and  gefuUod  bij>,  se 
bij)  hal ;  sopilice  se  de  ne  gelyf]),  se  bi]> 
genydei'od. 


I     XVI.  3-16.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

3  Anil  tliei  scidcn  to  giilcre,  "Who  schal 
turnc  jx5eii  to  vs  the  stoou  fro  the  dorc 
of  the  sepulcre  ] 

4  Ami  thei  biholtlingc  sy^cn  the  stoon 
•\vale\vid  awey,  forsoth  it  was  ful  greet. 

5  And  thei  goynge  yn  into  the  sepulcre 
sy;cn  a  5ong  oo«,  hilid  with  a  whit  stoole, 
^ittinge  at  the  rijt  half;  and  thei  weren 
.•il>aist!+ 

6  The  which  seith  to  licm,  Nyle  5e 
drede  ;  50  seken  Jhesu  of  Xazareth  cru- 
cified ;  he  hath  risun,  he  is  not  hcere ; 
lo  !  the  place  where  thei  puttiden  him. 

r  7  But  go  5c,  seye  56  to  his  disciplis, 
and  to  Petre,  for  he  schal  go  byfore  5011 
in  to  Galilee ;  there  50  schulen  se  him, 

[     as  he  seide  to  50U. 

'  8  And  thei  goynge  out  fledden  fro  the 
sepulcre  ;  forsothe  drede  and  quakynge 

>  hadde  assaylid  hem/  and  to  no  man  thei 
seideu  ony  thing,  forsoth  thei  dredden. 

9  Sothly  Jhesus,  rysinge  crly  in  the 
first  day  of  the  wouke,  ajiperide  firste  to 
Mary  Mawdeleyn,  of  whom  he  hadde 
cast  out  seuene  deuelis. 

10  She  gojTige  tolde  to  hem  that 
Averen  with  him,  hem  weylinge  and  wep- 
}"uge. 

1 1  And  thei  heeringe  that  he  iyuede, 
and  was  seyn  of  hir,  bileueden  not. 

12  Sothli  after  thes  thingis  tweyne  of 
hem  wandringe,  he  is  schewid  in  an 
other  lyknesse  ■*"  to  hem  goynge  in  to  a 
toun. 

13  And  thei  goynge  tooklen  to  othere, 
ncthir  thei  bileuyden  to  hem. 

14  Forsoth  at  the  laste,  liem  enleuene 
rcstinge,  Jhesus  apperide  to  hem,  and 
reprouyde  the  vnbileue  of  hem,  and  the 
hardnesse  of  herte,  for  thei  bileuyden 
not  to  hem,  that  hadden  seyn  him  to 
haue  risun  fro  deede. 

15  And  he  seide  to  hem,  5e  goynge  in 
to  al  the  world,  preche  the  gospel  to 
ech  creature. 

16  He  that  schal  bileue,  and  schal  be 
baptisid,'''  schal  be  sauyd  ;  sothli  he  that 
schal  bileue  not,  schal  be  dampned. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


263 


3  And  they  said  won  to  another,  Who 
shall  rollc  awayc  the  stone  froni  the 
dore  oft'  the  sepulcre  1 

4  And  when  they  behclde  yt  they  sawe 
how  the  stone  was  rolled  awaye,  for  it 
was  a  very  greate  won. 

5  And  they  went  in  to  the  sepulcre 
and  sawe  a  yonge  man,  sittinge  on  the 
ryght  syde,  cloothed  in  a  longe  white 
garment ;  and  they  were  abasshed. 

6  He  sayd  vnto  them,  Be  nott  afrayed  ; 
ye  seke  Jesus  of  Nazareth  which  was 
crucified  ;  he  ys  rysen,  he  ys  nott  here  ; 
behoolde  1  the  place  where  they  putt 
hym. 

7  Butt  go  youre  waye,  and  tell  his 
disci2)les,  and  namly  Peter,  that  he  is 
goonc  before  you  in  to  Galile ;  there 
shall  ye  se  hym,  as  he  sayde  vnto  you. 

8  And  they  went  oute  quicly  and  fleed 
from  the  sepulcre ;  for  they  trembled 
and  were  amased,  nether  said  they  eny 
thinge  to  eny  man,  for  they  were 
afrayed. 

9  AVhcn  Jesus  was  risen,  the  morowe 
after  the  sabboth  daye,  he  appered  fyrst 
to  jMary  ]\Iagdalen,  oute  off  whom  he 
cast  seven  devyls. 

10  And  she  went  and  toolde  them  that 
were  with  h3'm,  as  they  morned  and 
weppte. 

1 1  And  Avhen  they  herde  that  he  was 
alive,  and  had  appiercd  to  her,  they 
beleved  it  not. 

12  After  that  he  appered  vnto  two  of 
them  in  a  straunge  figure,  as  they  walked 
and  went  in  to  the  country. 

13  And  they  went  and  toolde  it  to  the 
remnaunt,  and  they  beleved  them  nether. 

14  After  that,  he  appered  vnto  the 
eleven,  as  they  sate  at  meate,  and  cast  in 
their  tethe  tlieir  vnbelefe,  and  hardnes 
off  herte,  be  cause  they  beleved  not 
them,  which  had  sene  hym  after  his 
resurreccion. 

15  And  he  sayd  vnto  them,  Goo  ye  in 
to  all  the  woorldc,  and  prcache  the  gos- 
pell  to  all  creaturs. 

1 6  Whosoever  beleveth,  and  ys  babtised, 
shalbe  safe ;  and  whosoever  beleveth 
nott,  shalbe  dampned. 


IGi 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Mark 

17  Das  tticnu  f3'liaj>  dani,  de  gelyfa]?. 
On  milium  naman  hi  deofol-seocnessa 
ut-drifajj ;  hi  spreca]?  niwum  tungum  ; 

18  Nseddran  hi  afyrra})  ;  and  him  ne 
derajj,  deah  hi  hwpet  deadbasrhces  drinc- 
on.  Ofer  seoce  hi  hyi-a  handa  setta]?, 
and  hi  beo}j  hale. 

19  And  witodlice  Drihten  Hjelend, 
syddan  he  to  him  sprajc,  he  wses  on 
heofonum  afangen,  and  he  sit  on  Godes 
swidran  healfe. 

20  S6[)lice  hi  da  farende  seghwar  bode- 
don,  Drihtne  mid-wyrcendum,  and  trym- 
mendre  spraece  sefter-fyligendum  tacu- 
um.- 


XVI.  I7-20.]  AVYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

17  Forsoth  these  tokenes  schulen  sue 
hem,  that  schulen  bileue.  In  my  name 
thei  schulen  cast  out  femlis  ;  thei  schulcu 
spcke  with  newe  tungis  ; 

J 8  Thei  schulen  do  awey  seipontis  ; 
ami  if  thei  schulen  drynke  ony  venym,^ 
it  schal  not  noye  hem.  Thei  schulen 
])utte  hir  hondis  vpon  sike  men,  and 
thei  schulen  haue  wel. 

19  And  sothli  the  Lord  Jhesu,  aftir 
that  he  hadde  spoke  to  hem,  is  takun 
vp  in  to  heuene,  and  sittith  on  the  ri5t- 
half  of  God. 

20  Sothli  thei  gon  forth  prechidon 
euerywherc,  the  Lord  worchinge  with, 
and  confcrmiuge  the  word  with  signes 
folowiuge. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


•2C-. 


17  And  these  signes  shall  folowe  tlioni, 
that  belcve.  In  my  name  they  shall 
cast  oute  devyls ;  and  shall  speakc  with 
newe  tonges  ; 

t8  And  shall  kill  serpcntes ;  and  yf 
they  drynke  eny  deiUy  thynge,  yt  shall 
nott  hurte  them.  They  shall  laye  their 
hondcs  on  the  sike,  and  they  shall 
recover. 

19  So  then  when  the  Lorde  had  spoken 
vnto  them,  he  was  receaved  in  to  hcven, 
and  sate  on  the  right  honde  of  God. 

20  And  they  went  forth  and  preached 
every  where,  and  the  Lordc  wroght  with 
them,  and  confirmed  their  preuchynge 
with  myracles  that  folowed. 


HER  OXGINNEp 

AIWAGGELYO  D^ET  GODSPELL 

JJAIRH  ^FTER 

LUKAN   ANASTODEIP.         LUCAS   GERECEDNESSE. 


Chap.  I.  i  Unte  raihtis  managai 
clugimnun  melyau  insaht,  bi  ))os  ga- 
fullaweisidous  in  uns  waihtins, 

2  Swaswe  anafullum  unsis,  Jjaiei  fram 
frumistin  silbasiiinyos,  yali  andbalitos 
•\vesuii  Jjis  waurdis, 

3  Galeikaida  yah  mis  yali  Ahmin 
Weihamma,  fram  auastodeinai  allaim 
glaggwuba  afarlaistyandin,  gababyo  ]>us 
melyan,  batista  paiaufeilu, 

4  Ei  gakmmais,  J)ize  bi  Jjoei  galaisijjs 
is  waurde  asta]?. 

5  Was,  in  dagam  Herodes,  ]}iudanis 
ludaias,  gudya,  namin  Zakaiias,  us  afar 
Abiyins,  yah  qeins  is  us  dauhtrum 
Aharons,  yah  namo  izos  AileisabaiJ). 

6  Wesunuli  ])an  garaihta  ba  in  and- 
wairjjya  Gu])S,  gaggandona  in  allaim 
anabusnim  yah  garaihteim  Frauyius, 
unwaha. 

7  Yah  ni  was  im  barne,  unte  was 
Aileisabai)j  stairo,  yah  ba  framakh'a 
dage  seinaize  wesun. 

8  War)j  J)an,  mi}))janei  gudyinoda  is,  in 
wikon  kunyis  seinis  in  audwairjjya  Gu])S, 

9  Bi  biuhtya  gudyinassaus,  hlauts  im- 
ma  urrann  du  salyan,  atgaggands  in 
alh  Frauyins. 

10  Yah  alls  hiuhma  was  manageins 
beidandans  uta,  wheilai  jjwmiamins. 


Chap.  I.'''  i  Fordam  de  wltodlice 
mauega  })ohton  dgei-a  Jjinga  race  ge- 
endebyrdan,  cle  on  us  gefyllede  synd, 

2  Swa  us  betsehton,  da  de  hit  of  frym))e 
gesawon,  and  dsere  sprsece  })enas  wser- 
on, 

3  Me  ge])uhte  ....  geornlice  eallum 
od  endebyrdnesse,  writan  de,  dii  se  Sel- 
esta Theophilus, 

4  Dset  du  oncnawe  dsera  worda  s6\>- 
fsestnesse,  of  dam  de  du  gelcered  eart. 

5  On  Herodes  dagum,  ludea  cyninges, 
waes  sum  sacerd,  on  naman  Zacharias, 
of  Abian  tune,  and  his  wif  wpes  of 
Aarones  dohtrum,  and  hyre  nama  wees 
Elizabeth. 

6  Sojjlice  hig  wseron  butu  riht\vise 
beforan  Gode,  gangende  on  eallum  his 
bebodum  and  i-ihtwisnessum,  biitan 
wrohte. 

7  And  hig  nasfdon  nan  beam,  fordam 
de  Elizabeth  wses  unberende,  and  hig 
on  heora  dagum  butu  for]j-eodon. 

8  S6j)lice  wses  geworden,  da  Zacharias 
his  sacerdhades  breac,  on  his  gewrixles 
endebyrdnesse  beforan  Gode, 

9  ^fter  gewunan  da3S  sacerdhades 
hlotes,  he  e5de  dcet  he  his  offrunge 
sette,  da  he  on  Godes  tempel  code. 

10  Eall  werod  dses  folces  Avses  ute, 
gebiddende  on  dsere  offrunge  timan. 


HERE  BTGYJfNETH 

THE    GOSPEL 

OF 

LUKE. 


THE    GOSPELL 

OFF 

S.   L  U  K  E. 


CiiAr.  I.  I  Forsotlic  for  manyc  men 
enforceden  to  ordcync  the  tellyng  of 
tliingis,  wliiclie  beu  fillid  in  vs, 

2  As  tliei  that  scyn  atte  the  bigyn- 
nyng-,  and  wei"en  luiuistris  of  the  word 
bitaken, 

3  It  is  seen  also  to  me,  hauynge  alio 
thingis  diligentli  bi  ordre,  to  Avrite  to 
thee,  tliou  best  Theofile, 

4  That  thou  knowe  the  trcuthc  of  tho 
■\vordis,  of  whiche  thou  art  lerucd. 

5  Ther  was  sum  prest,  Zacharie  by 
name,  in  the  dayes  of  Eroude,  kyng  of 
Judee,  of  the  sort  of  Abia,  and  his  wyf 
of  the  doujtris  of  Aaron,  and  hir  name 
Elizabeth. 

6  Suthli  thei  bothe  weren  iuste  bifore 
God,  go}Tige  in  alle  the  maundementis 
and  iustifyingis  of  the  Lord,  with  outen 
pleyntc. 

7  And  a  sone  was  not  to  hem,  for  that 
Elizabeth  was  bareyne,  and  bothe  hadden 
gon  forth  fer  in  her  dayes. 

8  Sothli  it  was  don,  whanne  Sacharie 
was  set  in  presthod,  in  the  ordre  of  his 
Bort  bifore  God, 

9  Vp  the  custom  of  presthod,  by  sort 
he  wente  forth,  that  he  cntrid  in  to  the 
temple  of  the  Lord,  schulde  putte  en- 
sence. 

10  And  alle  the  multitude  of  the  pcple 
was  withoutefoi'th,  preiynge  in  the  our 
of  encence. 


Chap.  I.  i  For  as  moehe  as  many 
have  taken  in  hond  to  com2:)yle  a  trcates 
off  thoo  thynges,  Avhich  are  surely  know- 
en  amonge  vs, 

2  Even  as  they  declared  them  vnto  vs, 
which  from  the  begynyngc  sawe  them 
with  their  eyes,  and  were  minsters  at 
the  doyng, 

3  I  determined  also,  as  sone  as  I  had 
searched  out  diligently  all  thingcs  from 
the  begynynge,  that  then  I  wolde  wryte 
vnto  the,  goode  Theophilus, 

4  That  thou  myghtcst  knowe  the  ccr- 
teute  off  thoo  thinges,  whereof  thou  arte 
informed. 

5  In  the  tyme  of  Herode,  kynge  of 
le^vry,  there  was  a  certayne  prcst,  named 
Zacarias,  off  the  course  of  Abie,  and  his 
wyfe  was  of  the  doughters  of  Aaron,  and 
her  name  Avas  Elizabeth. 

6  Booth  were  perfect  before  God,  and 
walked  in  all  the  lawes  and  ordinacions 
of  the  Lorde,  that  no  man  coulde  fynde 
fawte  with  them. 

7  And  they  had  no  childe,  be  cause 
that  Elisabeth  was  barren,  and  booth 
were  wele  stricken  in  age. 

8  Hit  cam  to  passe,  as  he  executed  the 
prcstes  office,  before  God  as  his  course 
cam, 

9  Accordinge  to  the  custome  of  the 
prcstes  office,  his  lott  was  to  breu  odoures, 
and  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lorde. 

10  And  all  the  multitude  of  people 
were  Avith  out,  in  their  prayers  whill 
the  odoures  were  abrennyngc. 


268 


GOTHIC,    q6o. 


1 1  War])  );an  imma  i'n  slunai  aggilus 
Frauyins,  standands  af  taihswon  hunsla- 
stadis  jjwmiamins. 

12  Yah  gadroLnoda  Zakarias  gasaiwh- 
ands,  yah  agis  disdraus  ina. 

13  QaJ)  |)an  du  'imma  sa  aggilus,  Ni 
ogs  jjus,  Zakaria  ;  dujje  ei  andhausida 
"isfc  bida  Jjeina,  yah  qens  ])eina,  Aileis- 
abaij),  gabairid  sunu  J)us,  yah  haitais 
iiamo  is  lohanneu. 

14  Yah  wairlu]?  }-/us  faheds  yah  sweg- 
iil])a ;  yah  managai  in  gabaurjjai  is  fag- 
in  on  d. 

15  WairJ)i})  auk  mikils  in  andwairjjya 
Frauyins,  yali  wein  yah  lei}m  ni  drigkid, 
yah  Ahmins  Weihis  gafullyada  nauhjjan 
in  wambai  aijjeins  seinaizos. 

16  Yah  managans  suniwe  IsraeHs  ga- 
wandei]?  du  Frauyin  Gu]ja  ize  ; 

1 7  Yah  silba  fauraqimid  in  andwairj^j-a 
is  in  ahmin  yah  mahtai  Haileiins  ;  ga- 
wandyan  hairtona  attane  du  barn  am, 
yah  untalans  in  frodein  garaihtaize, 
manwyan  Frauyin  managein  gafahi-ida. 

18  Yah  qa]j  Zakarias  du  ))amma  aggi- 
lau,  Biwhe  kunnum  |;ata  1  ik  raihtis  im 
sineigs,  yah  qens  meina  framaklrozei  in 
dagam  seinaini. 

19  Yah  andhafyands  sa  aggilus  qa])  du 
imma,  Ik  im  Gabriel,  sa  standands  in 
andwairjjya  Gujjs ;  yah  insandij)s  ini 
rodyan  du  ])us,  yah  Availameryan  j^us 
Jjata. 

20  Yah  siyais  Jjahands,  yah  ni  magands 
rodyan  und  ))ana  dag,  ei  wairj^ai  jjata ; 
du))e  ei  ni  galaubides  waurdam  mein- 
aim,  ])oei  usfullyanda  in  mela  seinamma. 


21  Yah  was  managei  beidandans  Zaka- 
riins,  yah  sildaleikidedun,  wha  latidedi 
ina  in  Jjizai  alh. 

22  Usgaggands  pan  ni  mahta  du  im 
rodyan,  yah  fro))un  jjammei  siun  gasaAvh 
in  alh.  Yah  silba  was  bandwyands  im, 
yah  was  dumbs. 

23  Yah  war]),  bi};e  usfullnodedun  dagos 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

1 1  Da  getywde  him  Drihtnes  engel, 
standende  on  ctses  weofodes  swydran 
healfe. 

12  Dii  wear))  Zacharias  gedrefed  dset 
geseonde,  and  him  ege  on-hreas. 

13  Da  cwpe})  se  engel  him  to,  ISTe 
ondrsed  dd  de,  Zacharias  ;  fordam  de 
din  ben  ys  gehyred,  and  din  wif,  Eli- 
zabeth, de  sunu  cen}),  and  dii  nemst  his 
naman  lohannes. 

1 4  And  he  by])  de  to  gefean  and  to 
blisse ;  and  manega  on  his  acennednysse 
gefagniaj). 

15  S6))lice  he  by|)  msere  beforan  Drilit- 
ne,  and  he  ne  drinc])  win  ne  beor,  and 
he  by])  gefylled  on  Haligum  Gaste 
donne  gyt  of  hys  modor  innode. 

16  And  manega  Israhela  bearna  he 
gecyr])  to  Drihtne  hyra  Gode ; 

17  And  he  gsej)  toforan  him  on  gfiste 
and  Elias  mihte  ;  dset  he  fiedera  heortan 
to  heora  bearnum  gecyrre,  and  unge- 
leaffulle  to  rihtwisra  gleawscype,  Drihtne 
fuU-fremed  folc  gegearwian. 

18  DJi  cwfej)  Zacharias  to  dam  engel e, 
Hwanon  wat  ic  dis  ]  ic  com  nu  eald, 
and  min  wif  on  hyre  dagum  for])-e6de. 

19  Da  andswarode  him  se  engel,  Ic 
eom  Gabriel,  ic  de  stande  beforan  Gode ; 
and  ic  eom  asend  wid  de  sj^recan,  and 
de  dis  bodian. 

20  And  nil !  dii  byst  siiwigende,  and 
du  sprecan  ne  miht  od  done  da^g,  de 
das  ))ing  gewurda]) ;  fordam  du  minum 
wordum  ne  gelyfdest,  da  beo])  on  hyra 
timan  gefyllede. 

21  And  dtet  folc  wses  Zacbariam  ge- 
anbidigende,  and  wiuidrigende,  dsefc  he 
on  dam  temple  la?t  woes. 

22  Da  he  lit-eode  ne  mihte  he  him  to 
sprecan,  and  big  oncneowon  dtet  he  on 
dam  temple  sume  ge.syh])e  geseah.  And 
he  wjes  bicniende  him,  and  dum  ];urh- 
Avunede. 

23  Da  wpes  geworden,  da  his  j-enunga 


I.  11-23.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1  Sothli  an  aunjjcl  of  the  Lonl  ap- 
pcride  to  him,  stomlingc  ou  the  ri5thalf 
of  the  alitor  of  ensence. 

1 2  Ami  Sacharie  seynj^c  was  disturblid, 
and  drode  folde  doiiii  ou  him. 

13  Forsotli  tlie  aunnol  .seith  to  hym, 
Zachario,  drode  thou  not ;  for  tlii  proior 
is  herd,  and  Elizaljctli,  thi  wyf,  .schal 
bore  to  thoe  a  souo,  and  Ins  name  schal 
bo  clcpid  John. 

14  And  ioye  and  ghidinge  schal  be  to 
thee ;  and  manye  schulen  enioye  in  his 
natyuite. 

I,-,  Sothli  he  schal  be  greet  bifore  the 
Lord,  and  he  schal  not  drynke  wyn  and 
sydir,  and  he  schal  be  fulfillid  of  the 
Hooly  Gost  5it  of  his  luodir  wombe. 

16  And  he  schal  conuerte  manye  of 
the  sones  of  Israel  to  the  Lord  God  of 
hem  ; 

17  And  he  schal  go  bifore  him  in  the 
spirit  and  vertu  of  Helye  ;  and  lie  schal 
turne  the  hertis  of  fadris  in  to  sones, 
and  men  but  of  bileue  to  the  prudence 
of  iuste  men,  for  to  make  redy  a  parfyt 
peple  to  the  Lord. 

18  And  Zachari  seide  to  the  aungel, 
Wherof  schal  I  wite  this  ?  for  I  am  old, 
and  my  wyf  hath  gon  fer  in  hir  dayes. 

1 9  And  the  aungel  answeringe  seide  to 
him,  Forsoth  I  am  Gabriel,  that  stonde 
iiy5  bifore  God  ;  and  I  am  sent  to  thee 
for  to  speke,  and  to  euangelise^  to  thee 
thes  thingis. 

20  And  loo  !  thou  shalt  be  stille,'''  and 
thou  schalt  not  inowc  speke  til  in  to  the 
day,  in  which  thes  thingis  schulen  be 
don ;  for  that  thou  hast  not  bileuyd  to 
my  wordis,  whiche  schulen  be  fillid  in 
her  t}Tne. 

2T  And  the  peple  was  abidinge  Za- 
chari c,  and  thei  wondriden,  for  he  tariede 
in  tlie  temple. 

22  Forsoth  he  gon  out  my5te  not  speke 
to  hem,  and  thei  knewcn  that  he  hadde 
seyn  a  vicioun  in  the  temple.  And  he 
was  bekenynge  to  hem,  and  dwellide 
doumb. 

23  And  it  was  maad,  as  the  dayes  of 


TYXDALE,  if;26. 


-2(\i) 


1 1  There  appercd  vnto  him  the  Lordes 
angell,  stondinge  ou  the  riglit  sydo  off 
the  aiiltre  off  odours, 

1 2  And  when  Zacharias  sawc  hym 
lie  was  abasshod,  and  fcare  cam  on 
hym. 

13  The  angell  saydc  vnto  hym,  Fearo 
not,  Zacary  ;  ffor  thy  prayer  is  horde, 
and  thy  wyfe,  llolyzaboth,  shall  boaro 
the  a  Sonne,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name 
Jhon. 

1 4  And  thou  shaltt  have  ioye  and  glad- 
nos  ;  and  many  shall  reioyce  att  his 
birth. 

15  For  he  shalbe  greate  in  the  sight 
off  God,  and  shall  nether  drynke  wyne 
ncr  stronge  drynke,  and  he  shalljc  filled 
Avith  the  Holy  Goost  even  in  his  mothers 
wombe. 

1 6  And  many  off  the  chyldren  off  Is- 
rahol  shall  he  tourne  to  their  Lorde 
God; 

17  And  he  shall  goo  before  hym  in  the 
sprete  and  power  off  Holyas  ;  to  tourne 
the  herttes  off  the  fathers  to  their  chyl- 
dren, and  the  vnbeleveres  to  the  wisdom 
off  the  iuste  men,  to  make  the  people 
redy  ffor  the  Lorde. 

1 8  And  Zacary  sayde  vnto  the  angell, 
Wherby  shall  I  knowe  this  ]  seinge  that 
I  am  olde,  and  my  wyfe  wele  stricken 
in  ycares. 

19  And  the  angell  answered  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  I  am  Gabrioll,  that  stonde  in 
the  ])resens  off  God  ;  and  am  sentt  to 
speake  vnto  the,  and  to  shewe  the  this 
glad  tydinges. 

20  And  take  hcde  !  thou  shalt  be 
domme,  and  not  able  to  speake  vntyll 
the  tyme,  that  these  thinges  be  per- 
formed ;  because  thou  bclevodst  not  my 
wordes,  which  shalbe  fulfilled  in  there 
season. 

21  And  the  people  wayted  for  Za- 
careas,  and  mervellod,  that  he  taryed  in 
the  temple. 

22  When  he  cam  oute  he  coulde  not 
sj)oake  vnto  them,  and  they  perccaved 
that  he  had  scnc  some  vision  in  the 
temple.  And  he  bockcnod  vnto  tlicm, 
and  remayncd  spoacldcsse. 

23  And  it  fortuned,   as   sone    as   the 


270  GOTHIC,  360. 

andbahteis  'is,  galaijj  du  garda  seinam- 
ma. 

24  Afaruh  J)an  ]jans  dagans  iukil])0 
warjj  Aileisabaijj,  qens  is,  yali  galaug- 
nida  sik  menojjs  fimf,  qijiandei, 

25  patei  swa  mis  gatawida  Frauya  in 
dagam,  J^aimei  insawb,  afuiman  idweit 
mein  in  mannam. 

26  panub  ]jan  in  meno]?  saibstin  in- 
sandi]js  Avas  agglkis  Gabriel  fram  Gujja 
in  baurg  Galeilaias,  sei  baitada  Nazav- 

ai^ 

27  Du  magajiai,  in  fragibtira  al)in,  ]jizei 
namo  losef,  us  garda  Daweidis ;  yab 
namo  ]jizos  raaga^ais  Mariam. 

28  Yab  galeijjands  inn  sa  agglbis  du 
izai  qaji,  Fagino,  anstai  audabafta  3 
Frauya  mijj  }3us  ;  ])iuj)ido  ]>u  in  qinom. 

29  1\)  si,  gasaiwbandei,  ga])labsnoda  bi 
innatgabtai  is,  yab  jjabta  sis  wbeleika 
wesi  so  goleins,  Jiatei  swa  J)iu])ida  izai. 

30  Yab  qa])  aggikis  du  izai,  Ni  ogs 
])us,  Mai-iam,  bigast  auk  anst  fram 
Gupa. 

3  r  Yab  sal  !  ganlmis  in  kiljjeln,  j-ab 
gabairls  sunu,  yab  baitals  namo  is 
iiesu. 

32  Sab  Avairjjl})  mlklls,  yab  sunus  Haub- 
istins  baitada ;  yab  gibld  imma  Frauya 
Gu];  stol  Daweidis,  attins  is, 

33  Yab  |)iudanoJ)  ufar  garda  lakobls 
in  ayukduj),  yab  ])iudinassaus  is  ni 
wairjji))  andeis. 

34  QaJ)  ]jan  ]\Iarlam  du  Jjamma  aggilau, 
Wbalwa  siyal  Jjata,  Jjandei  aban  ni 
kann  1 

35  Yab  andbafyands  sa  aggilus  qa]? 
du  izai,  Abma  Weibs  atgaggl])  ana  ]juk, 
yab  mabts  Haubistins  ufarskadweld  j)us; 
du]>e  ci  saei  gabalrada  weibs,  baitada 
sunus  Gu])S. 


36  Yab  sai !  Alleisabai]?,  nl]?yo  ]3eina, 
yab  so  inkiljjo  sunau  in  aklomin  selnam- 
ma,  yali  sa  raenojjs  salbsta  ist  izai  sei 
'baitada  stairo ; 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

dagas  gefyllede  wseron,  lie  ferde  to  bis 
biise. 

24  Sojjlice  fefter  dagum  Ellzabetb,  bis 
wif,  ge-eacnode,  and  beo  bediglode  big 
f  if  monj^as,  and  cwpe]?, 

25  S6j)lice  me  Drlbten  gedyde  dus  on 
dam  dagum,  de  be  geseab,  minne  bosp 
betweox  maunum  afjrrran.''' 

26  S5]?lice  on  dam  syxtan  monjse  wses 
asend  Gabriel  se  engel  fram  Dribtne  on 
Galllea  ceastre,  desre  nama  wses  Na- 
zaretb, 

27  To  beweddadre  fitmnan  anura  were, 
dses  nama  wses  losep,  of  Dauides  biise  ; 
and  dsere  fsemnan  nama  wses  Maria. 

28  Da  cwfejj  se  engel  ingangende,  Hal 
wpes  dii,  mid  gyfe  gefylled ;  Drlbten 
mid  de  ;  du  eart  gebletsod  on  wifum. 

29  Da  wear])  beo  on  bis  sprtece  ge- 
drefed,  and  jJobte  Invset  seo  greting 
wsere. 

30  Da  cw£e]?  se  engel,  Ne  ondreed  dil 
de,  Maria,  sojjlice  dii  gyfe  mid  Gode 
gemettest. 

3 1  S6];lice  mi !  du  on  innode  ge- 
eacnast,  and  sunu  censt,  and  bis  naman 
Hselend  genemnest. 

32  Se  by)>  msere,  and  da?s  Hebstan 
sunu  genemned ;  and  bim  sy\]>  Drlbten 
God,  bis  feeder  Dauides  setl, 

33  And  be  ricsa]j  on  ecnesse  onlacobes 
biise,  and  bis  rices  ende  ne  by{j. 

34  Da  cwsej)  Maria  to  dam  engle,  Hu 
gewyrjj  dls,  fordam  ic  were  ne  oucnawe  1 

35  Da  andswarode  b}-re  se  engel,  Se 
Halga  Gcist  on  de  beeymjj,  and  dfes 
Heahstan  mibt  de  ofer-sceada}) ;  and 
fordam  doet  billige  de  of  de  acenned 
byj),  by])  Godes  sunu  genemned. 


36  And  nu !  Elizabetb,  din  msege, 
sunu  on  byi-e  ylde  ge-eacnode,  and  des 
mona})  ys  byre  syxta  seo  is  unberende 
genemned ; 


I.  24-36.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Ills  office  wcrcn  fulfilHd,  he  wente  in  to 
his  hous. 

24  Forsoth  after  daycs  Elizabeth,  his 
wyf,  cousc}iiC(.lo,  and  hiddo  hir  fyue 
monethis,  scyingc, 

25  For  so  the  Lord  didc  to  me  in  the 
daycs,  in  the  whiche  ho  bihcldc,  for  to 
take  a  wey  my  schcuschip  a  mong  men. 

26  Sothely  in  the  sixte  monethe  the 
auni^cl  Gabriel  was  sent  fro  God  in  to 
a  citcc  of  Galilee,  to  which  the  name 
Nazareth, 

27  To  a  mayden,  wcddid  to  a  man,  to 
whom  the  nanie  was  Joseph,  of  the 
house  of  Dauitli ;  and  the  name  of  the 
mayden  Marie. 

28  And  the  aungcl  gon  yn  to  hir  seide, 
Heil,  ful  of  grace  ;  the  Lord  he  with 
thee  ;  blessid  be  thou  among  >v}'mmen. 

29  "Which,  whanne  she  had  herd,  was 
troublid  in  his  word,  and  thou3te  what 
maner  salutacioun  this  was. 

30  And  the  aungel  seide  to  hir,  Ne 
drede  thou,  Marie,  sothli  thou  hast 
founden  gi'ace  auemptis  God. 

3 1  Loo !  thou  schalt  conscyuc  in  the 
wombe,  and  schalt  here  a  sone,  and  thou 
schalt  clepe  his  name  Jhesu. 

32  This  schal  be  greet,  and  he  schal  be 
clepid  the  sone  of  the  Hi5este ;  and  the 
Lord  God  schal  5yue  to  him  the  seete 
of  Dauith,  his  fadir, 

33  And  he  schal  regne  in  the  hous  of 
Jacob  with  outen  ende,  and  of  his  rewme 
schal  l)e  non  ende. 

34  Forsoth  Marie  scith  to  the  anngel. 
On  what  manere  schal  this  thing  be 
don,  for  I  knowe  not  man  1 

35  And  the  aungel  ausweringe  seide 
to  hir,  The  Hooly  Gost  schal  come  fro 
aboue  in  to  thee,  and  the  vertu  of  the 
Hi5este  schal  schadewe  vnto  thee  ;  ther- 
fore  and  that  hooly  thing  that  schal  be 
born  of  thee,  schal  be  clepid  the  sone  of 
God. 

36  And  loo !  Elizabeth,  tin  cosyness, 
and  sche  hath  conceyued  a  sone  in  hir 
elde,  and  this  monethe  is  the  sixte  to 
hir  that  is  clepid  bareyne ; 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


271 


tymc  off  his  office  was  oute,  he  departed 
home  in  to  his  awne  liousse. 

24  ^Vffter  thoose  dayes  his  wife,  Eliza- 
beth, eonccaved,  and  hid  her  silfe  .v. 
moncthes,  saynge, 

25  This  wysc  liath  God  dcalte  with 
me  in  the  dayes,  when  he  loked  on  me, 
to  take  from  me  the  rebuke  that  I 
suffered  a  monge  men. 

26  And  in  the  .yj.  moneth  the  angell 
Gabryel  was  sent  from  God  vnto  a  cite 
off  Galile,  named  Nazareth, 

27  To  a  virgin,  spoused  to  a  man, 
whose  name  Avas  Joseph,  of  the  housse 
of  David;  and  the  virgins  name  was 
Mary. 

28  And  the  angell  went  in  vnto  her 
and  sayde,  Hayle,  full  of  gi-ace ;  the 
Lorde  is  Avith  the ;  blessed  arte  thou 
amonge  Avemen. 

29  When  she  saAve  hym,  she  was  a- 
basshed  att  his  saynge,  and  cast  in  her 
mynde  Avhat  maner  of  salutacion  that 
shulde  be. 

30  And  the  angell  sayde  vnto  her, 
Feare  not,  jMary,  thou  hast  founde  grace 
Avith  God. 

3 1  Loo  !  thou  shalt  conceave  in  thy 
Avombe,  and  shalt  beare  a  childc,  and 
shalt  call  his  name  Jesus. 

32  He  shalbe  greate,  and  shalbe  called 
the  Sonne  off  the  Hyest ;  and  the  Lorde 
God  shall  geve  vnto  hym  the  seate  off 
his  fiither,  David, 

33  And  he  shall  raygne  over  the  housse 
off  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kyngdom 
shalbe  none  ende. 

34  Then  sayd  Mary  vnto  the  angell, 
HoAve  shall  this  be,  scinge  that  I  knowe 
no  man  1 

35  And  the  angell  ansAvered  and  sayd 
vnto  her,  The  Holy  Goost  shall  come 
apon  the,  and  the  poAver  off  the  Hyest 
shall  over  shaddoAve  the ;  therfore  also 
that  holy  thynge  Avhich  shalbe  borne, 
shalbe  called  the  sonne  of  God, 

36  And  marke  !  thy  cosen,  Elizabeth, 
hath  also  eonccaved  a  sonne  in  her  olde 
age,  and  this  is  the  .yj.  moneth  to  her 
Avhich  AA'as  called  barren  ; 


272 


GOTHIC,  360. 


37  Unte  nlst  unmaliteig  Gu]>a  ainhun 
Avaurde. 

38  Qa]j  })an  Maviam,  Sai !  Jjiwi  Frau- 
yins  ;  wair|jai  mis  bi  waurda  }>einamma. 
Yah  galai|)  fairra  izai  sa  aggilus. 

39  Usstr.ndandci  j'au  Mariam  in  \>mn 
dagam,  iddya  in  bairgahein  sniumundo, 
iu  baurg  ludins. 

40  Yah  galaij?  in  gard  Zakariins,  yah 
golida  Aileisabai}). 

41  Yah  warj>,  swe  hausida  Aileisabaijj 
golein  Marlins,  lailaik  barn  in  qijjau 
izos.  Yah  gafuUnoda  Ahmins  AVeihis 
Aileisabai]), 

42  Yah  ufwoplda  stibnai  mikilai,  yah 
qa|),  piu])ido  ]>u  in  qinom,  yah  |)iuj)ido 
akran  qijjaus  jjeinis. 

43  Yah  wba]?ro  mis  Jjata,  ei  qemi  aijjei 
Frauyins  meiuis  at  mis  1 

44  Sai !  allis  sunsei  AvarJ?  stibna  gol- 
einais  {leinaizos  in  ausam  meinaim,  lai- 
laik Jjata  barn  in  swignij^ai  in  "wambai 
meinai. 

45  Yah  audaga  so  galaubyandei,  })atei 
•\vair]ji[)  ustauhts,  Jiize  rodidane  izai  fram 
Frauyin. 

46  Yah  qa])  Mariam,  Mikileid  saiwala 
meina  Frauyan, 

47  Yah  swcgneid  ahma  meins  du 
Gujja,  nasyand  meinamma. 

48  Unte  insawh  du  hnaiweinai  J^iuyos 
seinaizos.  Sai  I  allis  fram  himma  nu 
audagyand  mik  alia  kunya. 

49  Unte  gatawida  mis  mikilein  sa 
niahteiga,  yah  weih  namo  is. 

50  Yah  armahairtei  is  in  aldins  aide, 
paim  ogandam  ina. 

51  Gatawida  swin]>ein  in  arma  seinam- 
ma,  distahida  mikil])uhtans  gahugdai 
hairtins  seinis. 

52  Gadrausida  mahteigans  af  stolam, 
yah  ushauhida  gahnaiwidans. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

37  Fordam  nis  selc  word  mid  Gode 
unmihtelic. 

38  Da  cwpej)  Maria,  Her  is  Drlhtnes 
)nnen ;  geweorde  me  refter  dinum  worde. 
And  se  engel  hyre  fram-gewat.''' 

39  Sbjjlice  on  dam  dagum  arils  Maria, 
and  ferde  on  muntland  mid  ofste,  on 
ludeisce  ceastre. 

40  And  eode  into  Zachai'ias  huse,  and 
grette  Elizabeth. 

41  Da  wpes  geworden,  da  Elizabeth 
gehyrde  Marian  gretinge,  da  gefagnode 
dtet  cild  on  hyre  innode.  And  da 
wear]j  Elizabeth  Hiilegum  Gaste  ge- 
fylled, 

42  And  heo  clj'pode  mycelre  stefne, 
and  eyvse]),  Du  eart  betwux  wifum  ge- 
bletsod,  and  gebletsod  is  dines  innodes 
wfestm. 

43  And  hwanon  is  me  dis,  dset  mines 
Drlhtnes  modor  to  me  cume  1 

44  Sona  swa  dinre  gretinge  stefn  on 
minum  earum  geworden  wtes,  da  fseg- 
node  ....  min  cild  on  minum 
innode. 

45  And  eadig  du  eart,  du  de  gelyfdest, 
dset  fulfremede  synd  da  ))ing  de  de  fram 
Drihtne  gesEede  synd. 

46  Da  cwse})  Maria,  Min  saw!  msersaj? 
Drlhten, 

47  And  min  gast  gebllssode  on  Gode, 
minum  haelende. 

48  Fordam  de  he  geseah  hys  ])inene 
ead-modnesse.  S6j)hce  1  heonon-for]j  me 
eadlge  secgajj  ealle  eneoressa. 

49  Fordam  de  me  micele  Jjing  dyde  se 
de  mihtig  is,  and  hys  nama  ys  hallg. 

50  And  hys  mild-heortnes  of  cneoresse 
on  cneoresse,  hyne  ondrsedendum. 

5 1  He  worhte  [msegne]  on  hys  earme, 
he  to-dselde  da  ofer-modan  on  mode 
hp'a  he5rtan. 

52  He  awearp  da  rican  of  setle,  and 
da  ead-modan  up-ahof. 


I.  37-52-]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

37  For  eucry  word  sclml  not  be  inpos- 
sihle  aucmptis  Goil, 

38  Forsoth  Marie  scidc,  Loo  !  the  hand 
mayden  of  the  Lord  ;  be  it  don  to  me 
aftir  tlii  word.  And  the  aungcl  depart- 
ide  fro  hir. 

39  Sothli  Marie  risingc  vp  in  the 
dayes,  wente  with  haste  in  to  the  hilly 
l)lacis,  in  to  a  citee  of  Judee. 

40  And  sche  eutride  yn  to  the  hows  of 
Zacharie,  and  grette  Elizabeth. 

41  And  it  was  don,  as  Elizabeth  hcrde 
the  salntacioun  of  Marie,  the  5onge  child 
in  hir  wojnbe  gladide.  And  Elizabeth 
was  fillid  with  the  Hooly  Gost, 

42  And  criede  with  grete  voys,  and 
scide,  Blessid  be  thou  a  niong  wymmeu, 
and  blessid  he  the  fruyt  of  thi  wombe. 

43  And  wherof  tliis  thing  to  me,  that 
the  modir  of  my  Lord  come  to  me  1 

44  Loo !  forsothe  as  the  vois  of  thi 
salutacifun  wis  maad  in  myn  eeris,  the 
5onge  child  glxdide  with  ioye  in  my 
wombe. 

45  And  blessid  thou  erf,  that  hast 
bileuyd,  for  th  j  thingis  that  boa  scid  to 
thee  fro  tlie  Lord,  schulen  be  parfvtli 
don. 

46  And  Marie  seide,  My  soule  magny- 
fieth  the  Lord, 

47  And  my  spirit  hath  gladid  in  God, 
myn  heelthe. 

48  For  he  hath  biholden  the  meke- 
nesse  of  his  hand  mayde.  Loo  !  forsoth 
of  this  alle  generaciouus  schulen  seie  me 
blessid. 

49  For  he  that  is  my3ti  hath  don 
grete  thingis  to  me,  and  his  name  is 
hooly. 

50  And  his  mercy  is  fro  kynredis  in  to 
kynredis,  to  men  dredinge  him. 

51  lie  made  my5te  in  his  arme,  he 
scateride  proude  men  with  mynde  of  his 
herte. 

52  He  puttide  doun  mj-jty  men  fro 
seete,  and  enhaunside  mcke. 


TYNDALE,i526. 


273 


37  For  with  God  shall  nothinge  be 
vnpossible. 

38  Mary  snyd,  Bcholde !  the  Iionde 
maydon  off  the  Lorde  ;  be  it  vnto  me 
even  as  thou  hast  saydc.  And  the  angell 
departed  from  her. 

39  Mary  arose  in  thoose  dayes,  and 
went  into  the  mouutayns  with  hast,  into 
a  cite  off  lewry. 

40  And  cntred  in  to  the  housse  off 
Zacary,  and  saluted  Elizabeth. 

41  And  it  fortuned,  as  P^lizabeth  herde 
the  salutacion  of  Mary,  the  babe  spronge 
in  her  belly.  And  Elizabeth  was  filled 
with  the  Holy  Goost, 

42  And  cryed  with  a  loude  voyce,  and 
sayde,  Blessed  arte  thou  among  women, 
and  blessed  is  the  frute  off  thy  wombe. 

43  And  whcns  hapencth  this  to  me, 
that  the  mother  off  my  Lorde  shuldc 
come  to  me  1 

44  Loo !  as  sone  as  the  voyce  of  thy 
salutacion  sownded  in  myne  eares,  the 
babe  lepte  in  my  belly  for  ioye. 

45  And  blessed  arte  thou,  that  belev- 
edst,  for  thoose  tliinges  shalbe  performed, 
which  were  toldc  the  from  the  Lorde. 

46  And  Mary  sayde,  My  soule  magni- 
fieth  the  Lorde, 

47  And  my  sprete  reioyseth  in  God, 
my  savioure. 

48  For  he  hath  loked  on  the  po\Te 
degre  off  his  honde  mayden.  Beholde  ! 
nowe  from  hens  forth  shall  all  genera- 
cions  call  me  blessed. 

49  For  he  that  is  myghty  hath  done 
to  me  greate  thingcs,  and  blessed  ys  his 
name. 

50  And  hys  meroy  is  always  on  them 
that  feare  him,  thorow  oute  all  gencra- 
cions. 

51  He  hath  shewed  strengthe  with  his 
arme,  he  hath  scattered  them  that  are 
proude  in  the  ymaginacion  of  their 
hertes. 

52  He  hath  putt  doune  the  myghty 
from  their  seates,  and  hath  exalted  them 
of  lowe  degre. 

T 


274 


GOTHIC,  360. 


53  Gredagans  gasopida  )jiu}je,  yah  ga- 
bignandans  insandida  lausans. 

54  Hleibida  Israela,  |)iumagu  seinam- 
ina,  gamunands  armahairteins  ; 

55  Swaswe  rodida  du  attam  unsai-aim, 
Abraliama  yah  fraiwa  'is,  und  aiw. 

56  Gasto])  })an  j\Iariam  mi|)  izal  swe 
meno])S  jjrins,  yah  gawandida  slk  du 
garda  seinamma. 

57  I})  Aileisabaijj  usfullnoda  mel  du 
bairan,  yah  gabar  sunu. 

58  Yah  hausidedun  bisitaiids  yah  ga- 
nijjyos  izos,  unte  gamikilida  Frauya 
armahairtein  seina  bi  izai ;  yah  mi|)fag- 
inodedun  izai. 

59  Yah  war]),  in  daga  ahtudin,  qemun 
bimaitau  Jjata  barn ;  yah  haihaituu  ina, 
afar  namin  attins  is,  Zakarian. 

Co  Yah  andhafyandei  so  aij^ei  is  qa]?, 
Ne,  ak  haitaidau  lohannes. 

6x  Yah  qel)un  du  izai,  patei  ni  ainsliun 
ist  in  kunya  ])einamma,  saei  haitaidau 
Jjamma  namin. 

62  Gabandwidedun  })an  attin  is,  Jjata 
"vvhaiwa  wildedi  haitan  ina. 

6^  Ijj  is  sokyands  spilda,  nam  gah- 
melida,  qi];ands,  lohannes  ist  namo 
is.     Yah  siklaleikidedun  allai. 

64  Usluknoda  j^an  mun|)s  is  suns,  yah 
tuggo  is,  yah  rodida,  })iu])yands  Gu]?. 

65  Yah  war]j  ana  allaim  agis  jjaim 
hisitaudam  ina,  yah  in  allai  bairgahein 
ludalas  merida  wesun  alia  ])0  waurda. 

66  Yah  galagidedun  allai  Jjai  hausyand- 
ans  in  hairtin  seinamma,  qijjandans, 
Wha  skuli  Jjata  barn  -wairl^an "?  Yah 
];au  handus  Frauyins  was  mi^  imma. 

67  Yah  Zakarias,  atta  is,  gafullnoda 
Ahmlus  AYeihis,  yah  praufetida,  yah 
qaj), 

68  piujjeigs  Frauya  Gu]?  Israelis,  unte 
gaweisoda,  yah  gawaurhta  uslausein 
managein  seinai. 

6g  Yah  urraisida  haurn  naseinais  unsis 
in  garda  Daweidis,  Jjiumagaus  seiuis. 


.  ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

53  Hingriende  he  mid  godum  gefylde, 
and  ofer-m5de  idele  forlet. 

54  He  ufeng  Israhel,  hys  cniht,  and 
gemunde  hys  mild-heortnesse ; 

55  Swa  he  sproec  to  urum  fsederum, 
Abrahame  and  hys  saede,  on  a  woruld.''' 

56  S6j)lice  Maria  wunede  mid  hyre 
swylce  ]n-y  monjjas,  and  gewende  da  to 
hyre  huse. 

57  Da  wses  gefylled  Elizabethe  cen- 
ning-tid,  and  heo  sunu  cende. 

58  And  hyi-e  nehcheburas  and  hp-e 
cuctan  dpet  gehyrdon,  cttet  Drlhten  hys 
mild-heortnesse  mid  hyre  nicersode;  and 
hig  mid  hyre  blissodon. 

59  Da,  on  dam  eliteoj^an  dsege,  big 
comon  dfet  cild  ymb-snidan ;  and  nem- 
don  hine,  hys  feeder  naman,  Zachariam. 

60  Da  andswai'ode  his  modor,  Nese 
s5|)es,  ac  he  by]j  lohannes  genemned. 

61  Da  cwsedon  hig  to  hyre,  Nis  nan 
on  dinre  meegj^e,  dyson  naman  ge- 
nemned. 

62  Da  bicnodon  hi  to  hjs  feeder,  hw?et 
he  wolde  hine  genemnedne  be5n. 

6;^  Du  wrat  he,  gebedenum  wex-brede, 
lohannes  is  hys  nama.  Da  wundrodon 
hig  ealle. 

64  Da  wear})  s5na  hys  mu]),  and  hj's 
tunge  ge-openod,  and  he  sproec,  Drihten 
bletsiende. 

65  Da  wear])  ege  geworden  ofer  ealle 
hjTa  nehcheburas,  and  ofer  ealle  ludea 
munt-land  wseron  das  word  gewkl- 
msersode. 

66  And  ealle  da  de  hit  gehyrdon  on 
heora  heortan  setton,  and  cwsedon, 
Weust  du,  hweet  by))  des  cnapa?  Witod- 
lice  Di-ihtenes  hand  wtes  mid  him. 

67  And  Zacharias,  his  feeder,  AV£es  mid 
Halegum  Gaste  gefylled,  and  he  witeg- 
ode,  and  cw8e]>, 

68  Gebletsod  si  Drihten  Isi'ahela  God, 
fordam  de  he  geneosode,  and  his  folces 
alysednesse  dyde. 

69  And  he  us  hsele  horn  artvrde  on 
Dauides  huse,  hys  cnihtes. 


I.  53-69]    WYCLIFFE,i3S9. 

53  lie  hath  fillul  hungry  men  with 
gooile  thingis,  and  he  hath  left  vychc 
men  voyde. 

54  He,  lianynge  myndc  of  his  mercy, 
took  vj)  Israel,  his  cliild  ; 

55  As  he  hath  spoken  to  onrc  fadris,  to 
Abraham  and  to  his  seed,  in  to  worklis. 

56  Forsoth  Marye  dwellidc  with  Itir  as 
three  monethis,  and  turnydc  ajen  in  to 
hir  hous. 

57  Sotlily  the  tymc  of  bcringc  child 
■was  fillid  to  Elizabeth,  and  scho  chiklide 
a  soue. 

58  And  the  nei^cboris  and  cosyns  of 
hir  licrden,  for  the  Lord  haddc  magny- 
fied  his  mercy  with  hir  ;  and  thei  thank- 
idcn  him. 

59  And  it  was  don,  in  the  ei3tethe  day, 
thei  camcn  for  to  circumsidc  the  child  ; 
and  thei  clepiden  him  Sacharie,  by  name 
of  his  fadir. 

60  And  his  modir  answeringe  seide, 
Xay,  but  he  schal  be  clcpid  John. 

61  And  thei  seiden  to  hir.  For  no  man 
is  in  thi  kyn,  that  is  clepid  bi  this 
name. 

62  Sothli  tljci  maden  a  syngnc  to  his 
fadir,  wliom  he  woklc  him  for  to  be 
clcpid. 

6^  And  he  axinge  a  poyntel,  wroot, 
seyinge,  John  is  his  name.  And  alio 
men  wondriden. 

64  Forsoth  his  mouth  was  openyd 
anon,  and  his  tunge,  and  he  spak,  blcss- 
inge  God. 

65  And  drede  was  maad  on  alle  her 
neijeboris,  and  thcs  wordis  weren  pup- 
plischid  on  allc  the  hilly  placis  of  Judee. 

66  And  alle  men  that  herden  puttedyn 
in  her  herte,  seyinge.  Who,  gessist  thou, 
this  child  schal  be  1  And  sothli  the 
bond  of  the  Lord  was  with  him. 

67  And  Zacharie,  his  fadir,  was  fillid 
witli  the  Hooli  Gost,  and  prophesiede, 
seyinge, 

68  Ijlessid  he  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
for  he  hath  visitid,  and  maad  redemp- 
ciouu  of  his  pci)le. 

69  And  he  hath  rerid  to  vs  an  liorn  of 
helthe  in  the  hous  of  Uauith,  his  child. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  27  j 

53  He  hath  filled  the  liongry  Avith 
goode  thingcs,  and  hath  sent  awayc  the 
ryche  em|)ty. 

54  He  hath  remend)red  mercy,  and 
hath  holpen  his  scrvaunt,  Israhcl ; 

55  Vacu  as  he  jircnniscd  to  oure  fathers, 
Abraham  and  to  his  seede,  for  ever. 

56  And  Mary  aboodc  with  her  iij. 
moucthcs,  and  retourncd  home  agayne. 

57  Elizabethcs  tymc  was  come  that 
she  sludde  be  dclyvered,  and  she  brought 
forth  a  Sonne. 

58  And  her  neghbourcs  and  her  cosins 
hcrde  tell,  howe  the  Lorde  had  magni- 
fied hys  mcrey  vppon  her ;  and  they 
rcioysed  with  her. 

59  And  liit  fortuned,  the  eyght  daye, 
they  cam  to  circumcise  the  childc ;  and 
called  his  name  Zacari,  after  the  name 
of  his  father. 

60  And  his  mother  answei'cd  and  sayd, 
Not  soo,  but  he  shalbc  called  Jhon. 

61  And  they  sayd  vnto  her,  There  ys 
none  of  thy  kyune,  that  is  named  with 
th3's  name. 

62  And  they  made  signes  to  hys  fathei', 
howe  he  wolde  have  hym  called. 

63  And  he  axed  for  wrytyngc  tables, 
and  Avi'oote,  saying,  Hys  name  is  Jhon. 
And  they  mervellcd  all. 

64  And  hys  moughtwas  opened  inimc- 
diatly,  and  hjs  tonge,  and  he  spake, 
lawdynge  God. 

65  And  feare  cam  on  all  them  that 
dwelt  nye,  and  all  these  sayingcs  were 
noised  abroade  throughoutt  all  the  hylly 
countre  of  Jewry. 

66  And  all  they  that  hcrde  them  layde 
them  vj)pe  in  their  hertes,  saying,  AVliat 
mancr  cliylde  shall  thys  be '^  And  the 
lionde  of  God  was  with  hym. 

67  And  his  father,  Zacherias,  was  fylled 
with  the  Holy  Goost,  and  prophisyed, 
sayingc, 

68  Blessed  be  tlic  Loi-dc  God  of  Israhcl, 
for  he  liath  visited,  and  redemed  his 
people. 

69  And  hath  reysed  vppe  the  borne 
off  health  vnto  vs  in  the  huusse  of  his 
servaunt,  David. 

T  2 


270  GOTHIC,  360. 

70  Swaswe  rodida  jjairh  munjj  weih- 
aize,  jjize  fram  anastodeinai  aiwis,  prau- 
fete  seinaize. 

7  I  Giban  nasein  us  fiyandam  unsaraim, 
yah  us  liandau  allalze  })ize  hatandaue 
uusis. 

72  Tauyan  armaliah'tijja  bi  attam  un- 
saraim, yah  gamunan  triggwos  weihaizos 
seiiiaizos. 

73  Ai])is  };anel  swor  wi})ra  Abraham, 
attan  uusaraiia,  ei  gebi  uusis. 

74  Unagein  us  handau  fiyande  un- 
sai-aize  galausidaim,  skalkiuon  imma, 

75  In  sunyai  yah  garaihtein  in  and- 
•\vair{)ya  is  allans  dagans  unsaraus. 

76  Yah  jju,  barnilo,  praufetus  Hauh- 
istins  haitaza ;  fauragaggis  auk  faura 
andwair]?ya  Frauyins,  manwyan  wigans 
imma. 

77  Du  giban  kunj^i  naseinais  managein 
is,  in  afleta  frawaurhte  ize  ; 

78  pairh  infeinandein  armahairtein 
Gu])S  unsaris,  in  ])ammei  gaweisoj)  un- 
sara  urruns  us  hauhijjai. 

79  Gabairhtyan  J^aim  in  riqiza,  yah 
skadau  dau])us  sitandam;  du  garaihtyan 
fotuns  unsarans  in  wig  gawairjjyis. 

80  Ij)  jpata  barn  wohs,  yah  swinj'uoda 
ahmin,  yah  was  ana  aujjidom  und  dag 
ustaikneinais  seinaizos  du  Israela. 


Chap.  II,  i  War)?  ])an  in  dagans 
yainans,  urrann  gagrefts  fram  Kaisara 
Agustau,  gamelyan  allana  midyungard. 

2  Soh  ])i\n  gilstrameleins  frumista  war]? 
at  wisandin  kindina  Swriais^  raginondin 
Saurim  Kwreinaiau. 

3  Yah  iddyedun  allai,  ei  melidai 
weseina,  wharyizuh  in  seinai  baurg. 

4  UiTann  ])an  yah  losef  us  Galeilaia, 
us  baurg  NazaraiJ',  in  ludaian,  in  baurg 
Daweidis,  sei   haitada  Be})lahaim,  dujje 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

70  Swa  he  sprtec  jairh  hys  halegra 
wtegena  mu]>,  da  de  of  worldes  frymj'e 
S})rc!econ. 

7 1  And  he  Tdysde  us  of  urum  feondum, 
and  of  eah-a  dfera  handa  de  us  hatedon. 

72  Mild-heortnesse  to  wyrcanne  mid 
urum  fasderum,  and  gemunan  his  haleg- 
an  cydnesse. 

73  Hyne  us  to  syllanne  done  a|)  de  he 
urum  fffider,  Abrahame,  swor. 

74  Da?t  we  butan  ege  of  ure  feonda 
handa  alysede,  him  J^eowian, 

75  On  halignesse  beforan  him  eallum 
urum  dagum. 

76  And  dii,  cuapa,  byst  dses  Hehstan 
witega  genemned ;  dii  gsest  beforan 
Drihtnes  ansyne,  his  wegas  gearwian. 

77  To  syllanne  his  folce  hys  hsele  ge- 
wit,  on  hyra  synua  forgyfenesse  ; 

78  purh  innodas  ures  Godes  mild- 
heortnesse,  on  dam  he  us  geneosode  of 
east-dsele  up-springende. 

79  Onlihtan  dam  de  on  [jystrum,  and 
on  dea))es  sceade  sittaj? ;  ure  fet  to  ge- 
reccanne  on  sybbe  weg. 

80  S6])lice  se  cnapa  weox,  and  wses  on 
gaste  gestrangod,  and  waes  on  westenum 
od  done  d?eg  hys  setiwednessum  on 
Israhel. 


Chap.  II.  ^  i  S6}>lice  on  dam  dagum, 
wses  geworden  gebod  fram  dam  Casere 
Augusto,  doet  eall  ymbe-hwyrft  weere 
tomearcod. 

2  Deos  tomearcodnes  w£es  serest  ge- 
worden fram  dam  deman  Syi'ige,  Ci- 
rino. 

3  And  ealle  big  eodon,  ....  and 
syndrie  ferdon  on  hyra  ceastre. 

4  Da  ferde  losep  fram  Galilea,,of  dsere 
ceastre  Nazareth,  on  ludeisce,  ceastre 
Dauides,   seo    is    genemned   Bethleem, 


I.  70.-II.  4.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

70  As  he  spak  by  the  mouthc  of  hooly 
prophetis,  that  beii  fro  the  wurkl. 

71  Ilclthc  fro  ourc  cncmycs,  and  fro 
tlie  hoiul  of  alle  men  that  hatiden  vs. 

72  To  do  mercy  Avith  ourc  fadris,  and 
to  hauc  niyndc  of  his  hooly  testament. 

73  The  ootli  tliat  he  swor  to  Abraham, 
oure  fadir,  to  jyue  him  silf  to  vs. 

74  That  wo  withoiite  drcde  dcliiierid 
fro  the  Iiond  of  oure  enemyes,  scrue  to 
him, 

75  In  hoolynesse  and  ri5tfulnessc  bifore 
him  in  alle  oure  daycs. 

76  And  thou,  cliild,  schalt  be  clcpid 
the  prophete  of  the  Hi5este ;  for  thou 
schalt  go  bifore  the  face  of  the  Lord,  to 
make  redy  liis  weyes. 

77  For  to  5yue  the  science  of  heltlie 
to  his  peple,  in  to  I'emiscioim  of  her 
synnes  ; 

78  Bi  the  enti'aylis  of  mercy  of  oure 
God,  in  whiclie  he  spr3ngynge  vj)  fro  an 
hi5  hath  visytid  vs. 

79  For  to  5yue  li5t  to  hem  that  sitten 
in  derknessis,  and  in  schadewe  of  deth  ; 
for  to  dresse  oure  feet  in  to  the  wey  of 
pees. 

80  Sothli  the  child  waxide,  and  was 
eomfortid  in  spirit,  and  was  in  desert  til 
to  the  day  of  his  schewinge  to  Israel. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


277 


CiiAP.  II.  1  Forsothe  it  was  don  in 
tho  dayes,  a  maundement  went  out  fro 
Cesar  August,^  that  al  the  world  schulde 
be  discryued. 

2  This  firste  discryuyng  was  maad  of 
Cyryne,  iustice  of  Cirye. 

3  And  alle  men  wentcn,  that  thei 
schulde  make  profcscioun,^  ech  by  him 
self  in  to  his  cite. 

4  Sothly  and  Josep  sti5cdc  vp  fro  Gali- 
lee, of  the  cite  of  Xazareth,  in  to  Jude, 
in  to  a  cite   of  Dauitli,  that   is  clcpid 


70  Even  as  he  promised  by  the  moughtli 
of  his  holy  prophetes,  which  were  sens 
the  worldc  began. 

71  That  we  sluilde  be  saved  from  ourc 
enimys,  and  from  tlie  hondis  of  all  that 
hate  vs. 

72  To  shewe  mercy  towardes  oure 
fathers,  and  to  remember  hys  holy 
promcs. 

73  That  is  to  saye  the  oothe  which  he 
sware  to  oure  father,  Abraham,  for  to 
geve  vs. 

74  That  we  delivered  oute  of  the  hondes 
of  oure  enemis,  myght  serve  hym  with 
oute  feare, 

75  All  the  dayes  of  oure  lyfe  in  suchc 
holynes  and  ryghtewesnes  that  are  ac- 
cept before  him. 

76  And  thou,  chylde,  shalt  be  called 
the  pi'ophet  off  the  Hyest ;  for  thou 
shalt  goo  before  the  face  off  the  Lorde, 
to  prepare  his  wayes. 

77  And  to  geve  knowlege  off  health 
vnto  hys  people,  for  the  remission  of 
sinnes  ; 

78  Through  the  tender  mercy  off"  oure 
Lorde,  wher  with  hath  visited  vs  the 
daye  springe  from  an  hye. 

79  To  geve  light  to  them  that  sate  in 
darcknes,  and  in  shadowe  of  deth;  and 
to  gyde  oure  fete  into  the  waye  of 
peace. 

80  And  the  ehylde  encreased,  and 
wexed  stronge  in  sprete,  and  was  in 
wildernes  tyll  the  daye  cam  when  he 
shulde  shewe  hymsilfe  vnto  the  Is- 
rahelitcs. 


Chap.  II.  i  Hit  folowed  in  thoose 
dayes,  that  there  went  oute  a  commaund- 
ment  from  Auguste  the  Emperour,  that 
all  the  woorlde  shulde  be  valued. 

2  This  taxynge  was  fp-st  executed  when 
Syrenus  was  leftenaunt  in  Siria. 

3  And  every  man  went  in  to  his  awne 
shyre  toune,  there  to  be  taxed. 

4  And  Josejih  also  ascended  from  Ga- 
llic, oute  of  a  cite  called  Nazareth,  vnto 
lewrv,   into  a  cite   of  David,  which  is 


278  GOTHIC,  360. 

ei  was  us  gavda  fadreinais  Daweidis, 

5  Anamelyan  mi))  Mariin,  sei  'in  fragift- 
im  was  imma  qeins  wisandein  inkiljjon. 

6  War])  ))an.  mi|)])anei  ]>o  wesun  yainar, 
usfuUnodeduu  dagos,  du  bairan  izai. 

7  Yali  gabar  sunu  seinana  Jiana  frum- 
abaur,  yah  biwand  i'na,  yah  galagida  ina 
iu  uzetin,  imte  ui  Avas  im  rumis  in 
stada  ]:)amma. 

8  Yah  haii'dyos  wesun  in  Jjamma  sam- 
in  hmda,  J^airhwakandans  yah  Avitand- 
ans  wahtwoni  nahts  ufaro  hairdai  seinai. 

9  Jp  aggilus  Frauyins  anaqam  ins,  yah 
wu]))us  Frauyins  biskain  ins ;  yah  oht- 
edun  agisa  mikilamma. 

10  Yaii  qajj  du  im  sa  aggilus,  M 
ogeijj ;  unte  sai  !  spillo  izwis  faheid 
mikila,  sei  wair])ijj  allai  managein, 

1 1  patei  gabaurans  ist  izwis  himma 
daga  nasyands,  saei  ist  Christus  Frauya, 
in  baurg  Daweidis. 

12  Yah  ])ata  izwis  taikns;  bigitid  barn 
biwundan,  yah  galagid  in  uzetin. 

13  Yah  anaks  war))  mi))  ))amma  agg- 
ilau  managei  haryis  himinakundis,  haz- 
yandane  Gu)),  yah  qijjandane, 

14  Wul))us  in  hauhistyam  Gu))a,  yah 
ana  air))ai  gawairj)i  in  mannam  godis 
wilyius. 

15  Yah  war]),  bij)e  gali))un  fairra  im 
in  himin  ])ai  aggilyus^  yah  ))ai  mans  )iai 
hairdyos  qe))un  du  sis  misso,  pairhgagg- 
aima  yu  und  Be))lahaim,  yah  saiwhaima 
waurd  ))ata  waur])ano,  ))atei  Frauya  ga- 
kannida  unsis. 

16  Yah  qemun  sniumyandans,  yah  bi- 
getun  Marian  yah  losef,  yah  ))ata  barn 
ligando  in  uzetin. 

17  Gasaiwhandans  ])an,  gakannidedun 
bi  ))ata  waurd  ))atei  rodi])  was  du  im 
bi  ))ata  barn. 

18  Yah  allai  j'ai  gahausyandans  sil- 
daleikidedun,  bi  ))0  rodidona  fram  ))aim 
hairdyam  du  im. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

fordam  do  he  wres  of  Dauides  huse  and 
hirede, 

5  Da^t  be  ferde  mid  Marian,  d.e  him 
beweddod  wses  and  wres  ge-eacnod. 

6  S6l)lice  Avses  geworden,  da  lii  dar 
wseron,  hire  dagas  weeron  gefyllede,  dset 
heo  cende. 

7  And  heo  cende  liyre  frum-ccnnedan 
sunu,  and  bine  mid  cild-cladum  bewand, 
and  bine  on  binue  alede,  fordam  de  big 
najfdon  riim  on  cumena  huse. 

8  And  hyrdas  wseron  on  dam  ylcan 
rice,  waciende  and  iiiht-wiEccan  heald- 
ende  ofer  heora  heorda. 

9  Da  st5d  Drihtnes  engel  wid  big, 
and  Godes  beorhtnes  him  ymbe-scean ; 
and  hi  him  mycelum  ege  adredon. 

10  And  se  cngel  him  to  cwoe)),  Nelle  ge 
eow  adrsedan  ;  s5))lice  nu  !  ic  eow  bodie 
mycelne  gefean,  se  bi))  eallum  folce. 

1 1  Fordam  to-da^g  eow  ys  hselend 
acenued,  se  is  Drihten  Crist,  on  Dauides 
ceastre. 

1 2  And  dis  tiicen  eow  by)) ;  ge  ge- 
mcta))  an  cild  hrajglum  bewiindeu,  and 
on  binne  aled. 

13  And  da  Ava?s  fseringa  geworden  mid 
dam  engle  mycelnes  heofonlices  werydcs, 
God  herigendra,  and  dus  cwedendra, 

14  Gode  sy  wuldor  on  heahnesse,  and 
on  eorjjan  sybb  manuum  godes  willan. 

15  And  hit  wa}s  geworden,  da  da  en- 
glas  to  heofone  ferdon,  da  hyrdas  him 
betwynan  sprsecon,  and  cwsedon,  Uton 
faran  to  Bethleera,  and  geseon  dcet 
word  de  geworden  is,  dset  Drihten  us 
setywde. 

16  And  big  efstende  comon,  and  ge- 
metton  Marian  and  losep,  and  diet  cild 
on  binne  aled. 

17  Da  hi  dset  gesiiwon,  da  oncneowon 
big  be  dam  worde  de  him  gesaJd  wses 
be  dam  elide. 

18  And  ealle  da  de  gehyrdon  wund- 
redon,  be  dam  de  him  da  hyrdas 
sscdon. 


II.  5-i8.]  AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Bedleem,  for  that  lie  was  of  the  hous 
and  inevnc  of  Dauith, 

5  Tliat  he  sohulile  kuowlochc  with 
Marie,  with  chiUl  spousid  wyf  to  him. 

6  Sothli  it  was  don,  whanne  thoi  weron 
there,  the  daycs  wercn  fultillid,  that  she 
schuldc  l)erc  ehikl. 

7  And  sche  chiklide  her  firste  born 
souc,  and  whxppide  him  in  clothis,  and 
puttide  him  iu  a  craeche,  for  ther  was 
not  phicc  to  hym  in  the  corayn  stable. 

8  And  schephcrdis  wcren  in  the  same 
cuntre,  wakinge  and  kei)inge  the  watchis 
of  the  ny^t  on  her  Hok. 

9  And  loo  !  the  aiinojcl  of  the  Lord 
stood  by  sydis  hem,  and  tlic  clerencsse 
of  God  schynedc  aboute  hem  ;  and  thei 
drcdden  with  greet  drede. 

10  And  the  anngel  seide  to  hem,  Nyle 
5e  drede  ;  lo  !  sothli  I  euangelise  to  50U 
a  grete  ioye,  that  schal  be  to  al  pcple. 

1 1  For  a  samour  is  bornn  to  day  to 
vs,  that  is  Crist  the  Lord,  iu  the  cite  of 
Dauith. 

12  And  this  a  tokene  to  50U  ;  56  schulen 
fynde  a  5ong  child  wlappid  in  clothis, 
and  put  in  a  cracelie. 

13  And  sudenly  ther  is  maad  with 
the  aungel  a  multitude  of  hcuenly  knyjt- 
liod,  heriynge  God,  and  seyinge, 

14  Glorie  be  in  the  hi5este  thingis  to 
God,  and  in  crthe  pees  he  to  men  of 
good  wille. 

15  And  it  was  don,  that  whanne  the 
aungelis  passiden  a  wey  fro  hem  in  to 
heucnc,  the  schephcrdis  spaken  to  gidere, 
sciynge,  Passe  we  ouer  til  to  Bedleem, 
and  se  we  this  word  that  is  maad,  the 
whiche  the  Lordc  maad,  and  sehewid 
to  vs. 

16  And  thei  hyjinge  camcn,  and  found- 
en  ^Marie  and  Joseph,  and  a  jong  child 
put  in  a  craeche. 

17  Sothli  thei  seinge,  knewen  of  the 
word  that  was  seid  to  hem  of  this  child. 

18  And  alle  men  that  hadden  herd 
wondriden,  and  of  thes  thingis  that 
wercn  seide  to  hem  of  the  schephcrdis. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


279 


called  Bethlcem,  because  he  was  of  the 
housse  and  linage  of  David, 

^y  To  be  taxed  with  ]\Luy,  his  wedded 
wife  which  was  with  childe. 

6  And  it  fortuned,  whill  they  there 
were,  her  tyme  was  come,  that  she  shulde 
be  delyvered. 

7  And  she  brought  forth  licr  fyrst  be- 
gotten Sonne,  and  wrap])ed  hym  in  swad- 
lynge  cloothcs,  and  laycd  hym  in  a 
nianger,  be  cause  there  was  no  roume 
for  them  with  in  in  the  hostrey. 

8  And  there  were  in  the  same  region 
shcpherdes,  abydingc  in  the  fclde  and 
watching  their  flocke  by  nyght. 

9  And  loo  !  the  angell  of  the  Lorde 
stode  liarde  by  them,  and  the  brightues 
of  the  Lorde  shone  rounde  aboute  them  ; 
and  they  were  soore  afrayed. 

10  And  the  angell  sayd  vnto  them.  Be 
not  afrayed ;  bcholde !  I  brynge  you 
tydinges  off  greate  ioye,  that  shall  come 
to  all  the  people. 

1 1  For  vnto  you  is  borne  this  dayc  in 
the  cite  of  David,  a  savcoure,  which  is 
Christ  the  Lorde. 

12  And  take  this  for  a  signe  ;  ye  shall 
fynde  the  childe  swadled,  and  layed  in  a 
manger. 

13  And  strcight  waye  there  was  with, 
the  angell  a  multitude  of  hevenly  sow- 
dici'S,  laudynge  God,  and  sayinge, 

14  Glory  to  God  an  hye,  and  peace  on 
the  crth,  and  vnto  men  reioysynge. 

15  And  itt  fortuned,  as  sone  as  the 
angels  were  gone  awaye  iu  to  heven, 
the  shepheides  sayd  won  to  another.  Let 
vs  goo  even  vnto  Bethlcem,  and  se  this 
thynge  thatt  is  hapencd,  which  the  Lorde 
hath  shewed  vnto  vs. 

16  And  they  cam  with  haste,  and 
founde  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  the  babe 
layde  in  a  manger. 

17  When  they  had  sene  it,  they  pub- 
lisshed  abrode  the  saynge  Avhicli  was 
tolde  them  off  that  chylde. 

18  And  all  that  herde  itt  Avondrcd,  att 
thoose  thynges  which  were  toldc  them 
off  the  shcpherdes. 


28'J 


GOTHIC,  360. 


1 9  I|)  jNIaria  alia  gafastalda  ]>o  waurda, 
])agkyandei  'in  hairtin  seinamnia. 

20  Yah  gawandidedun  sik  ))ai  hairdyos, 
mikilyandans  yah  hazyaudans  Gu]>  iu 
allaize  ))izeei  gahausidedun  yah  ga- 
sewhun,  swaswe  rodi|)  was  du  im. 

21  Yah  bi[ie  usfulnodedun  dagos  ahtau, 
du  bimaitan  ina,  yah  haitaii  was  namo 
is  lesus,  J?ata  qi})ano  fram  aggilau,  faur- 
J)izei  ganumans  wesi  in  wamba. 

22  Yah  bijje  usfulnodedun  dagos  hrain- 
einais  ize,  bi  witoda  Mosezis,  brahtedun 
ina  in  lairusalem,  atsatyan  faura  Frau- 

23  Swaswe  gamelid  ist  in  witoda 
Frauyins,  patei  whazuh  gumakundaize 
uslukands  qi};u^  weihs  Frauyins  haitada; 

24  Yah  ei  gebeina  fram  imma  hunsl, 
swaswe  qi};an  ist  in  Avitoda  Frauyins, 
Gayuk  hraiwadubono,  ai])];au  twos  yugg- 
ons  ahake. 

25  paruh  was  manna  in  lairusalem, 
Jnzei  namo  Swmaion ;  yah  sa  manna 
was  garaihts  yah  gudafaurhts,  beidands 
la])onais  Israelis  ;  yah  Ahma  Weihs  was 
ana  imma. 

26  Yah  was  imma  gataihan  fram  Ah- 
min  )!amma  Weihin,  ni  saiwhan  dau);u, 
faur]jize  sewhi  Christu  Frauyins. 

27  Yah  qam  in  ahmin  in  Jjizai  alh. 
Yah  mi]5j)anei  innattauhun  berusyos  ])ata 
barn  lesu,  ei  tawidedeina  bi  biuhtya 
witodis  bi  ina, 

28  Yah  is  andnam  ina  ana  armins 
seinans,  yah  ])iu]jida  Gu|ja,  yah  qa]>, 

29  Nu  fraleitais  skalk  fieinana  frau- 
yinond,  Frauya,  bi  waurda  jjeinamma  in 
gawairjjya ; 

30  paude  sewhun  augona  meina  nasein 
peina, 

31  poei  manwides  in  andwairjjya  al- 
laizo  manageino  ; 

32  Liuhaji  du  andhuleinai  jjiudom,  yah 
wulj)u  managein  Jjeinai  Israela. 

33  Yah  was  losef  yah  aijjei  is  silda- 
leikyandona  ana  J^aim,  J)oei  rodida  wesun 
bi  ina. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

19  Maria  geheold  ealle  das  word,  on 
hyre  lieortau  smeagende. 

20  Da  gewendon  ham  da  hyrdas,  God 
wuldrigende  and  heriende  on  eallum 
dam  de  In  gehyrdon  and  gesawon,  swa 
to  him  gecweden  waes.''' 

21  JEiter  dam  de  ehta  dagas  ge- 
fyllede  Avseron,  dset  dset  cild  emb-snyden 
wsei^e,  his  nama  wses  Heelend,  se  wnes 
fram  engle  genemned,  str  he  on  innode 
ge-eacnod  wEere. 

22  And  sefter  dam  de  hyre  clsensunge 
dagas  gefyllede  Avgeron,  softer  Moyses 
se,  hi  Iseddon  hine  on  Hierusalem,  deet 
hi  hine  Gode  gesetton, 

23  Swa  swa  on  Drihtnes  Ee  uwriten  is, 
Dtet  selc  waepned  gecynd-lim  ontynende, 
by])  Drihtne  halig  genemned  ; 

24  And  dset  hig  offrunge  sealdon, 
pefter  dam  de  Drihtnes  se  gecweden  is, 
Twa  turtlan,  odde  twegen  culfran  brid- 
das. 

25  And  da  wses  an  man  on  Hieru- 
salem, dfes  nama  wses  Simeon  ;  and  des 
man  w?es  rihtw;s,  .  .  .  and  od  Is- 
rahela  fr5for  ge-anbidiende ;  and  Hillig 
Gast  him  on  wses. 

26  And  he  andsware  fram  dam  Haleg- 
an  Gttste  onfeng,  dset  he  dea)>  ne  ge- 
sawe,  buton  he  ser  Drihten  Crist  ge- 
sawe. 

27  And  on  gaste  he  on  da^t  tempel 
com.  And  da  his  magas  Istddon  done 
Heel  end,  dfet  hig  for  him  softer  dajre 
Ee  gewunan  dydon, 

28  He  onfeng  hine  mid  hys  handum, 
and  God  bletsode,  and  cwte];, 

29  Drihten,  nu  du  Isetst  dinne  ];eow 
^fter  dinum  worde  on  sibbe  ; 

30  Fordam  mine  eagan  gesawon  dine 
hsele, 

3 1  Da  du  ge-earwodest  beforan  ansyne 
eallra  folca ; 

32  Leoht  to  J:eoda  awrigenesse,  and  to 
dines  folces  wuldre  Israhel.''' 

33  Da  wses  his  feeder  and  his  modor 
wundriende  be  dam,  de  be  him  gesEede 
wseron. 


n.  19-33]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

1 9  Forsoth  Marie  ko])tc  alio  tlics  worilis, 
beriiige  to  gidcre  in  hir  horte. 

20  And  tlic  seliei)Iicidis  turncden  ajen, 
gfloritiynj:^©  and  horiynge  God  in  alle 
thingis  that  tliei  liadden  herd  and  soyn, 
as  it  is  seyd  to  hem. 

2  1  And  aftir  that  ci';tc  daycs  weren 
endid,  that  the  child  schulde  be  cironni- 
sidid,  his  name  was  clepid  Jhosns,  which 
Avas  clepid  of  the  aungel,  bil'ore  he  was 
conseyued  in  wombe. 

2  2  And  aftir  that  the  dayes  of  pm'ga- 
cioim  of  ^larie  weren  fulHld,  vp  I\Ioyses 
lawe,  thei  token  him  in  to  Jerusalem, 
that  thci  schulden  offre  him  to  the 
Lord, 

23  As  it  is  writun  in  the  lawe  of  the 
TiOrd,  For  ech  male  kynde  openynge 
the  wombe  to  go  out,  schal  be  clepid 
hooly  to  the  Lord ; 

24  And  that  thei  schulen  5yue  an  off- 
lyuge,  vp  that  it  is  seid  in  the  lawe  of 
the  Lord,  A  peyre  of  turtris,  or  twey 
culuerc  briddis. 

25  And  lo  !  a  man  Avas  in  Jerusalem, 
to  whom  the  name  Symeon ;  and  this 
man  was  iust  and  dredful,  abidinge  the 
comfort  of  Israel ;  and  the  Hooly  Gost 
was  in  him. 

26  And  he  hadde  taken  answere  of  the 
Hooly  Gost,  that  he  schal  not  se  decth, 
no  but  he  sai3  first  the  Crist  of  the 
Lord. 

27  And  he  cam  in  spirit  in  to  the 
temple.  And  whenne  his  fadir  and 
modir  ledden  in  the  child  Jhesu,  that 
thei  schulden  do  vp  the  custom  of  lawe 
for  him, 

28  And  he  took  him  in  to  his  amies, 
and  he  blesside  God,  and  seide, 

29  Lord,  now  thou  leeuyst  thi  seruaunt 
vp  thi  word  in  pees  : 

30  For  myn  y^en  han  seyn  thin  helthe, 

31  Tiie  which  thou  hast  maad  redy 
bifore  the  face  of  allc  pcplis  ; 

32  Li5t  to  the  schewing  of  hethene, 
and  glorie  of  thi  peple  of  Israel. 

33  And  his  fadir  and  his  modir  weren 
wondringe  on  thes  thingis,  that  weren 
seid  of  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


281 


19  But  Mary  kept  all  thoose  sayingcs, 
and  pondered  them  in  hyr  hcrt. 

20  And  the  shepherdes  retourned, 
jiraysyngc  and  huulyngc  God  ftbr  all 
that  they  had  herde  and  sene,  cvyn  as 
itt  was  told  vnto  them. 

21  And  when  the  eyght  daye  was  come, 
thatt  the  ehyldc  shuld  be  circumcised, 
his  name  was  called  Jesus,  which  was 
named  off  the  angell,  before  he  was  con- 
ceaved  in  his  mothers  wombe. 

22  And  when  the  tyme  of  their  purifi- 
cacion,  after  the  lawe  of  Moyses,  was 
come,  they  brought  hym  to  Hierusalcm, 
to  present  hym  to  the  Lorde, 

23  As  yt  is  written  in  the  lawe  off  the 
Lorde,  Every  man  chylde  that  fyrst 
opcneth  the  matrix,  shalbe  called  holy 
to  the  Loi'de  ; 

24  And  to  offer,  as  yt  ys  saydc  in  the 
lawe  of  the  Lorde,  A  payre  off  turtle 
doves,  or  ij.  yonge  pigions. 

25  And  beholde !  thei-e  was  a  man  in 
Hierusalem,  whose  name  was  Simeon ; 
and  the  same  man  was  iuste  and  feared 
God,  and  longed  for  the  eonsolacion  off 
Israhel ;  and  the  HolyGoost  was  in  hym. 

26  And  an  answer  was  geven  hym  of 
the  Holy  Goost,  that  he  shulde  not  so 
deethe,  before  he  had  scne  the  Lordes 
Christ. 

27  And  he  cam  by  inspiracion  in  to 
the  temple.  And  as  the  father  and 
mother  broght  in  the  chylde  Jesus,  to 
do  fur  hym  after  the  custome  of  the 
lawe, 

28  Then  toke  he  hym  vppe  in  his 
amies,    ....     and  sayde, 

29  Lorde,  nowe  lettest  thou  thy  ser- 
vaunt  departe  in  peace  accordinge  to 
thy  ])ronics  ; 

30  For  myne  eyes  have  scne  the  savcour 
sent  from  the, 

31  Which  thou  hast  prepared  before 
the  face  of  all  people  ; 

32  A  light  to  lighten  the  gcntyls,  and 
the  glory  off  thy  people  Israhel. 

33  And  his  father  and  mother  mervel- 
led  att  thoose  thinges,  which  were  spoken 
off  hym. 


282 


GOTHIC,  360. 


34  Yah  })iu)^ida  ina  Swmaion,  yali  qa]j 
du  Mari'in,  ai}jein  is,  Sai !  sa  ligijj  du 
drusa  yah  usstassai  managaize  in  Is- 
raela,  yah  du  taiknai  andsakanai. 


35  Yah  Jjan  |)eina  silbons  saiwala 
JjairhgaggiJ)  liairus,  ei  andhulyaindau  us 
managaiin  hairtain  mitoneis. 

36  Yah  was  Anna  praufeteis,  dauhtar 
Fanuelis,  us  kunya  Aseris.  Soh  fram- 
aldra  dage  managaize,  libandei  niij)  abin 
yera  sibun  fram  magajjein  seinai. 


37  Soh  ]>an  widuwo  yere  ahtautehund 
yah  fid\yor ;  soh  ni  afiddya  fairra  alh, 
fastubnyam  yah  bidoni  blotande  Frau- 
yan  nahtam  yah  dagam. 

38  Soh  jjizai  wheilai  atstandandei,  and- 
haihait  Frauyin,  yah  rodida  bi  ina  in 
allaim  Jjaim  usbeidandani  hijjon  lairu- 
saulwmos. 

39  Yah  h\\>e  ustauhun  allata,  bi  witoda 
Frauyins,  gawandidedun  sik  in  Ga- 
leilaian,  in  baurg  seina  ISTazaraijj. 

40  I})  })ata  barn  wohs,  yah  swinJ)noda, 
ahmins  fuUnands  yah  handugeins ;  yah 
ansts  Gu]?s  was  ana  imma. 

41  Yah  wratodedun  ]>ai  birusyos  is 
yera  Avhammeh  in  lairusalem,  at  duly 
paska. 

42  Yah  bi])e  war}?  twahbwintrus,  us- 
gaggandam  }>an  im  in  lairusaulwnia,  bi 
biuhtya  duljjais, 

43  Yah  ustiuhandam  jjans  dagans,  mi];- 
|)ane  gawandidedun  sik  aftra,  gastoj) 
lesus  sa  magus  in  lairusalem,  yali  ni 
wisedun  losef  yah  aij>ei  is. 

44  Hugyandona  in  gasin]jyam  ina  wis- 
an,  qemun  dagis  wig,  yah  sokidedun  iua 
in  ganijjyam  yah  in  kunjjam. 

45  Yah  ni  bigitandona  ina,  gawandi- 
dedun sik  in  lairusalem,  sokyaudona 
iua. 

46  Yah  war]?,  afar  dagans  Jjrins  bige- 
tun   ina  in  allh,   sitandan  in  midyaim 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.  [St.  Luke 

34  And  da  bletsode  hig  Simeon,  and 
cwse]j  to  Marian,  his  meder,  Loca  nu  ! 
des  is  on  hryre  and  on  eeryst  asett 
mauegra  on  Israhel,  and  on  tacen,  dam 
de  wid-cwedeu  byjj. 

35  And  his  sweord  dine  stiwle  |;urh- 
fserjj,  dset  gejjohtas  syn  a\vrigene  of 
manegum  heortum. 

36  And  Anna  wses  witegestre,  Fan- 
ueles  dohtor,  of  Asseres  mseg})e.  Deos 
wunode  masnigne  dseg,  and  lieo  lyfode 
mid  byre  Avere  seofen  gear  of  byre 
fsemnhade. 

37  And  heo  wjes  wuduwe  od  feower 
and  hund-eahtatig  geara ;  seo  of  dain 
temple  ne  gewat,  dneges  and  nihtes 
j'eowigende  on  ftestenuni  and  on  hal- 
suugum. 

38  And  deos  dsere  tide  becumende, 
Drihtne  andette,  and  be  liim  spriiec 
callum  dam  de  ge-anbidedon  Hierus- 
alem  alysednesse. 

39  And  da  hi  ealle  piing  gefyldon, 
fefter  Drilitnes  se,  hi  gehwurfon  on 
Galileam,  on  heora  ceastre  Nazareth. 

40  S5)5lice  dait  cild  weox,  and  wa^s 
gestrangod,  wisdomes  full ;  and  Godes 
gyfu  wees  on  him. 

41  And  his  magas  ferdon  selce  gcare 
to  Hierusalem,  on  easter-da?ges  freols- 
tide. 

42  And  da  he  wses  twelf  wintre,  hy 
foron  to  Hierusalem,  to  dam  easterlican 
freolse,  jsefter  hyra  gewunan, 

43  And  gefylledum  dagum,  da  hig 
agen-gehwurfon,  belaf  se  Hfelend  on 
Hierusalem,  and  his  magas  dset  nyston. 

44  Wendon  dfet  lie  on  hcora  gefere 
wsere,  da  conion  hig  tines  dreges  fper, 
and  bine  sohton  betweox  his  magas  and 
his  ciidan. 

45  Da  hig  hyne  ne  fundon,  big  ge- 
wendon  to  Hierusalem,  bine  secende. 

46  Da,  sefter  |)rim  dagum  hig  fundon 
bine  on  dam  temple,  sittende  on  mid- 


ir.  34-46.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

34  And  Symeon  blcsside  hem,  and 
scidc  to  Mario,  his  inodir,  Lo  !  tliis  is 
put  in  to  the  fallingc  and  in  to  the  rys- 
iuge  a5cn  of  many  men  in  Israel,  and 
in  to  a  tokenc,  to  whom  it  schal  be 
a5einseid. 

35  And  a  swcrd  schal  passe  tliorw  thin 
owne  soule,  that  thou3tis  be  schewid  of 
manye  hertis. 

26  And  Anna  was  a  prophctisse,  the 
dou5tir  of  Fanuol,  of  the  lynage  of 
Aser.  And  sche  liadde  gon  forth 
in  many  dayes,  and  hadde  lyiied  with 
hir  hoscbonde  seuen  5ecr  fro  hir  mayd- 
cnhed. 

37  And  this  was  a  widowe  til  to  foure 
score  5cer  and  foure ;  which  departidc 
not  fro  the  temple,  seru3'nge  ny3t  and 
day  to  fastingis  and  bisechingis. 

38  And  tliis  in  thilke  our  aboue  com- 
ynge,  knowlcchide  to  the  Lord,  and 
spak  of  him  to  alle  that  abiden  the  re- 
dempciouu  of  Israel. 

39  And  as  thci  haddcn  pcrfj-tli  doon 
alle  thingis,  by  the  lawe  of  the  Lord, 
thei  turuyden  a5eu  in  to  Galilee,  in  to 
her  citee  Xazaretli. 

40  Sothli  the  child  wax,  and  was  coum- 
fortid,  ful  of  wysdoni ;  and  the  grace  of 
God  was  in  him. 

41  And  his  fadir  and  niodir  wenten  by 
alle  5eeris  in  to  Jerusalem,  in  the  so- 
lempne  day  of  paske. 

42  And  whanue  Jliesus  was  maad  of 
twelue  5ceris,  hem  sti5ynge  vp  in  to  Je- 
rusalem, by  custom  of  the  feeste  day, 

43  And  the  dayes  eudid,  whanne  thei 
turneden  ajen,  the  child  dwelte  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  his  fadir  and  modir  kncAven 
not. 

44  Forsothe  thei  gessinge  him  to  be  in 
the  felowschipe,  camen  the  wey  of  a  day, 
and  sou5ten  him  a  mong  his  cosyns  and 
knowcn. 

45  x\nd  thci  not  fyndinge,  wenten  a3en 
in  to  Jerusalem,  sekynge  him. 

46  And  it  was  don,  aftir  the  thriddc 
day  thei   founden    him  in   the  temple, 


TYNDALE,  1K26. 


283 


34  And  Simeon  blessed  them,  and  sayd 
vnto  Mary,  his  mother,  Behold  I  this 
ehildc  shalbc  the  fall  and  rcsurreccion 
oti'  many  in  Israhel,  and  a  signe,  which 
shalbc  spokyn  agaynste. 

35  And  moreover  the  sweardc  shall 
pearce  the  very  hcrt  off  the,  that  the 
though  tes  of  many  hertcs  maye  be 
opened. 

36  And  there  was  Anna  a  proi)hetes, 
the  doughter  of  Phanucl,  of  tribe  of 
Aser.  And  she  was  off  a  greate  age, 
and  had  lived  with  an  husbande  .vij. 
yere  from  her  virgiuite. 

37  And  this  Avedowe  was  aboute  .iiij. 
scoore  and  .iiij.  yere  off  age  ;  which 
went  never  oute  of  the  temple,  but 
served  there  with  fastinge  and  prayer 
nyght  and  daye. 

38  And  she  cam  forth  that  same  lioure, 
and  praysed  God,  and  spake  of  hym  to 
all  that  loked  for  redempcion  in  Hieru- 
salem. 

39  And  as  sone  as  they  had  performed 
all  thinges,  accordinge  to  the  lawe  off 
the  Lordc,  they  returned  into  Galile,  into 
their  awne  cite  Nazareth. 

40  And  the  childe  grcwe,  and  wexed 
stronge  in  sprete,  and  was  full  off  wys- 
dom  ;  and  the  favour  of  God  was  with 
hym. 

41  And  his  father  and  mother  went  to 
Hicrusalem  every  yeare,  att  the  feeste 
of  ester. 

42  And  when  he  was  xij.  yere  olde, 
they  went  vppc  to  Hicrusalem,  after  the 
custome  of  the  feeste, 

43  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  the 
dayes,  as  they  returned  home,  the  chylde 
Jesus  boode  styll  in  Hicrusalem, vnknow- 
ynge  to  his  father  and  mother. 

44  For  they  supposed  he  had  bene  in 
the  company,  they  cam  a  days  iorney, 
and  sought  hym  aniougc  their  kyusfolke 
and  acquayntuuncc. 

45  And  founde  hym  not,  they  went 
backe  agayne  to  Hicrusalem,  and  sought 
hym. 

46  And  hit  fortuned,  that  after  .iij. 
dayes  they  fouiide  hym  in  the  temple, 


284 


GOTHIC,  360. 


laisaryam,  yah  laausyandaii  im  yali  fraih- 
nandan  ins. 

47  Usgeisuodedun  ]3an  allai  Jjai  baus- 
yandans  is,  ana  frodein  yah  andawaurd- 
yam  is. 

48  Yah  gasaiwhandans  ina  siklaleic- 
idedun.  Yah  qajj  du  imma  so  aijsei  is, 
Magau,  wha  gatawides  uns  swa  1  Sai  ! 
sa  atta  ))eins  yah  ik  Avinnandona  soki- 
dedum  jjuk. 

49  Yah  qaj)  du  im,  Wha  J)atei  soki- 
dedu})  mik  1  niu  Avissedu}),  J^atei  in  Jjaim 
attins  meiuis,  skulda  wisan  1 

50  Yah  iya  ni  fro})un  J^amma  Avauvda, 
patei  rodida  du  im. 

51  Yah  iddya  mi)?  im,  yah  qam  in 
Nazaraijj,  yah  was  uthausyauds  im.  Yah 
in])ei  is  gafastaida  ]>o  waurda  alia  in 
hah'tin  seinamma. 

52  Yah  lesus  })aih  frodein,  yah  wahs- 
tau,  yah  anstai,  at  Gujja  yah  manuam. 


Chap.  III.  i  In  yera  j^an  fimfla- 
taihundin  ))iudinassaus  Teibaiviaus,  Kal- 
saris,raginondinPuntiau  Peilatau  ludaia, 
yah  fidurraginya  |ns  Galeilaias,  Herodeis, 
FiHppauzuh,  \^an  broprs  is,  fidurrag- 
inya })is  Ituraias,  yah  Trakauneitidaus 
landis,  yah  Lwsaniaus,  Abeileni  fidur- 
raginya, 

2  At  auhmistam  gudyam  Annin  yah 
Kayafin,  AvarJ)  waurd  Gujis  at  lohannen, 
Zachariins  sunau,  in  au])idai, 

3  Yah  qam  and  allans  gauyans  laur- 
danaus,  meryands  dau2:)ein  idreigos  du 
fraleta  frawaurhte. 

4  Swaswe  gamelid  ist  in  bokom  waurde 
Esaeiins,  praufetaus,  qijjandins,  Stibna 
wopyandins  in  au]>idai,  Mamveid  wig 
Frauyins,  raihtos  waurkeijj  staigos  is. 

5  All  dalei  usfullyada,  yah  all  fairgunye 
yah  hlaine  gahnaiwyada ;  yah  wair))i|? 
))ata  wraiqo  du  raihtarama,  yah  usdrus- 
teis  du  wijram  slaihtaim  : 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

dan  dam  lareowum,  hlystende  and  hi 
ahsiende. 

47  Da  wundrodon  big  ealle  de  ge- 
hyrdon,  be  his  gleawscipe  and  bys  and- 
swarum. 

48 Da  cw8e{3  his  modor 

to  him,  Sunu,  bwi  dydest  dti  unc  dus  1 
din  feder  and  ic  sarigende  de  s5hton. 


49  Da  cwje])  he  to  him,  Hwset  is  doet 
gyt  me  sobton?  nyste  gyt,  d»t  me 
gebyra})  to  beonne,  on  dam  Jjingum  de 
mines  feeder  synd  1 

50  Da  ne  ongeaton  big  dset  word,  de 
he  to  him  spraec. 

51  Da  ferde  he  mid  him,  and  com  to 
Nazareth,  and  wa3s  him  under-)jeod. 
And  bis  modor  geheold  ealle  das  word, 
on  byre  beortan  smeagende. 

52  And  se  Hetlend  j'eab  on  wisdome, 
and  on  ylde,  and  mid  gyfe,  mid  Gode 
and  mid  mannum. 


Chap.  III.  i  ■'■Sojjlice  dam  fifteojjan 
geai-e  dses  Caseres  anwealdes,  Tiberii, 
begymendum  dam  Pontiscan  Pilats 
Iudea-})eode,  feorj^an  deeles  riea  Galilee, 
Herode,  Pilippo,  bis  breder,  feorjian 
dseles  rica  Iturie,  and  dses  rices  Tra- 
conitidis,  and  Lisania,  Abiline  feorjjan 
daeles  rica, 

2  Under  daera  sacerda  ealdrum  Anna 
and  Caifa,  Godes  word  wses  geworden 
ofer  Zacbarias  sunu,  on  westene. 

3  And  he  com  into  eall  lordanes  rice, 
bodigende  daed-bote  fullubt  and  synna 
forgyfenesse. 

4  Swa  bit  awriten  ys  on  Isaies  bee, 
dses  witegan,  Clypiendes  stefu  on  west- 
ene, Gegearwia])  Drihtnes  weg,  doj)  bis 
sidas  i"ihte. 

5  JE'\c  denu  h\]>  gefylled,  and  selc 
munt  and  beorb  byjj  genj-derod ;  and 
]>weoru  beo)>  on  gerihte,  and  uugerydu 
on  smede  wegas ; 


II.  47 -III-  5]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

sittinj^c  in  the  mj-ddil  of  doctours,  hccr- 
inge  hem  and  axingc  honi. 

4  7  Sutlili  allc  men  tliat  hcrden  liim, 
Mondridon  on  the  prudence  and  answeris 
of  liini. 

48  And  thci  scyngc  wondiidon.  And 
liis  modir  seide  to  him,  Sone,  what  hast 
thou  don  to  vs  thus  1  Lo  !  thi  fadir  and 
I  sorwynge  han  sou5t  tliec. 

49  And  he  seith  to  hem,  AVhat  is  it 
that  5c  sou5ten  me?  wisten  56  not,  for 
in  tho  thingis  that  ben  of  my  fadir,  it 
bihoucth  me  to  be  ? 

50  And  thei  vndirstodcn  not  the  word, 
which  he  spak  to  hem. 

51  And  he  cam  doun  with  hem,  and 
cam  to  Xazareth,  and  was  suget  to  hem. 
And  his  modir  kepte  to  gidere  alle  thes 
wordis,  beriiige  to  gidere  in  hir  herte. 

52  And  Jhesu  profitidc  in  wysdom, 
age,  and  grace,  anemptis  God  and  men. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


28."> 


Chap.  III.  i  Forsothe  in  the  fyf- 
tcnthe  5eer  of  the  empyre  of  Tiberie, 
emperour,  Pihit  of  Pounce  kepinge  Judee, 
sothli  Eroude,  prince  of  CTalilee,  Philip 
forsoth,  his  brother,  prince  of  Ituree, 
and  of  the  cuntre  of  Tracon,  and  Lisany, 
prince  of  Abilyn, 

2  Vndir  the  princis  of  prestis  Annas 
and  Cayfas,  the  word  of  the  Lord  is 
maad  on  John,  the  sone  of  Zachai-ie,  in 
desert. 

3  And  he  cam  in  to  al  the  cuntre  of 
Jordan,  prechinge  baptym  of  penaunce 
in  to  remysciouu  of  synncs. 

4  As  it  is  writun  in  the  book  of  wordis 
of  Ysaye,  the  i>rophete,  The  voys  of  oon 
criynge  in  desert,  !Make  50  redy  the 
weye  of  the  Lord,  make  je  his  pathis 
ri3t. 

5  Ech  valey  schal  be  fulfiUid,  and  ech 
mountayn  and  litil  hil  schal  be  maad 
I0U3  ;  and  schrewide  thingis  schulen  be 
in  to  dressid  thingis,  and  scharpe  thingis 
in  to  plajTie  weyes  ; 


sittinge  in  the  middes  of  tlic  doctours, 
both  hoaryiigc  them  and  posinge  tliem. 

47  And  all  that  herdc  hym,  mcrvcllcd 
at  his  witt  and  answers. 

48  And  when  they  sawe  hym  they  wci*e 
astonyed.  And  his  mcjther  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Sone,  why  haste  thou  thus  dealte 
with  vs?  Beholde!  thy  father  and  I 
have  sorowed  and  sought  the. 

49  And  lie  sayd  vnto  them,  Howe  is  it 
that  ye  sought  me  ?  wist  ye  not,  that  I 
muste  goo  aboute  my  fathers  busines  ? 

50  And  they  vnderstod  nott  the  saynge, 
that  he  spake  to  them. 

51  And  he  went  with  them,  and  cam 
to  Nazareth,  and  was  obedient  to  them. 
His  mother  kept  all  these  thynges  in 
her  hert. 

52  And  Jesus  increased  in  Avisdom, 
and  age,  and  in  favoure,  with  God  and 
man. 


Chap.  III.  i  In  the  fiftenthe  yeare 
of  the  raigne  off  Tiberius,  the  emperourc, 
Pontius  Pilate  beinge  leftenaunt  of  Jewry, 
and  Herode  beinge  tetrarch  of  Galile, 
and  his  brother  Philip,  tetrarch  in  Iturea, 
and  in  the  region  of  Traconitis,  and  Ly- 
sanias  the  tetrarch  of  Abyline, 

2  AVhen  Anna  and  Cayphas  were  the 
bye  prestes,  the  commaundment  of  God 
was  puplisshed  vnto  Jhon,  the  sonne  off 
Zacarias,  in  the  wildernes. 

3  And  he  cam  into  all  the  coostes 
aboute  Jordan,  preachynge  the  ba])tim  of 
repentaunce  for  the  remission  of  synnes. 

4  As  it  is  written  in  the  boke  of  the 
sayinges  of  Esayas,  the  prophet,  which 
saeth,  The  voyce  off  a  cryar  in  wylder- 
nes.  Prepare  the  waye  off  the  Lorde, 
make  hys  pathes  straight. 

5  Every  valley  shalbc  fyllcd,  and  every 
mountayne  and  hyll  shalbe  broght  lowe  ; 
and  crocked  thynges  shalbe  made  streight, 
and  the  rought  wayes  shalbe  made  smoth ; 


286  GOTHIC,  360.  ANGLO-SAXO^,  gg^.     [St.  Luke 

6  Yah  gasalwlii])  all  leike  nasein  Gujjs.         6  And  selc  flsesc  gesih]>  Gocles  heele. 


7  Qa})  J^an  du  }>aim  atgaggandelm 
manageim,  daupyan  fram  sis,  Kuni  nad- 
re,  wlias  gataiknida  izwis  })liuhaii  faura 
J?auima  anawairjiln  hatiza  ? 

8  Waurkyaijj  nu  akran  waii'l^ata  id- 
reigos,  yah  ni  duginnaijj  qijjan  in  izwis, 
Attan  aigum  Abraham  ;  qi})a  auk  izwis, 
patei  mag  Guj)  us  stainam  Jjaim  urrais- 
yan  barna  Abrahama. 

9  Ajjjian  yu  so  aqizi  at  waurtim  bagme 
ligifj  ;  all  nu  bagme  unbairandane  akran 
god,  usmaitada,  yah  in  fon  galagyada. 


10  Yah  frehun  ina  manageins,  qi})- 
andans,  An  wha  tauyaima  1 

11  Andhafyands  jsan  qaj),  Sa  habands 
twos  paidos,  gibai  ]?amma  unhabandin  ; 
yah  sael  habai  matins,  samaleiko  tauyai. 

1 2  Qemun  ]?an  motaryos  daupyan  ;  yah 
qe])un  du  imma,  Laisari,  wha  tau- 
yaima 1 

13  paruh  qa{)  du  ira,  Ni  waiht,  ufar 
])atei  garaid  siyai  izwis,  lausyaijj. 

14  Frehun  ];an  ina  yah  ]>ai  militond- 
ans,  qi}5andans,  Yah  weis  wha  tau- 
yaima 1  Yah  qa)j  du  im,  Ni  mannanhun 
holojj,  ni  mannanhun  anamahtyaid,  yah 
waldaijj  annom  izwaraim, 

15  At  wenyandein  jmn  allai  managein, 
yah  Ijagkyandamallaiminhairtam  seinaim 
bi  lohannein,  niu  aufto  sa  wesi  Christus, 

16  Aiidhof  }mn  Johannes,  allaim  qij;- 
ands,  Ik  allis  izwis  watin  daupya ;  i}? 
gaggijj  swinj^oza  mis,  ])izei  ik  ni  im 
wairjjs  andbindan  skaudaraip  skohis  is  ; 
sail  izwis  daupeij)  in  Ahmin  Weihamma 
yah  fuuin. 

17  Habands  winjnskauron  in  handau 
seinai,  yah  gahraineij?  gajjrask  sein,  yah 
briggijj  kaurn  in  bansta  seinamma ;  'iy 
ahana  intandeijj  funin  unwhajinandin. 

18  Managu|5-|>an  yah  anjjar  jjrafstyands, 
]jiu])spilloda  managein. 


7  S5})lice  he  cwte})  to  dam  menegimi, 
de  ferdon,  dset  hi  weeron  gefullode  fram 
him,  Eala  ge  nasddrena  cynn,  hwa  set- 
ywde  eow  dtet  ge  fleon  fram  dam  to- 
weardan  yrre  ? 

8  D6}>  geornlice  weordlice  dsed-bote 
wsestmas,  and  ne  ongynue  ge  cwedan. 
We  habba})  us  to  fancier  Abraham  ;  ic 
secge  eow,  d-xt  God  is  swa  mihtig  dfet 
he  mseg  of  dysum  stanum  Abrahames 
beam  aweccan. 

9  Nil  is  seo  sex  aset  to  dtes  treowes 
Avyrtruman  ;  witodlice  jelc  treow  de  ne 
bryng})  godne  wtestm,  bij)  forcorfen,  and 
on  fyr  aworpen. 

10  Da  ahsodon  hyne  da  menegu,  and 
cwredon,  Hw£et  do  we  1 

1 1  Da  cwsejj  he  to  him,  Se  de  hsef)) 
twa  tunecan,  sylle  dam  de  nsefp ;  and 
dam  gelice  do,  se  de  mettas  ha3f[>. 

12  Dii  comon  da  miinfullan  dtet  hig 
a[nvegene  waeron ;  and  cwaedon  to  him, 
Lareow,  hwpet  d5  we  1 

13  Da  cwse]?  he,  Ne  do  ge  naht  mare, 
donne  dset  eow  geset  is. 

14  Dil  ahsodon  hine  da  cempan,  and 
cwa?don.  And  hwpet  do  we  1  Da  ssede 
he  him,  Ne  slea  ge  n inne,  ne  tale  ne 
do}',  and  beo];  edhylde  on  eoAvrum  and- 
lyfenum. 

15  Sol'lice  dam  folce  w^enendum,  and 
eallum  on  hyra  heortan  Jjencendum  be 
lohanne,  liAvseder  he  Crist  wsere, 

16  Da  andswarode  lohannes,  him  eal- 
lum sccgcnde,  Witodlice  ic  eow  on 
wsetere  fullige  ;  s6[jlice  cymj;  strengra 
donne  ic,  d?es  ic  ne  com  wyrde  da;t  ic 
hys  sceo-jjwang  uncnytte;  lie  eow  fullaj? 
on  Halgum  Gaste  and  on  fyre. 

1 7  And  his  fann  ys  on  his  handa,  and 
he  feorma)/  his  bernes  fl5re,  and  ga- 
dera)j  hys  hAvsete  into  his  berne ;  dset 
ceaf  he  forbsernjj  on  unacwencedlicum 
fyre. 

18  Manega  odre  ping  bodigende,  he 
dset  folc  Iserde. 


III.  6-18.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

6  And  och  fleisch^  sclial  sc  the  liclthc 
of  Goil. 

7  Therforc  he  scidc  to  tlic  cumpanycs, 
the  whiche  wenten  out,  that  thei  schulclcn 
be  baptysid  of  hmi,  Kyndlis  of  od(h-is, 
Avho  schewide  to  50U  to  Hoe  fro  wraththe 
to  comynge  1 

8  Therfore  do  5e  worthi  fruytis  of  pcn- 
aimce,  and  bigynne  5e  not  to  seye,  We 
han  a  fodir  Abraham ;  sotldi  I  scic  to 
50U,  God  is  myjti  to  reise  of  thos 
stoones  the  sones  of  Abraham. 

9  Forsothc  now  an  ax  is  put  to  the 
roote  of  the  tree  ;  sothli  cch  tree  not 
makvnge  good  fruyt,  schal  be  kitt  doun, 
and  schal  be  sent  in  to  the  her. 

TO  And  the  cumpanyes  axden  him, 
seiynge,  What  therfore  schulen  we  do  1 

1 1  Sothli  he  answeringe  seide  to  hem, 
He  that  hath  twey  cootis,  5yue  to  him 
that  hath  non ;  and  he  that  hath  metis, 
do  on  lyk  manere. 

12  Sothli  and  pupplicans  camen  for  to 
be  baptised  ;  and  thei  seideu  to  him, 
Maistir,  what  schulen  we  don  1 

13  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Do  50  no 
thing  more,  than  that  that  is  ordeyned 
to  50U. 

14  Forsothe  and  kny5tis  axiden  him, 
seiynge,  What  schulen  also  we  do  ?  And 
he  seith  to  hem,  Smyte  50  wrongfulli  no 
man,  nether  make  5e  fals  chalengc,  and 
be  56  apaid  with  5oure  soudis. 

15  Forsoth  al  the  peple  gessinge,  and 
alle  men  thenkinge  in  her  hcrtis  of  John, 
lest  perauenture  he  were  Crist, 

16  John  answeride,  seyinge  to  alle 
men,  Sothli  I  baptise  50U  in  watir  ; 
forsothe  a  strengere  than  I  schal  come 
aftir  me,  of  which  I  am  not  worthi  for 
to  vnbynde  the  thwong  of  his  schoon  ; 
he  schal  baptyse  30U  in  the  Hooly  Gost 
and  fycr. 

I  7  Whos  Avynewyng  tool  in  his  liond, 
and  he  schal  purge  his  corn  floor,  and 
schal  gedere  the  whete  in  to  his  bcrnc ; 
sothli  the  chaffis  he  schal  brenne  in  fier 
Aii(|uenchable. 

18  Forsoth  and  he  moncstinge  manyc 
othere  thingis,  euangeliside  to  the  j^eple. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


287 


6  And  all  flesshc  shall  se  the  saveour 
sent  off  God. 

7  Then  saydc  he  to  the  people,  that 
were  come  to  be  baptised  of  hym,  O 
gencracion  of  vipers,  who  hath  shewed 
you  the  crafte  to  flye  from  wrath  to 
come  1 

8  Brynge  forth  due  frutes  of  repent- 
auncc,  and  begyn  nott  to  saye  in  youre 
selves.  We  have  Abraham  to  oure  father  ; 
for  I  say  vnto  you,  God  is  able  of  these 
stones  to  reyse  vppe  children  vnto  Abra- 
ham. 

9  NoAve  also  ys  the  axe  Icyd  vnto  the 
rote  oft'  the  trees  ;  every  tree  therfore 
which  bringeth  not  foi'th  good  frute, 
shalbe  hewen  doune,  and  caste  in  to  the 
fyre. 

I  o  And  the  people  axed  him,  sayinge, 
What  shall  we  do  then  1 

I I  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
He  that  hathe  ij.  coottes,  lett  hym  parte 
with  him  that  hath  none  ;  and  he  that 
hath  meate,  let  him  do  lyke  wyse. 

12  Then  cam  there  puplicans  to  be 
baptised  ;  and  sayde  vnto  hym.  Master, 
what  shall  we  do  1 

13  He  answered  vnto  them,  Ptequyre 
no  more,  then  that  which  ys  appoynted 
vnto  you. 

14  The  soudiers  lykewyse  demaunded 
off  hym,  sayinge.  And  what  shall  we  do  1 
And  he  sayde  to  them.  Do  violence  to 
noo  man,  nether  trouble  eny  man  wrong- 
fully, and  be  content  wyth  youre  Avages. 

15  As  the  people  Avere  in  a  doute,  and 
all  men  disputed  in  there  hertes  of  Jhon, 
AA'hcther  he  Avere  very  Christ, 

16  Jhon  ansAvered,  and  sayd  to  them 
all,  I  baptise  you  Avyth  Avater ;  butt  a 
stronger  then  I  commoth,  Avhose  shue 
latchet  I  am  nott  AA'orthy  to  vnloose ; 
he  Avill  baptise  you  Avith  the  Holy  Goost 
and  with  fyre. 

17  Which  hath  his  f;m  in  his  bond, 
and  Avil  pourge  his  floore,  and  Avill  gador 
his  corne  in  to  hys  barnc ;  and  the 
chaflfe  Avyll  he  bourne  Avith  fyre  that 
never  shalbe  quenched. 

18  And  many  other  thyngcs  in  hys  cx- 
bortacion,  preached  he  vnto  the  people. 


288 


GOTHIC,  360. 


19  Ij;  Herocles,  sa  taitrarkes,  gasakans 
fram  imma  bi  Herodiadein,  qen  brojjrs 
is,  yali  bi  alia  ])oei  gawaurlita  ubila 
Herodes, 

20  Anaaiauk  yali  j^ata  ana  alia,  yah  ga- 
iauk  ioliannea  in  karkarai. 

21  War]>  }ian,  bijje  daupida  alia  man- 
ageiu,  yah  at  lesu  ufdaupidaiuma,  yah 
bidyandin,  usluknoda  himins. 

22  Yah  atiddya  Ahma  sa  Weiha  leikis 
siunai,  swe  ahaks  ana  ina ;  yah  stibna 
us  hiniina  Avar}',  qijmndei,  pu  is  sunns 
meins  sa  liuba,  in  jjuzei  waila  galelk- 
aida. 

23  Yah  silba  was  lesus  swe  yei'e  ))ri- 
yetigiwe  uf  gakunjjai,  swaei  sunns  munds 
was  losefis,  sunaus  Heleis, 

24  Sunaus  Mat))atis,  sunaus  Laiwweis, 
sunaus  Mailkeis,  sunaus  Yannins,  sun- 
aus losefis, 

25  Sunaus  Matta|)iwis,  sunaus  Am- 
mons,  sunaus  Naumis,  sunaus  Aizleimis, 
sunaus  Naggais, 


26  Sunaus  MahaJ)is,  sunaus  Mattajjiaus, 
sunaus  Saimaieinis,  sunaus  losefis,  sun- 
aus lodins, 


27  Sunaus  lohannins,  sunaus  Resins, 
sunaus  Zauraubabilis,  sunaus  Salajjielis, 
sunaus  Nerins, 


28  Sunaus  Mailkeins,  sunaus  Addeins, 
sunaus  Kosamis,  sunaus  Airmodamis, 
sunaus  Heris, 


29  Sunaus  losezis,  sunaus  Aileiaizairis, 
sunaus  loreimis,  sunaus  Matta|)anis,  sun- 
aus Laiwweis, 

30  Sunaus  Swmaions,  sunaus  ludins, 
sunaus  losefis,  sunaus  lohannins,  sun- 
aus Aileiakeimis, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

19  Herodes,  se  feorjjan  daeles  rica,  da 
he  wajs  fram  him  ge}'read  be  djere 
Herodiadiscan,  hys  broder  wife,  and  be 
eallum  yfelum  de  Herodes  dyde, 

20  And  ofer  eall  dset  he  ge-icte,  da?t 
he  beclysde  lohannem  on  cwearterne. 

21  S6|)lice  waes  geworden,  da  eall  da^t 
folc  wa2S  gefullod,  and  dam  Hselende 
gefulledum,  and  gebiddendum,  heofon 
wses  ge-openod. 

22  And  se  Halega  Gast  astah  li'cham- 
Hcre  ansyne,  on  hyne  swa  an  culfre ; 
and  stefen  w£es  of  heofone  geworden, 
and  dus  cw?e|3,  Dii  eart  min  gecorena 
sunn,  on  de  me  gelicode. 

23  And  se  Hselend  w«s  on  ylde  swylce 
|)ritig  wintre,  dset  men  wendon  daet  he 
waere  losepes  sunn,  se  wees  Helies  sunn,''' 
24-38  se  wses  Nazareth.  Swa  of  cneor- 
ysse  on  cneorysse,  od  Adam,  se  wses 
Godes  sunu,  od  fif  and  hund-seofentig 
cneoryssa. 


III.  19-30.]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

19  Sothli  Eroude,  the  fortlic  |iriiice, 
wliannc  he  was  blamyd  of  John  for 
Herodias,  wyf  of  his  brother,  iiud  of  alle 
eucls  that  Eroud  dide, 

20  Addido  this  ouer  alio,  and  closidc 
John  in  i)risoun. 

2 1  Forsoth  it  was  don,  whannc  al  the 
peple  Avas  baptisid,  and  Jhesu  cristcuyd, 
and  prciynge,  hcneue  was  openyd. 

22  And  the  Hooly  Cost  cam  doun  in 
bodily  licknesse,  as  a  cnUierc  in  to  him  ; 
and  a  voys  was  niaad  fro  hcucnc,  Thou 
ert  my  dcrcworthe  sonc,  in  thee  it  hath 
I)lesid  to  me. 

23  And  Jhcsu  him  silf  was  bygynnynge 
as  of  thritti  5ecr,  that  he  was  gessid  the 
soue  of  Joseph,  which  was  of  Hely, 

24  Which  was  of  !Mathath,  Avhich  was 
of  Leuy,  wich  was  of  Melchy,  which  was 
of  Jamne,  that  was  of  Joseph, 

25  That  was  of  Mataty,  that  was  of 
Amos,  that  was  of  Naum,  that  was  of 
Ilely,  that  was  of  Nagge, 


26  That  was  of  Mathath,  that  was  of 
Mathatye,  that  was  of  Semy,  that  was 
of  Joseph,  that  was  of  Juda, 


27  That  was  of  Johanna,  that  was  of 
Eesa,  that  was  of  Zorol)abel,  that  was  of 
Salatiel,  that  was  of  Nery, 


28  Tliat  was  of  Melchy,  that  was  of 
Addy,  that  was  of  Cosan,  that  was  of 
Elmadan,  that  was  of  Her, 


29  That  was  of  Jesu,  that  was  of  Ele- 
asar,  that  was  of  Jorym,  that  was  of 
Mathath,  that  was  of  Leuy, 

30  That  was  of  Symeon,  that  was  of 
Juda,  that  was  of  Josepli,  that  was  of 
Jona,  that  was  of  Elyachim, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


289 


19  Then  Herodc,  the  tetracli,  when  he 
was  rebuked  of  hym  for  Herodias,  his 
brother  I'hilippcs  wyfe,  and  for  all  the 
cvyls  which  Herod  had  done, 

20  Added  this  above  all,  and  Icyd  Jhon 
in  preson. 

21  And  yt  fortuned,  as  all  the  ])eople 
receavcd  bajitim,  and  wlien  Jesus  was 
baptised,  and  did  praye,  that  heven  was 
Oldened. 

22  And  the  Holy  Goost  cam  doune  in 
a  bodely  shape,  lykc  a  dove  apon  him ; 
and  a  voycc  cam  from  heven,  sayinge, 
Thou  arte  my  dere  sonne,  in  the  do  I 
delyte. 

23  And  Jesus  him  silfe  was  about  thirty 
yere  of  age  when  he  began,  beinge  as 
men  supposed  the  sonne  of  Joseph, 
which  Joseph  was  the  sonne  of  Heli, 

24  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Mathat, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Levi,  which  was 
the  sonne  of  Melchi,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Janna,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Joseph, 

25  AVliich  Avas  the  sonne  of  Matattliias, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Amos,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Nahum,  which  was  the 
sonne  of  Esli,  which  was  the  sonne  of 
Nagge, 

26  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Maath, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Matathias,  which 
was  the  sonne  ot  Semei,  which  Avas  the 
sonne  of  Joseph,  which  was  the  sonne  of 
Juda, 

27  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Johanna, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Eliesya,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Zorobabel,  which  was 
the  sonne  of  Salathiel,  which  was  the 
Sonne  of  Neri, 

28  AVhich  was  the  sonne  of  Melchi, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Addi,  which  was 
the  sonne  of  Cosam,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Helmadam,  Avhich  was  the  sonne  of 
Her, 

29  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Jcso,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Helicser,  which  was 
the  Sonne  of  Joram,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Mattha,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Levi, 

30  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Simeon, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Juda,  which  was 
the  sonne  of  Joseph,  which  was  the 
Sonne  of  Jonam,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Jlcliacim, 

u 


290  GOTHIC,  36o- 

31  Sunaus  Mailaianis,  sunaus  Maein- 
anis,  sunaus  Mattaj;aiiis,  sunaus  Najjanis, 
sunaus  Daweidis. 


32  Sunaus  iaissaizis,  sunaus  Oljeidis, 
sunaus  Bauauzis,  sunaus  Salmonis,  sun- 
aus Naliassonis, 

33  Sunaus  Ameinadabis,  sunaus  Av- 
amis,  sunaus  Aizoris,  sunaus  Faraizis, 
sunaus  ludins, 


34  Sunaus  lakobis,  sunaus  Isakis,  sun- 
aus Abrabamis,  sunaus  parins,  sunaus 
Nakoris, 


35  Sunaus  Sairokis,  sunaus  Eagawis, 
sunaus  Falaigis,  sunaus  Aibairis,  sunaus 
Salamis, 


36  Sunaus  Kaeinanis,  sunaus  Arfak- 
sadis,  sunaus  Semis,  sunaus  Nauelis, 
sunaus  Lamaikis, 


37  Sunaus  Ma])usalis,  sunaus  Ainokis, 
sunaus  laredis,  sunaus  Maleilaielis,  sun- 
aus Kaeinanis, 


38  Sunaus  Ainosis,  sunaus  Sedis,  sun- 
aus Adamis,  sunaus  Gu})S. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Lu^f 


Chap.  IV.  i  1]j  lesus  Ahmins  Weib- 
is  fulls  ga^yandida  sik  fram  laurdanau, 
jab  taubans  was  in  abmin  in  au|)idai 

2  Dage  fidwortiguns,  fraisans  fram 
diabulau,  yab  ni  matida  waibt  in  dagam 
yainaim ;  yab  at  ustaubanaim  j^aim  dag- 
am,  bi[)e  gredags  war]?. 

3  Yab  qa})  du  imma  diabulus,  Yabai 
sunaus  siyais  Gujjs,  qi])  Jjamma  staina,, 
ei  wair))ai  blaibs. 

4  Yab  andbof  lesus  vn\>ra  ina  qipands. 


Chap.  IV.  i  SoJ^lice  se  Hselend  wres 
full  Haligum  Gaste  and  ferde  fram  lord- 
ane,  and  be  wtes  fram  Haligum  Gaste 
geleed  on  sumum  westene 

2  Feowertig  daga,  and  wses  fram  deofle 
costod,  and  be  on  dam  dagum  nan  {^ing 
ne  set ;  and  ctafn  gefylledum  dagum, 
bine  bingrcde. 

3  Da  cwx]>  se  deofol  bim  to,  Gif  ctii 
sy  Godes  sunu,  sege  disum  stiine,  fet 
be  to  blafe  geweorde. 

4  Da  andswarode  bim  se  Hselend,  Hit 


III.  3 1. -TV.  4.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

31  That  was  of  ^NFclca,  that  was  of 
Mcnna,  that  was  of  .Mathatha,  that  was 
of  Nathan,  that  was  of  Dauith, 


32  That  was  of  Jesse,  that  was  of  Obcth, 
that  was  of  Booz,  that  was  of  Salmon, 
that  was  of  Xasou, 

33  That  was  of  Amynadab,  that  was  of 
Aram,  that  was  of  Esrom,  that  was  of 
Pharcs,  that  Avas  of  Judas, 


34  That  was  of  Jacob,  that  was  of 
Ysaac,  that  was  of  Abraham,  that  was 
of  Tare,  that  was  of  Xacor, 


35  That  was  of  Seruch,  that  was  of 
Eagan,  that  was  of  Phaleth,  that  was  of 
Hcber,  that  was  of  Sale, 


36  That  was  of  Cay  nan,  that  was  of 
Arfaxat,  that  was  of  Sem,  that  Avas  of 
Xoe,  that  was  of  Lameth, 


37  That  was  of  ^Matusale,  that  was  of 
Enok,  that  was  of  Jarcth,  that  was  of 
MaU^licl,  that  was  of  Caynan, 


38  That  was  of  Enos,  tliat  was  of  Seth, 
that  was  of  Adam,  that  was  of  God. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


291 


Chap.  IV.  i  Forsothe  Jliesu  ful  of 
the  Hooly  Gost  turnede  a5en  fro  Jordan, 
and  was  led  by  the  spirit  in  to  desert 

2  Fourty  daycs,  and  was  tcmjitid  of  the 
deuyl,  and  cut  no  thing  in  tho  dayes ; 
and  tho  daycs  endid,  he  hungiide. 

3  Forsothe  the  deuel  seide  to  him,  If 
thou  ert  Goddis  sonc,  seyc  to  this  stoon, 
that  it  be  maad  bred. 

4  And  Jhcsus  answcridc  to  him,  It  is 


31  Which  was  the  sonnc  of  Mclca, 
whidi  was  the  sonne  of  Mcnajii,  wliich 
was  the  sonne  of  Mathatlian,  which  was 
the  sonnc  of  Nathan,  which  was  the 
Sonne  of  David, 

32  A\' liicli  was  the  sonnc  of  Jesse,  which 
was  tlie  sonnc  of  Obcd,  which  was  the 
sonnc  of  l^oos,  whicli  was  the  sonne  of 
Sahnon,  which  was  tlie  sonnc  of  Naason, 

33  Which  was  the  sonnc  of  Aminadab, 
whicli  was  the  sonne  of  Aram,  which 
was  the  sonnc  of  Esrom,  which  was  the 
Sonne  of  Phai'es,  which  was  the  sonnc  of 
Jiida, 

34  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Jacob, 
which  was  the  sonne  of  Ysaac,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Abraham,  which  was 
the  sonne  of  Tharra,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Nachor, 

35  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Saruch, 
v/liich  was  the  sonne  of  Ragan,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Phalec,  which  was  the 
sonne  of  Heber,  which  was  the  sonne  of 
Sala, 

36  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Cainan, 
wliich  was  the  sonne  of  Arphaxat,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Sem,  which  was  the 
Sonne  of  Noe,  which  was  the  sonne  of 
Lameth, 

37  AVhich  was  the  sonne  of  Mathusala, 
wliich  was  the  sonne  of  Enoch,  which 
was  the  sonne  of  Jareth,  which  was  the 
sonne  of  Malalehel,  which  was  the  sonne 
of  Cainan, 

38  Which  was  the  sonne  of  Enos,  which 
was  the  sonnc  of  Seth,  which  was  the 
sonne  of  Adam,  which  was  the  sonne  of 
God. 


Chap.  IV.  i  Jesus  then  full  off  the 
Holy  Goost  returnyd  from  lordan,  and 
was  caryed  off  the  sprete  into  a  wildcr- 
nes, 

2  And  was  xl.  daycs  tempted  of  the 
dcvyl,  and  in  thoosc  daycs  ate  he  no 
thingc ;  and  when  they  Averc  ended,  he 
after  Avard  hongrcd. 

3  And  the  dcvyll  sayd  vnto  him,  Yf 
thou  be  the  sonne  of  God,  commaunde 
this  stone,  that  he  be  breed. 

4  And  Jesus  answered  hym,  sayinge, 

U2 


i92 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Gamelid  "ist,    patei  ni  bi   hi  alb  ainana 
libaid  manna,  ak  bi  all  waurde  GuJ)S. 

5  Yali  ustiubands  'ina  diabulaus  ana 
falrgunl  baubata,  atauglda  imma  allans 
J)iudmassuus  jjis  mldyungardls  in  stika 
melis  ; 

6  Yah  qa]j  du  imma  sa  dlabulus,  pus 
glba  l^ata  waldufni  })lze  allata,  yah  ^\allJm 
ize,  unte  mis  atglban  ist,  yab  J)iswbam- 
meb  })el  Avllyau  glba  Jsata ; 

7  pu  nu  yabal  inweitis  mik  in  and- 
■wairjjya  meinamma,  wairj)i]3  fern  all. 

8  Yab  andbafyands  imma   lesus    qa|>, 

Gamelid  ist,  Frauyan  Gu}> 
I'cinana  inweitais,  yab  imma  aiuamma 
luUafabyais. 

9  paJ)rob  gataub  ina  in  lairusalem, 
yab  gasatida  ina  ana  giblin  albs,  yab 
qa))  du  imma,  Yabai  sunus  siyais  Gujjs, 
wairp  |)uk  Jmjiro  dala}5  ; 

10  Gamelid  ist  auk,  patei  aggilum 
seinaim  anabiudi]?  bi  J;uk,  du  gafastan 
Ink, 

1 1  Yab  Jjatei  ana  bandum  ])uk  uf  bab- 
and,  ei  Avban  ni  gastagqyais  bi  staina 
fotu  |)einana. 

12  Yab  andbafyands  qa})  imma  Icsus, 
patei  qi]jan  ist,  Ni  fraisais  Frauyan  Gujj 
peinana. 

13  Yab  ustiubands  all  fraistobnyo, 
diabulus  afstoj)  fairra  imma  und  mel. 

14  Yab  gawandida  sik  lesus  in  mabtai 
abmins  in  Galeilaian,  yab  merijja  ur- 
rann  and  all  gawi  bisitande  bi  ina. 

15  Yab  is  laisida  in  gaqumjjim  ize, 
mikilids  fram  allaim. 

16  Yab  qam  in  JSTazarai]?,  |)arei  was 
fodijjs,  yab  galaij)  inn  bi  biubtya  sein- 
amma  in  daga  sabbato  in  swnagogein, 
yab  usstoj)  siggwan  bokos. 

17  Yab  atgibanos  wesun  imma  bokos 
Eisaeiins,  praufetus  ;  yab  uslukands  Jjos 
bokos,  bigat  stad  j^arei  was  gamelid, 

.18  Abma  Frauyins  ana  mis,  in  })izei 
gasalboda  mik ;  du  wailameryan  unled- 
aim  insaudida  mik,   du  ganasyan  ]>ans 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

is    awriten,    Dset   se    man   ne  lyfa))  be 
blafe  anum,  ac  of  Belcum  Godes  worde. 

5  And  da  Igedde  se  deofol  byne,  and 
setywde  bim  ealle  ricu  eorj^an  ymbe- 
bwyrftes  on  anre  byrbtm-bwile ; 

6  And  to  bim  cwsej),  Ealne  disne  an- 
weald  ic  de  sylle,  and  byra  wuldor, 
fordam  de  bi  me  synd  gesealde,  and  ic 
bi  sylle  dam  de  ic  wylle  ; 

7  Witodlice  ealle  big  beo]^  dine,  gif  dv. 
ge-eadmetst  beforan  me. 

8  Da  andswarode  bim  se  Hselend,     . 

Hit  is  awriten,  Dribten  dinne 
God  du  ge-eadmetst,  and  bim  anum 
)jeowast. 

9  Da  Isedde  be  byne  on  Hierusalem, 
and  gesette  bine  ofer  dses  temples  bricg, 
and  bim  to  cwse}),  Gyf  du  sy  Godes 
sunu,  asend  de  beonun  nyder ; 

10  S6j)Hce  byt  is  awriten,  Dajt  be  bys 
englum  be  de  bebyt,  daet  big  de  ge- 
bealdon, 

1 1  And  dtet  big  de  mid  bandum  nim- 
on,  de-l«s  du  d'une  f5t  a;t  stane  set- 
speorne. 

12  Da  cwrej)  se  Hselend  bim  andswar- 
iende,  Hyt  is  gecweden,  Ne  costna  dii 
Dribten  dinne  God. 

13  And  ealre  dsere  costnunge  ge- 
fylledre,  se  deofol  bim  sume  bwile  fram- 
gewat. 

14  Da  ferde  se  Hyclend  on  gastes 
m?egene  on  Galileam,  and  bis  blisa  be 
bim  ferde  on  eall  daet  rice. 

15  And  be  Iserde  be  byra  gesamnung- 
um,  and  waes  fram  eallum  gemstrsod. 

16  Da  com  be  to  Nazaretb,  dar  be 
afed  WEBS,  and  be  eode  on  reste-dtege  on 
da  gesamnunge  sefter  bis  gewunan,  and 
be  aras  daet  be  rsedde. 

17  And  bim  wpes  geseald  Isaias  boc, 
dses  witegan ;  and  sona  swa  be  da  boc 
unfeold,  da  funde  be  dar  awriten, 

18  Dribtnes  Gast  is  ofer  me,  fordam 
de  be  smyrede  me ;  be  sende  me  })earf- 
um  bodian,  and  geba?ftum  alysednesse. 


IV.  5-iS.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

writun,  For  a  man  lyucth  not  in  breed 
aloone,  but  iu  cucry  word  of  God. 

5  And  the  douyl  laddo  hyin  in  to  an 
hi5  bil,  and  scliewide  to  him  alle  the 
rewmes  of  the  roundnessc  of  crthc  in  a 
moment  of  a  tynie  ; 

6  And  seith  to  him,  I  schal  ^yue  to 
thee  al  this  power,  and  the  glorie  of 
hem,  for  to  me  thei  ben  5ouun,  and  to 
whom  I  wolc  I  5yue  hem  ; 

7  Therfore  if  thou  fallinQ[e  doun  sclialt 
worsehipe  bifore  me,  alle  thingis  schulen 
be  thine. 

8  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seidc  to  liim, 

.  It  is  writen,  Thou  schalt 
worscliijie  the  Lord  tlii  God,  and  to 
hym  aloone  tliou  sclialt  serue. 

9  And  he  ledde  him  in  to  Jerusalem, 
and  settide  on  the  pynacle  of  the  temple, 
and  scide  to  him,  If  thou  art  Gotldis 
sonc,  scnde  thi  self  fro  hennis  down  ; 

10  For  it  is  writen,  Fur  he  hath  co- 
maundid  to  his  aungcls  of  thee,  that  thei 
kepe  thee  in  alle  thi  weyes, 

1 1  And  for  thei  schulen  in  liondis  take 
thee,  lest  perauenture  thou  hirte  thi  foot 
at  a  stoon. 

1 2  And  Jhesus  answeringe  seith  to 
him.  It  is  seid.  Thou  schalt  not  tempte 
the  Lord  thi  God. 

13  And  cuery  temptacioun  endid,  the 
dcuyl  wentc  away  fro  him  til  to  a  tyme. 

14  And  Jhesu  turnyde  a5en  in  the 
vcrtu  of  the  spirit  in  to  Galilee,  and  the 
fame  wente  forth  of  him  thur5  al  the 
cuntre. 

15  And  he  tau5te  in  the  synagogis  oi 
hem,  and  was  magnyfied  of  alle  men. 

1 6  And  he  cam  to  Nazareth,  where 
he  was  norischid,  and  he  cntride  by 
custom  in  the  day  of  saboth  in  to  the 
synagoge,  and  roos  for  to  rede. 

17  And  the  book  of  Ysaie,  the  pro- 
phete,  Avas  takun  to  him  ;  and  as  he 
turnyde  the  book,  he  fond  a  place  where 
it  is  writuii, 

18  The  S})irit  of  the  Lord  on  me,  for 
which  thing  he  anoyntide  me ;  ho  scnte 
me  for  10  euaungelise  to  pore  men,  for  to 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


2J);{ 


It  ys  written,  ^Fan  sliall  nott  live  by 
breed  only,  butt  by  every  worde  of 
God. 

5  And  the  devyll  toke  liim  vjipe  into 
an  hye  mountaync,  and  shewed  hym  all 
the  kyngdoms  of  the  crth  even  in  the 
twyncklynge  of  an  eye  ; 

6  And  the  devyl  said  vnto  him,  All 
this  jjower  will  I  geve  the  cverywhit, 
and  the  gluri  of  them,  for  that  is  dc- 
lyvei'cd  to  me,  and  to  who  soever  I  wyll 
I  geve  it ; 

7  Yf  thou  therfore  wilt  worshippe  me, 
they  shalbe  all  thyne. 

8  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto  hym, 
Hence  from  me,  Satan,  for  hit  is  written. 
Thou  shalt  honour  thy  Lorde  God,  and 
hym  only  serve. 

9  And  he  earyed  hym  to  Ilierusalem, 
and  set  him  on  a  pynacle  of  the  temple, 
and  sayd  vnto  him,  Yt  thou  be  the  sonno 
of  God,  cast  thy  silfe  doune  from  hens  ; 

10  For  it  ys  written.  He  shall  geve 
hys  angellcs  charge  over  the,  to  kepe 
the, 

1 1  And  with  there  hondis  they  shall 
stey  the  vppe,  that  thou  hurt  nott  thy 
fote  agaynst  a  stone. 

1 2  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
hym.  It  ys  sayd,  Thou  shalt  nott  tempte 
thy  Lorde  God. 

13  And  as  sone  as  the  dev3'll  had  ended 
all  his  temptacions,  he  departed  from 
hym  for  a  season. 

14  And  Jesus  rctourned  by  the  power 
of  the  sprete  in  to  Galile,  and  the  fame 
off  hym  went  throwe  onto  all  the  region 
rounde  aboute. 

15  And  he  taught  in  there  sinagogges, 
and  was  commended  off  all  men. 

16  And  he  cam  to  Nazareth,  where  he 
was  noursed,  and  as  hys  custume  was 
went  in  to  the  sinagog  on  the  saboth 
daye,  and  stodc  x^ypo  for  to  rede. 

1 7  And  there  was  delyvered  vnto  hym 
the  boke  off  the  prophet,  Esaias  ;  and 
when  he  had  opened  the  boke,  he  founde 
the  i)lace  where  hit  was  wrytten, 

18  The  Sprete  off  the  Lorde  apon  me, 
be  cause  he  hath  annoyntcd  me ;  to 
preache  the  gospell  to  the  povre  he  hath 


294 


GOTHIC,  360. 


gamalwiclans  hfiirtin,  meryan  fraliun]?- 
anaim  fralet,  yah  bliiidaim  sum  j  fralet- 
an  gamaidans  in  gajn-afstein  ; 


19  Meryan  yer  Frauj'ins  andanem. 

20  Yali  falfaljj  ]jos  bokos,  yah  usgib- 
ands  andbahta,  gasat ;  yali  allaim  iu 
])izai  swnagogein  wesuii  augona  faii'- 
Aveityandona  du  imma. 

21  Dugann  l^an  rodyan  du  im,  patei 
himma  daga  usfulhiodedun  inehi  ]jo  in 
ausam  izwaraun. 

22  Yah  allai  alakyo  weitwodidedun 
imma,  yah  sildaleikidedun  bi  jjo  waurda 
anstais,  ]>o  nsgaggandona  its  munjia  is. 
Yah  qepiuii,  Niu  sa  ist  sunus  losefis  1 

23  Yah  qab  du  im,  Aufto  qijjij'  mis  ])0 
gayukon,  pu  leiki,  hailei  ]>u\i.  silban. 
Whan  filu  hausldedum  Avaurj^an  in 
Kafax'naum,  tawei  yah  her  in  gr.baurjjai 
];einai. 

24  Qa]j  jian.  Amen  izwis  qij'a,  )-atei  nl 
ainshun  praufete  audanems  ist  in  ga- 
baurj^ai  semai. 

25  A];})an  bi  sunyai  qij-^a  izwis,  patei 
manages  widuwons  AA'esun  in  dagam 
Heleiins  in  Israela,  }ian  galuknoda  him- 
ins  du  yeram  Ju-im  yah  menojjs  saihs,  swe 
Avarjj  huhvus  mikils  and  alia  air])a ; 

26  Yah  ni  du  ainaihun  ]nzo  insandijjs 
Avas  Helias,  alya  in  Savaipta  Seidonais, 
du  qinon  AviduAvon. 

27  Yah  managai  prutsfiUai  Avesun,  uf 
Haileisaiu,  praufetau,  in  Israela,  yah 
ni  ainshun  ize  gahralnids  Avas,  alya 
Naiman  sa  Saur. 

28  Yah  fullai  Avaur])un  allai  modis  in 
pizai  swnagogein,  hausyandans  J^ata. 

29  Yah  usstandandans,  uskusun  imma 
ut  us  baurg,  yah  brahtcdun  ina  und 
auhmisto  Jns  fairgunyis  ana  jjammei  so 
baurgs  ize  gatimrida  Avas,  du  afdrausyan 
ina  Jjajjvo. 

30  IJj  is  ]iairhlei);ands  J^airh  midyans 
ins  iddya ; 

31  Yah  galaijj  in    Kafarnaum,   baurg 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

and    blindum    gesihjie,    foibrocene   ge- 
haelan  ;  .     .     . 


19  And  bodian  Drihtnes  andfenge  ger, 
and  edleanes  dreg. 

20  And  da  he  eta  b5c  befeold,  he  big 
dam  J)ene  agef,  and  sset ;  and  ealra 
heora  eagan  on  dfere  gesamnunge  Avser- 
on  on  hyne  behealdende. 

21  Da  ongan  he  him  to  CAvedan,  S6]j- 
lice  to-dfeg  dis  geAvrit  is  on  eowrum 
earum  gefylled. 

22  And  big  ealle  Avseron  dies  ge- 
cnseAve,  and  Avundredon  be  dam  Avordum, 
de  of  his  mu|,'e  eodon.  And  dus  CAVsed- 
on,  Nys  des  losepes  sunu  1 

23  Da  cwfe})  he,  Witodlice  ge  secga)> 
me  das  gelicnesse,  Eala  l^ce,  gehsel  de 
sylfne.  Do  her  on  dinum  earde,  swa 
fela  Avundra  swa  Ave  gehyrdon  gedone 
on  Cafarnaum. 

24  Du  cwfej)  he,  SoJ^lice  ic  eoAV  secge, 
dast  nan  Avitega  nis  andfenge  on  his 
edele. 

25  S6}'lice  ic  eoAV  secge,  manega  Avud- 
CAvan  AVEeron  on  Helias  dagum  on  Is- 
rahel,  da  da  seo  heofon  AVfes  belocen 
J^reo  ger  and  syx  monjjas,  da  Ava?s  ge- 
Avorden  mycel  hunger  on  ealre  eorjjan  : 

26  And  to  dara  nanum  nres  Helias 
asend,  buton  to  anre  Avudewan,  on 
Sai-epta  Sidonie. 

27  And  manega  lic-JsroAvei'as  Avaeron 
on  Israhel,  under  Heliseo,  dam  Avitegan, 
and  hyra  nan  nees  aclsensod,  buton 
Naaman  se  Sirisca. 

28  Da  Avurdon  hig  ealle  on  dtere  ge- 
samnunge mid  yrre  gefylled,  das  ]>ing 
gehyrende. 

29  And  hig  arisen,  and  scufon  hine 
of  da?re  ceastre,  and  laeddon  hine  ofer 
dass  muntes  cna?pp  ofer  done  hyra  burh 
getimbrod  Ava?s,  dset  hi  hine  nyder- 
bescufon, 

30  Da  ferde  he  J'urh  hyra  midlen  ; 

31  And  he  ferde    to   Cafarnaum.    on 


IV.  1 9-31  •]  \VYCLIFFE,i389. 

hcelc  contrite  men  in  hcrto,  and  for  to 
proclic  vonnscioun  to  caytifs,  and  si3t 
to  blyiulc  nicu ;  and  for  to  dclyucrc 
brokun  men  in  to  rcmiscioun  ; 

19  For  to  prcchc  the  ^eer  of  the  Lord 
lilesaimt,  and  the  day  of  ^eldyn^^e. 

20  And  wliannc  he  haddc  closid  the 
book,  he  5af  a3ein  to  tlie  mynystre,  and 
sat ;  and  the  y5en  of  alle  men  in  the 
synagoge  weren  bihoklinge  in  to  him. 

2 1  Sothli  lie  bigan  for  to  seie  to  hem, 
For  in  this  day  this  scripture  is  fultillid 
in  50ure  eeris. 

22  And  alle  men  5aucn  Avitncsslnge  to 
him,  and  wondriden  in  the  wordis  of 
grace,  that  camcn  forth  of  his  mouth. 
And  thci  seiden,  Wher  this  is  not  the 
sone  of  Joseph  ] 

23  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Sothli  50 
schulen  seie  to  mc  this  liknesse,  Leeche, 
heele  thi  silf.  Thei  sayden,  Hou  grete 
thingis  han  we  herd  don  in  Capharnaum, 
make  thou  and  here  in  thi  cuntre. 

24  Sothli  he  seith,  Treull  I  seie  to 
50U,  for  no  man  pi'ophete  is  rcceyued  in 
his  owne  cuntre. 

2,^  In  ti'cuthe  I  seie  to  50U,  for  manye 
widewis  wcren  in  the  dayes  of  Flye,  the 
])rophete,  in  Israel,  whanne  heuene  was 
closid  thre  3eer  and  sixe  moncthis, 
whanne  greet  hungir  was  maad  in  euery. 
lond; 

26  And  to  non  of  hem  was  Elye  sent, 
no  but  to  Sarepta  of  Sydon,  to  a  wom- 
man  widowe. 

27  And  manye  meselis  weren  in  Israel, 
vndir  Elyse,  the  prophete,  and  non  of 
hem  was  clensid,  no  but  Naman  of  Sirie. 

28  And  alle  in  the  synagoge  heer- 
inge  thcs  thiugis,  weren  iultillid  with 
wrath  the. 

29  And  thci  risen  vp,  and  castiden  out 
him  with  oute  the  citee,  and  ledde  him 
to  the  cop  of  the  hil  on  which  the  cite 
of  hem  is  foundid,  that  thei  schulden 
caste  him  doun. 

30  Sothly  Jhesus  passynge  wente  thorw 
the  myddil  of  hem  ; 

31  And  he  cam  doun  in  to  Cafaruaum, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


295 


scut  me,  and  to  lieale  them  Avhlch  are 
troubled  in  there  hertcs,  to  jireache 
deliverauncc  to  the  captive,  and  sight  to 
the  blyndc ;  and  frcly  to  sett  att  libcrte 
them  that  are  brnscd  ; 

)  9  And  to  prcachc  the  aceptable  ycai'O 
off  the  Lorde. 

20  And  he  clooscd  the  booke,  and  gave 
it  agayne  to  the  minister,  and  sate 
doune ;  and  the  eyes  off  all  thatt  were 
in  the  synagog  were  fastened  on  hym. 

2  I  And  he  began  to  saye  vnto  them, 
This  daye  ys  thys  scripture  fulfilled  in 
youre  cares. 

22  And  all  they  bare  hym  witncs,  and 
wondred  att  the  gracious  wordcs,  which 
proceded  oute  off  hys  mouth.  And  sayde, 
Is  not  this  Josephs  sonnc  1 

23  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Ye  maye 
very  wele  saye  vnto  me  this  proverbe, 
Visicion,  heale  thy  silfe.  Whatsoever 
we  have  herd  done  in  Capernaum,  do 
the  same  here  lyk  wyse  in  thyne  awne 
countre. 

24  And  he  sayde,  Vercly  I  saye  vnto 
you,  no  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  awne 
countre. 

25  But  I  tell  you  off  a  trueth,  many 
wyddowes  Avere  in  Israhell  in  the  dayes 
off  Helyas,  Avhen  hevyn  Avas  shet  thre 
yeres  and  syxe  monethes,  Avhen  grcate 
fammisshment  Avas  troughoute  all  the 
londe ; 

26  And  vnto  none  off  them  AA'as  Helyas 
sent,  save  in  to  Sarepta  besydes  Sydon, 
vnto  a  Avoman  that  Avas  a  Avidow. 

27  And  many  leppers  Avere  in  Israhel, 
in  the  tyme  off  Hcliseus,  the  prophet, 
and  yet  none  off  them  Avas  healed,  sav- 
ynge  Naaman  off  Siria. 

28  And  as  manyasAvere  in  the  sinagog 
Avhcn  they  herdc  that,  Avcr  filled  Avith 
wrath. 

29  And  roose  vpjje,  and  thrust  hym 
oute  of  the  cite,  and  ledde  hym  even 
vnto  the  edge  of  the  hill  Avhcron  their 
cite  Avas  bilte,  to  cast  hym  duune  hed- 
lynge. 

30  But  he  Avent  his  Avaye  even  thoroAve 
the  myddes  of  them  ; 

31  And  cam  in  to  Capernaum,  a  cite 


290 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Galcilaias,  yali  was  laisyands  ins  in  sab- 
batim. 

32  Yah  siklaleikidednn  bi  )'0  laiscin  is, 
unte  in  waldufnya  was  waurd  is. 

33  Yah  in  J^izai  swnagoi^ein  was  man- 
na habands  ahman  unhul|>ons  unhrain- 
yana,  yah  ufhropida, 

34  Qi|)ands,  Let,  wha  uns  yah  ]>vls, 
lesu  Nazorenu  1  qarat  fraqistyan  unsis  1 
Kann  ))uk  whas  is,  sa  weiha  Gu])S. 


35  Yah  gawhotida  imma  lesus,  qi]>- 
ands,  Afdobn,  yah  usgagg  us  )iamma. 
Yah  gawairpands  ina  sa  unhulj^a  in 
midyaim,  urrann  af  imma,  ni  waihtai 
gaska})yands  imma. 

36  Yah  war))  afslaujman  allans,  yah 
rodidedun  du  sis  misso,  qilmndans,  Wha 
wam'de  Jjata,  J^atei  mi)?  wakhifnj^a  yah 
malitai  anabiudi])  }-aim  uuhvainyam  ah- 
mam,  yah  usgaggand  ? 

37  Yah  usiddya  merijja  fram  imma  and 
allans  stadins  ];is  bisunyane  landis. 

38  Usstandands  Jjan  us  jjizai  swnagogai, 
galaij)  in  gard  Seimonis  ;  swaihro  jnin 
J)is  Seimonis  Avas  anahabaida  brinnon 
mikilai,  yah  bedun  ina  bi  J)o. 

39  Yah  atstandauds  ufar  iya,  gasok 
J)izai  brinnon,  yah  afiailot  iya  ;  sunsaiw 
])an  usstandandei  andbahtida  im. 

^o  MiJ3]janei  l^an  sagq  sunno,  allai  swa 
managai  swe  habaidedun  siukans  sauh- 
tim  missaleikaim,  brahtedun  ins  at  im- 
ma ;  i|)  is,  ainwharyammeh  ize  handuns 
analagyands,  gahailida  ins. 

41  Usiddyedun  Jan  yah  unhuljjons  af 
managaim,  hropyandeins,  yah  qi];and- 
eins,  Patei  J;u  is  Christus  sunus  Gu]:!S. 
Yah  gasakands  Vm  ni  lailot  j^os  rodyan, 
unte  wissedun  silban  Christu  ina  wisan. 

42  Bijjeh,  ];an  war))  dags,  usgaggands, 
galai))  ana  au))yana  stad  ;  yah  manag- 
eins  sokidedun  ina,  yah  qemun  und  ina, 
yah  gahabaidcdun  ina,  ei  ni  afli)>i  fairra 
im. 

43  paruh  is  qa))  du  im,  patei  yah  ))aim 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

Galileisce  ceastre,  and  hi  dar  on  reste- 
dagum  Iserde. 

32  And  hig  wundredon  be  his  Lire, 
fordam  his  spriec  on  anwealde  wks. 

33  And  on  hyra  gesamnunge  wses  sum 
man  unclsene  deofol  hajbbende,  and  he 
hrymde  micelre  stefne, 

34  And  cwx]),  Lett,  la  Nadzai'enisca 
Hselend,  hwast  is  us  and  de  1  com  dii 
vis  to  forspillanne  1  Ic  Wat,  dest  dii 
eart  Godes  hulega. 

35  And  da  cidde  him  se  Hselend,  and 
cwfe)),  Adumba,  and  ga  him  of.  And 
da  he  lit-adraf  hine  on  heora  midlene, 
he  him  fram-gewat,  and  him  naht  ne 
derede. 

36  Da  wurdon  hig  ealle  forhte,  and 
sprsecon  him  betwynan,  and  CAVsedon, 
Hwajt  ys  dset  word,  da't  he  on  mihte 
and  on  mtegene  uncla?num  gastum 
bebyt,  and  hig  ut-gaj)  ? 

37  Da  wtes  his  hlisa  gewidmsersod  on 
cclcere  stowe  dajs  rices.''' 

38  Sc))lice  he  Ta-as  of  heora  gesam- 
nunge, and  ferde  on  Simones  bus  ;  da 
wses  Simones  sweger  geswenced  on 
mycelum  feferum,  and  hig  hyne  for 
hyre  l)Eedon. 

39  And  he  standende  ofer  hig,  dam 
fefere  bebead,  and  he  hig  foriet ;  and 
heo  sona  aras  and  him  );enode. 

40  S5))lice  da  sunne  asah,  ealle  de 
untrume  wseron  on  mislicum  adlum,  hig 
Iceddon  him  to  ;  and  he,  syndrygum  hys 
hand  on-settende,  hig  gehselde. 

41  Da  ferdon  da  deoflu  of  manegum, 
hrymende,  and  cwedende,  S6))es  du  eart 
Godcs  sunu.  And  he  ne  ge))afode  dtet 
hig  Eenig  ping  S2:)rEecon,  fordam  de  hig 
wiston  dtet  he  Crist  wxs. 

42  Da,  gewordenum  dsege,  se  Hselend 
ut-gangende,  ferde  on  weste  stowe;  and 
da  ma^negu  hine  sohton,  and  hi  comon 
to  him,  and  behsefdon  hine,  dfet  he  him 
fram  ne  gewite. 

43  Da  ssede  he  him,  S6))lice  me  ge- 


IV.  3^-43]   WVCLIFFE,  1389. 

rt  citee  of  Cialiloe,  and  tlicie  he  tau3tc 
lieiii  in  the  sal)otliis. 

32  And  thei  weren  astonycd  in  his 
tcching,  for  his  word  was  in  power. 

;^^^  And  in  the  syna<:foge  was  a  man 
lianynge  an  vnclene  fend,  and  he  eriede 
with  greet  vois, 

34  Seyinge,  SnfTre,  what  to  vs  and  to 
thee,  Jliesus  of  Nazareth  1  hast  thou 
conien  for  to  leese  vs  1  I  knowe  thee, 
tliat  thou  art  the  hooly  of  God. 

35  And  Jhesu  l)laniydc  him,  seyinge, 
AVaxe  dounibe,  and  go  out  fro  liini.  And 
whanne  the  fend  hadde  cast  him  forth 
in  to  the  myddel,  he  wente  a  wey  fro 
him,  and  ^it  noyede  hym  no  thing. 

^6  And  drede  is  maad  in  alle  men,  and 
thei  spaken  to  gidere,  seyinge,  What  is 
this  word,  for  in  power  and  vertu  he 
comaundith  to  vuclene  spiritis,  and  thei 
gon  out  ? 

37  And  the  fame  was  pupplischid  of 
hym  in  to  ech  pk\ce  of  the  cnutre. 

38  Forsothe  Jliesu  risynge  of  the  syna- 
goge,  entride  in  to  tlie  hous  of  Symount ; 
sotldi  tlie  modir  of  Symondis  wyf  was 
hoi  den  with  grete  feueris,  and  thei 
preieden  him  for  hir. 

39  And  Jhesu  stondinge  on  liir,  co- 
maundide  to  the  feuir,  and  it  lefte  hir ; 
and  anon  sche  risynge  mynystride  to 
hem. 

40  Forsoth  whanne  the  sunne  Avente 
doun,  alle  that  hadden  sike  men  with 
dyuerse  langwiscliingis,  ledden  hem  to 
hym  ;  and  lie,  puttinge  hondis  to  ech 
by  him  silf,  lieelide  hem. 

41  Sotlili  fendis  wenten  out  fro  manye, 
criynge,  and  seyinge,  For  thou  ert  the 
sone  of  God.  And  he  blamynge  sufiVide 
not  hem  for  to  speke,  for  thei  wistea 
him  to  be  Crist. 

42  Sothli,  the  day  maad,  he  gon  out, 
wente  in  to  desert  place  ;  and  the  cum- 
penyes  of  peple  sou^ten  him,  and  thei 
camen  til  to  him,  and  thei  heklen  him, 
that  he  schulde  not  go  awey  fro  hem. 

43  To  whiche  he  seydc.  For  and  to 


TYXDALE,  1526. 


207 


of  Galile,  and  there  taught  them  on  tlie 
sabboth  dayes. 

32  And  they  were  a  stonied  at  his 
doctrine,  for  hys  preachinge  was  with 
power. 

;^;i  And  in  the  sinagogc  there  was  a 
man  which  had  a  foule  sprete  whith  in 
him,  and  cryed  with  a  loude  voyce, 

34  Sayinge,  Let  me  alone,  what  haste 
thou  to  do  wyth  vs,  thou  Jesus  oif  Naza- 
reth ?  arte  thou  come  to  destroyc  vs  1  I 
knowe  the  what  thou  arte,  thou  arte  the 
holy  man  of  God. 

35  And  Jesus  rebuked  hym,  sayinge, 
Hoolde  thy  peace,  and  come  o:ite  of 
hym.  And  the  devyle  threwe  him  in 
the  myddes  of  them,  and  cam  oute  of 
hym,  and  hurt  hym  not. 

36  And  feare  cam  on  them  all,  and 
they  spake  amonge  them  selves,  sayinge, 
What  manner  a  thinge  is  this,  for  with 
auctorite  and  power  he  commaundeth 
the  foule  spretes,  and  they  come  outi 

37  And  the  fame  of  hym  spreed  abroode 
throwoute  all  places  of  the  countre  round 
aboute. 

38  And  he  roose  vppe  and  cam  oute  of 
the  synagoge,  and  entrcd  into  Simons 
housse ;  and  Simons  mothcrelawc  was 
taken  wyth  a  greate  fever,  and  they 
made  intercession  to  him  for  her. 

39  And  he  stode  over  her,  and  rebuked 
the  fever,  and  hit  Iceft  her ;  and  immc- 
diatly  she  roose  and  ministred  vnto 
them. 

40  When  the  sun  was  doune,  all  they 
that  had  sicke  taken  with  divers  deseases, 
bi'ought  them  vnto  him  ;  and  he  layde 
his  hondes  on  every  won  of  them,  and 
healed  them. 

41  And  devils  also  cam  out  of  many 
of  them,  cryinge,  and  saying.  Thou  arte 
Christ  the  sonne  of  God.  And  he  re- 
buked them  and  suflercd  them  nott  to 
speake,  for  they  knewe  that  he  was 
Christ. 

42  As  sone  as  it  was  daye,  he  departed, 
and  went  awaye  into  a  desert  place  ; 
and  the  people  sought  hym,  and  cam  to 
hym,  and  kQ[)t  hym,  that  he  shulde  not 
departe  from  them. 

43  Aud  he  sayde  vnto  them,  I  muste 


298 


GOTHIC,  360. 


anfiaraim  baurgim  wailameryan  ik  skal 
bi  })iudangardya  Gujjs,  unte  dujje  mik 
insandida. 

44  Yah  was  meryands  in  swnagogim 
Galeilaias. 


Chap.  V.  i  Yah  war]?,  mi])]janei  man- 
agei  anatramp  ina,  du  liausyan  waurd 
GuJ;s,  yah  is  silba  Avas  standands  newha 
saiwa  Gainnesaraijj, 

2  Yah  gasawh  twa  skipa  standandona 
at  jjamnia  saiwa ;  'i\>  fiskyans  afgagg- 
andans  af  im,  us|)\vohmi  natya. 

3  Galai|>  l^an  in  ain  ]>\ze  skipe,  ];atei 
was  Seimonis,  haihait  ina  aftiuhan  fairra 
stajja  leitil  ;  yah  gasitands  laisida  us 
^amma  skipa  manageins. 

4  Bi})eh  })an  ganan);ida  rodyands,  qa}) 
du  Seimonau,  Brigg  ana  diupijia,  yah 
athahid  \>o  natya  izwara  du  fiskon. 

5  Yah  andhafyands  Seimon  qa]>  du  im- 
ma,  Talzyand,  alia  naht  ]?airharbaidyaiid- 
ans  Avaiht  ni  nemum,  a|)  afar  Avaurda 
jjeinamma  wairpam  natya. 

6  Yah  })ata  tauyandans,  galukiui  man- 
agein  fiske  filu  ;  swe  natya  dishnuimo- 
dedun  ize. 

7  Yah  bandwidedun  gamanam,  Jjoei 
wesun  in  an)jaramma  skipa,  ei  atiddyed- 
eina,  hilpan  ize.  Yah  qemun,  yah  ga- 
fuUibedun  ba  ]>o  skipa,  swe  sugqun. 

8  Gaumyands  l^an  Seimon  Paitrus, 
draus  du  kniwam  lesuis,  qij^ands,  Bidya 
])uk  usgagg  fairra  mis,  unte  manna  fra- 
waurhts  im,  Frauya. 

9  Sildaleik  auk  dishabaida  ina,  yah 
allans  jsans  mi[)  imma,  in  gafahis  j>ize 
fiske  Jianzei  ganutun. 

__io  Samaleikoh  jjan  yah  lakobau  yah 
lohannen,  sununs  Zaibaidaiaus,  jjaiei  wes- 
un gadailans  Seimona.  Yah  qa})  du 
Seimona  lesus,  Ni  ogs  [jus  ;  fram  him- 
nia  nu  maune  siud  nutans. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

dafcna])    5drum    ceastrum    Godes    rice 
bodian,  fordam  to  dam  ic  eom  aseud. 


44  And  he  wees  bodigende  on  Galilea 
fresamnuuoum. 


Chap.  V.  i  '''Sojjlice  wses  geworden, 
du  da  manegu  him  to  comon,  daet  hig 
Godes  Avord  gehyrdon,  he  stod  Avid  done 
mere  Genesareth, 

2  And  he  geseali  tAva  scipu  standende 
Avid  done  mere ;  da  fisceras  eodon,  and 
Avoxon  heora  nett. 

3  He  da  astigende  on  an  scyp,  dset 
AVfes  Simones,  bted  liyne  daet  he  hit 
lyt-liAvon  fram  lande  tuge ;  and  on  dam 
scipe  sittende  he  larde  da  msenegu. 

4  Da  he  sprecan  gesAvac,  he  cwpdjj  to 
Simone,  Teoh  hit  on  dypan,  and  Ireta]) 
eoAvre  nett  on  done  iisc-Aver. 

5  Da  CAVfe])  Simon  him  andswariende, 
Eala  bebeodend,  ealle  niht  swincende 
Ave  naht  ne  gefengon,  sojjlice  on  dinum 
worde  ic  min  nett  ut-lsete. 

6  And  da  hi  dfet  dydon,  hig  betugon 
mycele  menigeo  fixa ;  and  hyra  net  Avses 
tobrocen. 

7  And  hig  bicnodon  hyra  geferan,  de 
on  odrum  scipe  Avseron,  dfet  hi  comon, 
and  him  fylston.  Da  comon  hig,  and 
gefyklon  butu  da  scipu,  SAva  dset  hi  neh 
Avseron  beseucte. 

8  Da  Petrus  dset  geseah,  he  feoll  to 
dses  Hfelendcs  cneowum,  and  CAv^eJ', 
Drihten,  gCAvit  fram  me,  fordam  ic  eom 
synfull  mann. 

9  And  he  AA'undrode,  and  ealle  da  de 
mid  him  Avseron,  on  dam  Avere  dara  fixa 
de  hi  gefengon. 

10  Gelice  lacobum  and  lohannem, 
Zebedeis  suna,  da  Avteron  Simones  ge- 
feran. Da  cwa?J)  se  Hrelend  to  Simone, 
Ne  ondrted  dii  de ;  heononforj)  du  byst 
men  o;ef6nde. 


IV.  44.-V.  lo.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

othcrc  citecs  it  bihouctli  me  for  to  cuaiin- 
L;rlisc  tlic  kyngdoni  of  God,  for  therfore 
i  am  scute. 

44  And  ho  was  prccliinge  in  the  syna- 
gogis  of  Galilee. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


209 


Chap.  V.  i  Sothcli  it  was  don,  wliannc 
cmnpanyes  of  pei)lc  fclden  in^  to  Jhesu, 
that  thei  schuldcn  heorc  the  word  of 
God,  and  he  stood  bisydis  the  stoudingc 
watir  of  Genascrcth, 

2  And  sy3  twey  bootis  stondinge  bi- 
sydis the  stonding  watir  ;  sothli  the 
fiseheris  hadden  gon  doun,  and  waischidc 
nettis. 

.^,  Sothli  he  sti5ynge  in  to  a  boot,  that 
was  Symoundis,  preiede  hi  in  to  lede 
a^cu  a  litil  fro  the  loud  ;  and  he  sittinge 
tau5te  the  cumpanyes  fro  the  boot. 

4  Sothli  as  he  ceesside  to  speke,  he 
seide  to  Syniound,  Lede  thou  in  to  hi^, 
and  slake  50  5oure  nettis  in  to  the 
takinge. 

5  And  Symount  answcringe  seide  to 
him,  Comaundour,  Ave  trauelinge  by  al 
the  ny5t  token  no  thing,  but  in  thi  word 
I  schal  leye  out  the  nett. 

6  And  whanne  thei  hadden  don  this 
thing,  thei  closideu  to  gidere  a  plentcu- 
ous  multitude  of  fysches ;  forsoth  her 
nett  was  broken. 

7  And  thei  bekenyden  to  felowis,  that 
wcren  in  an  othir  boot,  that  thei  schulden 
iiime,  and  heipe  hem.  And  thei  camen, 
and  filliden  bothe  litle  bootis,  so  that 
thei  weren  al  moost  drenchid. 

8  Which  thing  whanne  Symound  Petre 
sy5,  he  felde  doun  to  the  knees  of  Jhesu, 
seyinge.  Lord,  go  fro  me,  for  I  am  a  man 
synuerc. 

9  Sothli  greet  wondir  hadde  bigon 
aboute  him,  and  alle  that  weren  with 
him,  in  the  takinge  of  fisehes  whiche 
thei  tooken. 

10  Sothli  in  lyk  manere  James  and 
John,  the  sones  of  Zcbedc,  whiche  weren 
felowis  of  Symount  Petre.  And  Jhesu 
seith  to  Symound,  Xylc  thou  drede ; 
now  fro  this  tyme  thou  schalt  l)e  tak- 
\i\<ie  men. 


to  other  cities  also  preace  the  worde  of 
God,  for  therfore  am  I  sent. 

44  And  he  preached  in  the  synagoges 
off  Galile. 


CiiAP.  V.  I  Hit  cam  to  passe,  as  the 
peojile  jireascd  a])on  hym,  to  heare  the 
worde  off  God,  that  he  stode  by  the  lake 
of  Genazareth, 

2  And  sawe  two  shippes  stonde  by  the 
lake  syde  ;  for  the  fisshermen  were  gone 
out  of  them,  and  were  wasshynge  their 
nettes. 

3  Jesus  entred  in  to  one  of  the  shippes, 
which  perteyned  to  Simon,  and  prayed 
hym  that  he  wolde  cary  hym  a  litell 
from  the  londe  ;  and  he  sate  doune  and 
taught  the  peple  out  of  the  shippe. 

4  When  he  had  leeft  speakynge,  he 
sayde  vnto  Simon,  Cary  vs  in  to  the 
depe,  and  lett  slippe  thy  nett  to  make  a 
draught. 

5  And  Sinion  answerid  and  sayde  to 
hym,  Master,  we  have  labored  all  nyght 
and  have  taken  uothynge,  yet  nowe  at 
thy  worde  I  wil  loose  forthe  the  net. 

6  And  Avhen  they  had  so  done,  they 
inclosed  a  greate  multitude  of  fisshes ; 
and  the  net  brake. 

7  And  they  made  signes  to  their  fel- 
owes,  which  were  in  the  other  shippe, 
that  they  sliuldc  come,  and  helpe  them. 
And  they  cam,  and  they  filled  bothe  the 
shippes,  that  they  soncke  agayne. 

8  When  Simon  Peter  saAve  that,  he  fell 
doune  at  Jesus  knees,  sayinge,  Lorde, 
goo  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful!  man. 

9  For  he  Avas  A'tterly  astonyed,  and  all 
that  Avere  Avith  hym,  att  the  draught  off 
fisshe  Avhicli  they  toke. 

10  And  so  Avas  also  James  and  Jhon, 
the  sonncs  of  Zcbedei,  Avhich  Avere  parte- 
takers  Avitli  Simon.  And  Jesus  sayd 
vnto  Simon,  Feare  not  ;  from  hence 
forthe  thou  shalt  catche  men. 


300 


GOTIilC,  360. 


1 1  Yali  g-atiuhandans  \>o  skipa  ana 
air}:a,  afleijjaudans  allata,  laistidedun 
afar  imma. 

12  Yah  war',>,  mijjjjanei  was  is  'in  ainai 
baurge,  yah  sai !  manna  fulls  |n-utsfillis  ; 
yah  gasaiwliands  lesu,  driusands  ana 
andwair))!,  bad  ina,  qij^ands,  Frauya, 
yabai  wileis,  magt  mik  gahrainyan. 

13  Yah  iifrakyands  handu,  attaitok 
i'mma,  qi})ands,  Wilyau,  wair);  hi-ains. 
Yah  suns  Jjata  jjrutsfill  aflaijj  af  imma. 

14  Yah  'is  faurbaud  imma,  ei  raann  ni 
qe)?! ;  Ak  gagg,  yah  ataugei  ))uk  silban 
gudyin,  yah  atbair  imma  fram  })izai  ga- 
hraineinai  jielnai,  })atei  anabaud  Moses, 
du  weitwodijjai  im. 

15  Usmei-noda  ])an  Jjata  waurd  mals 
bi  ina  ;  yah  garunnun  biuhmans  man- 
agai,  hausyon,  yah  leikinon  fram  imma 
sauhte  seinaizo. 

j6  I\>  is  was  aflei))ands  ana  au];idos, 
yah  bidj'ands. 

17  Yah  war];  'in  ainarama  dage,  yah  is 
was  laisyands ;  yah  wesun  sitandans 
Fareisaieis,  yah  witodalaisai-yos,  jmiei 
wesun  gaqumanai  us  allamma  haimo 
Galeilaias,  yah  ludaias,  yah  lairusaulw- 
mon ;  yah  mahts  Frauyius  was  du  hail- 
yan  ins. 

18  Yah  sai!  mans  bairandans  ana  ligra 
mannan  saei  was  usli]?a,  yah  sokidedun 
whaiwa  ina  innatbereina,  yah  galagl- 
dideina  in  andwairjjya  is. 

19  Yah  ni  bigitandans  whaiwa  in- 
natbereina  ina,  in  manageins,  ussteig- 
andans  ana  hrot,  and  skalyos  gasatide- 
dun  ina  m\lp  jjamma  badya  in  midyaim, 
faura  lesua. 

20  Yah  gasaiwhands  galaubein  ize,  qa]) 
du  |?amma  uslijiin,  Manna,  afleitanda  jjus 
frawauvhteis  Jjeinos. 

21  Yah  dugunnun  jjagkyan  Jjai  bok- 
aryos  yah  Fareisaieis,  qi}mndans,  Whas 
ist  sa,  saei  rodei[j  naiteinins  1  whas  mag 
afletan  frawaurhtins,  alya  ains  Gu})  1 

22  Ufkuunands  J'an  lesus  mitonins  ize, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

1 1  And  big  tugon  hyra  scypu  to  lande, 
and  forleton  big,  and  folgodon  dam 
Ilselende. 

1 2  Da  he  wpbs  on  anre  ceastre,  da 
W8es  dar  an  hreofla  ;  and  da  he  geseah 
done  Hselend,  da  astrehte  he  bine,  and 
bped,  and  dus  cwse}',  Drihten,  gyf  dii 
wylt,  dil  miht  me  geclseusian. 

13  And  he  set-bran  hine,  his  Iianda 
ajjenede,  and  cwpe}),  Ic  wylle,  si  dii  gc- 
clcvnsod.  And  s5na  se  hreofla  him  fram 
ferde. 

14  And  he  bebead  him,  dtet  be  hit 
nanum  men  ne  saede ;  Ac  ga,  and  a?tyAV 
de  dam  sacei'de,  and  bring  for  dinre 
clcvnsuuge,  swa  Moyses  bebead,  him  on 
gewitnesse. 

15  Witodlice  dies  de  ma  seo  sprsec  be 
him  ferde  ;  and  mycele  menegeo  comon, 
dajt  hi  gehyrdon,  and  Avurdon  gehtelede 
fram  hyra  untrumnessum. 

16  He  da  ferde  on  westen,  and  bine 
gebajd.''' 

17  Da  wses  anum  drege  geworden,  dtet 
he  spet  and  big  Iserde  ;  and  da  wscron 
da  Farisei  sittende,  and  dajre  re  It'reow- 
as,  da  comon  of  relcum  castellum  Gal- 
lilese,  and  ludete,  and  Hierusalem  ;  and 
Drihtnes  msegen  wses  big  to  gehselenne. 

18  And  da  bseron  men  on  Taium  bedde 
anne  man  se  wa^s  lama, 


19  And  big  ne  mlhton  hine  in  bringan 
and  alecgan  beforan  him,  for  dsere  men- 
igeo  de  mid  dam  Hrtlende  wses,  da 
astigon  big  uppan  dtene  hrof,  and  ))urh 
da  watelas  hine  mid  dam  bedde  iisendon, 
beforan  done  Hselend. 

20  Da  he  geseah  hyra  geleafan,  he 
CAVse)',  La  mann,  de  synd  dine  synna 
forgyfene. 

2 1  Da  agunnon  jjencan  da  b5ceras  and 
Farisei,  and  cwsedon,  Hwa^t  is  des,  de 
her  sprycjj  Av5fFunga  1  hwa  mjeg  synna 
forgyfan,  buton  God  ana  1 

22  Da  se  Hselend  gecneow  hyi'a  ge- 


V.  11-22.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

T  t  Ami  tlic  bootis  led  vp  to  the  loiul, 
alle  tliingis  left,  thei  suedeu  him. 

I  2  And  it  was  don,  whannc  he  was  in 
oon  of  the  citoes,  and  lo  !  a  man  ful  of 
leper ;  and  seyncje  Jhesu,  and  fallim^e 
doun  in  to  his  faee,  preiede  him,  sey- 
inge,  Loi'd,  if  thou  wolt,  thou  maist 
make  me  clcne. 

13  And  Jhesu  holdinge  forth  the  hond, 
touohide  him,  soyinge,  I  wole,  be  tliou 
maad  clene.  And  anon  the  lepre  passide 
a  wey  fro  hym. 

14  And  Jhesu  eomaundide  to  him,  that 
he  schulde  seie  to  no  man  ;  But  go  thou, 
schewe  thou  thee  to  a  prest,  and  ofiVe 
thou  for  tin  cleusinge,  as  Moyscs  bad,  in 
to  witnessinge  to  hem, 

15  Sothli  the  word  walkide  aboute  the 
more  of  him  ;  and  manye  cumpanyes 
camen  to  gidre,  that  thei  schulden  hecre, 
and  be  heelid  of  her  syknessis. 

1 6  Forsothe  he  wente  in  to  desert,  and 
preiede. 

17  And  it  was  don  in  oon  of  dayes, 
and  he  sittiugc  tau5te ;  and  there  were 
Pharisees  sittinge,  and  doctours  of  the 
lawe,  that  eamen  of  ech  eastel  of  Galilee, 
and  of  Judee,  and  of  Jerusalem  ;  and 
the  vertu  of  the  Lord  was  for  to  heele 
syke  men. 

1 8  And  loo !  men  berlnge  in  a  bed  a 
man  that  was  syk  in  palasye,  and  thei 
sou5ten  for  to  here  iu  hym,  and  to  puttc 
bifore  him. 

19  And  thei  not  fyndinge  in  what  part 
thei  sehulde  here  him  yn,  for  the  cum- 
penye  of  peple,  sti5eden  vp  on  the  rof, 
and  by  the  sclattis  thei  senten  him  doun 
with  the  bed  in  to  the  myddil,  byfore 
Jhesu. 

20  The  feith  of  whiclie  as  Jhesu  syj, 
he  seidc,  Man,  thi  synnes  ben  for3ouun 
to  thee. 

21  And  scribis  and  Pharisees  bigunnen 
for  to  thenke,  scyinge,  Who  is  this,  that 
spekitli  blasphemyes  ]  who  may  for3yue 
synneS;  no  but  God  aloone  1 

22  Forsoth  as  Jhesu  knew  the  thou3tis 


TYNDALE,  1526.  HOI 

1 1  And  they  broughtt  their  shippcs 
to  londe,  and  forsokc  all,  and  folowed 
hym. 

12  And  itt  fortuned,  that  he  was  in  a 
ccrtaync  eitc,  and  beholde  !  there  was  a 
man  full  of  leprosy ;  and  when  he  had 
spied  Jesus,  he  fell  on  his  faee,  and  be- 
sought hym,  saying,  Lorde,  }ff  thou 
wilt,  tliou  canst  make  me  elcane. 

13  And  he  strcthed  forth  his  iiond,  and 
touched  hym,  sayingc,  I  will,  be  thou 
eleane.  And  immediatly  the  leprosy 
departed  from  hym. 

14  And  he  warned  hym,  that  he  shulde 
tell  no  man ;  But  that  he  shulde  goo, 
and  shewc  hym  silfe  to  the  prcste,  and 
ofter  for  his  clensynge,  aceordynge  as 
Moses  eommaundement  was,  for  a  Avitnes 
vnto  them. 

15  But  his  name  spreed  the  moare 
abroade  ;  and  the  people  cam  togedder, 
to  hearc,  and  to  be  healed  of  hym  of 
infirmities. 

16  And  he  kepte  hym  silfe  aparte  in 
the  Avildernes,  and  gave  hym  silfe  to 
prayer. 

17  And  itt  happened  on  a  certayne 
daye,  that  he  taught ;  and  there  sate  the 
Hiai'ises,  and  doctours  of  lawe,  which 
were  come  out  off  all  the  tounes  of 
Galile,  Jewry,  and  Jerusalem  ;  and  the 
power  off"  the  Lorde  was  to  hcale  them. 

1 8  And  beholde  !  men  l)rongt  a  man 
lyinge  in  hys  beed  which  was  taken  with 
the  jialsey,  and  they  sought  mcancs  to 
bryngc  hym  in,  and  to  layc  hym  before 
hym. 

19  And  when  they  coulde  not  fynde  by 
what  waye  they  myght  brynge  hym  in, 
be  cause  off"  the  preace,  they  went  vp  on 
the  toppe  of  the  housse,  and  lett  hym 
doune  thorowe  the  tylynge  beed  and  all 
in  the  myddes,  before  Jesus. 

20  When  he  sawe  their  fayth,  he  sayde 
vnto  hym,  ^lan,  thy  synnes  are  forgeven 
the. 

21  And  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisea 
began  to  thynke,  saynge,  What  felow  is 
this,  which  speaketh  blasphemy  1  who 
can  forgeve  synnes,  butt  God  only  1 

22  When     Jesus     perceaved      their 


302 


GOTHIC,  360. 


andhafyands  qaj?  du  'im,  Wha  bi|jagkei]3 
'ill  hairtam  izwai'aim  1 

23  Whaj^ai'  ist  azetlzo  qi};an,  Afletanda 
)jus  frawaurhteis,  J)au  qijjan,  Urreis,  yah 

gagg? 

24  A]j|)an  ei  witeid,  Jjatei  waldufni 
habaid  sa  sunus  mans  ana  air})ai  afletan 
fraAvaurhtins,  qn\>  du  )jamma  iisli))in,  Du 
J)us  qifia,  urreis,  yah  ushafyands  jjata 
badi  Jjeinata,  gagg  in  gard  Jjeinana. 

25  Yah  sunsaiw  usstandands  in  and- 
wairjjya  ize,  ushafyands  ana  jjammei  lag, 
galai])  in  gard  seinana,  mikilyands  Gujj. 

26  Yah  nsfihnei  dissat  allans,  yah  mik- 
ilidedun  Gu]) ;  yah  fullai  waurj)un  ag- 
isis,  qil^andans,  patei  gasaiwham  wuljjaga 
himma  daga. 

27  Yah  afar  fiata  usiddya,  yah  ga- 
sawh  motari,  namin  Laiwwi,  sitandan 
ana  motastada.  Yah  qa]j  du  imma, 
Laistei  afar  mis ; 

28  Yah  bileipands  allaim,  usstandands 
iddya  afar  imma. 

29  Yah  gawaurhta  dauht  mikila  Laiw- 
weis  imma  in  garda  seinamma ;  yah  was 
manage!  motarye  mikila,  yah  an|)araize 
fiaiei  wesun  mi])  im  anakumbyandans. 

30  Yah  birodidedun  bokaryos  ize  yah 
Fareisaieis,  du  siponyam  is  qi|iandans, 
Duwhe  mij)  J)aim  motaryam  yah  fra- 
waurhtaim  matyid  yah  drigkid  ? 

31  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qaj?  du  im, 
Ni  jjaurbun  hailai  leikeis,  ak  J^ai  un- 
'hailans  ; 

32  Ni  qam  lajjon  garaihtans,  ak  fra- 
waurhtans  in  idreiga. 

33  I])  eis  qejiun  du  imma,  Duwhe 
siponyos  Johannes  fastand  ufta,  yah  bid- 
os  tauyand,  samaleiko  yah  Fareisaiei,  i|) 
J)ai  ))einai  siponyos  matyand  yah  drigk- 
and? 

34  paruh  is  qa]>  du  im,  Ni  magud 
sununs  bru|)fadis,  unte  sa  bruj)fads  mi{) 
im  ist,  gatauyan  fastan  % 

35  Ajjjian  qimand  dagos,  yah  Jjan 
afuimada  af  im  sa  bnijjfads,  yah  ]-an 
fastand  in  yainaim  dagam. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

)jancas,  he  andswarigende  cwce|j  to  him, 
Hwajt  Jience  ge  on  eowrum  heortum  % 

23  Hwseder  is  edre  to  cwettenne,  De 
synd  dine  synna  forgyfene,  hwreder  de 
cwedan,  A'ris,  and  ga  % 

24  Dajt  ge  witon,  dait  mannes  sunu 
on  eorjjan  anweald  hjef|)  synna  to  for- 
gyfanne,  and  he  ssede  dam  laman,  De 
ic  secge,  aris,  nim  din  bed,  and  ga  on 
din  hils. 

25  And  he  s5na  beforan  him  aras,  and 
nam  dset  he  on  Iseg,  and  to  his  luise 
ferde,  and  God  wuldrode. 

26  And  hig  ealle  wundredon,  and  God 
msersodon  ;  and  waeron  mid  ege  ge- 
fyllede,  and  cwsedon,  Sojjes  we  to-dseg 
wundru  gesawon. 

27  Da  fefter  dam  he  iit-eode,  and  ge? 
seah  pnblicanum,  he  wpes  odrum  naman 
Leui  gehaten,  set  ceap-sceamule  sittende. 
And  he  cwsej)  to  him,  Filig  me  ; 

28  And  he  him  da  filigde,  and  ealle 
hys  {jing  forlet. 

29  And  Leui  dyde  hym  mycelne  ge- 
beorscype  on  his  huse  ;  and  dar  wses 
mycel  menegeo  manfulra,  and  oderra  de 
mid  him  sseton. 

30  Dii  muiTnodon  da  Farisei  and  da 
boceras,  and  cwaedon  to  hys  leorning- 
enihtum,  Hwi  ete  ge  and  drincaj)  mid 
manfullum  and  synfunum? 

3 1  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  and 
cwcejj  to  him,  Ne  befjurfon  Iscces  da  de 
hale  synd,  ac  da  de  unli8el))e  liabba}) ; 

32  Ne  com  ic  rilitwise  clypian,  ac 
synfulle  on  daed-bote. 

33  Da  cwsedon  hig  to  him,  Hwi  ftesta]) 
lohannes  leorning-cnihtas  gelomlice,  and 
halsunga  doj),  and  eall-swu  Farisea,  and 
dine  etaj;  and  drinca))  ? 

34  Da  cwse})  he,  Cwyst  dii  magon  dass 
brydguman  beam  ffestan,  swa  lange  swa 
se  brydguma  myd  him  ys  % 

35  S6))lice  da  dagas  cuma,',  donne  se 
brydguma  him  byj>  afyrred,  donne  fsestaj) 
hicf  on  dam  das-um. 


V.  C3-35-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

of  hem,  he  answcringc  scide  to  hen, 
"What  theukeu  50  yuelc  thingis  in  joure 
bertis  1 

23  What  is  lijtere  to  seye,  Synnes  ben 
for50uun  to  thee,  cthir  to  scic,  Eysc  vp, 
and  walke  1 

24  Sothli  that  5e  wite,  for  mannis  sonc 
hath  power  in  erthe  to  for5yue  synnes, 
he  seith  to  the  syke  man  in  palasy,  To 
thee  I  seie,  ryse  vp,  take  thi  bed,  and 
go  in  to  thin  hous. 

25  And  anon  lie  risinge  vp  bifore  hem, 
took  the  bed  in  Avhieh  he  hiy,  and  wente 
in  to  his  hous,  magnyfyinge  God. 

26  And  gi-eet  wondir  took  alle  men, 
and  thei  magnyfieden  God ;  and  thei 
weren  fulfiUid  with  greet  drede,  seyinge, 
For  we  han  seyn  merueilouse  thingis  to 
day. 

27  And  aftir  thes  thingis  Jhesu  Avente 
out,  and  sv}  a  pupplican,  Leeuy  by  name, 
sittinge  at  the  tolbothe.  And  he  seith 
to  him,  Sue  thou  me  ; 

28  And  alle  thingis  forsaken,  he  risynge 
suede  him. 

29  And  Leuy  made  to  him  a  greet 
feeste  in  his  hous ;  and  there  was  a 
greet  cumpanye  of  pupplicans,  and  of 
othere  that  weren  with  hem,  sittinge  at 
the  mete. 

30  And  Farisees  and  the  scribis  of  hem 
grucchiden,  seyinge  to  his  disciplis,  Wlii 
eten  50  and  drynken  with  puj^plicans 
ami  synful  men] 

3 1  And  Jhesu  answcringe  seith  to  hem, 
Thei  that  ben  hoole  han  no  nede  to  a 
leehe,  but  thei  that  han  yuele  ; 

32  Sothli  I  cam  not  to  clepe  iust  men, 
but  synful  men  to  penaunce. 

33  And  thei  seiden  to  him,  Whi  dis- 
ciplis of  John  fasten  oft,  and  maken 
biscchingis,  also  and  of  Pharisees,  but 
thi  disciplis  etcu  and  drynken  1 

34  To  whiche  he  seith,  "Whcr  30  mown 
make  the  sones  of  the  spouse  for  to  faste, 
the  while  the  spouse  is  with  hem] 

:]f)  Sothli  dayes  schnlen  come,  wlianne 
the  spouse  sclial  be  taken  awey  fro  hem, 
tlianuc  thei  schulen  faste  in  tho  dayes. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


.•303 


thoughtes,  he  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  What  thynke  ye  in  youre  hertes  'I 

2  3  Whether  is  casyar  to  saye,  Thy  synnes 
arc  forgeveu  the,  or  to  saye,  Rise,  and 
walke  ? 

24  That  ye  mayc  knowe,  that  the  sonne 
off"  man  hath  power  to  forgeve  synnes 
on  crth,  he  sayde  vnto  the  sicke  of  tho 
palyse,  I  saye  to  the,  arysc,  take  vp  thy 
boed,  and  goo  home  to  tliy  housse. 

25  And  immcdiatly  he  rose  vp  before 
them  all,  and  tokc  vp  his  becd  where  on 
he  laye,  and  departed  to  his  awne  housse, 
I)raysynge  God. 

26  And  they  were  all  amased,  and  they 
lauded  God  ;  and  were  filled  with  feare, 
sayinge.  We  have  sene  straunge  thynges 
to  daye. 

27  And  after  that  he  went  forthe,  and 
sawe  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sittynge 
at  the  receyte  off"  custome.  And  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Folow  me  ; 

28  And  he  leeft  all,  roose  vppe  and 
folowed  hym. 

29  And  that  same  J^evi  made  him  a 
greate  feaste  at  home  in  his  awne  housse  ; 
and  there  was  a  greate  company  of  pub- 
licans, and  off"  othei",  that  sate  at  meate 
with  hym. 

30  And  the  scribes  and  Pharises 
gi-udged  agaynst  his  disciples,  sainge. 
Why  eate  ye  and  drynke  yc  with  publi- 
cans and  syuners  ? 

31  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them.  They  that  are  whole  nede  not  of 
the  phisicion,  but  they  that  are  sicke  ; 

32  I  cam  not  to  call  the  rightewes  to 
repentaunce,  but  the  synners. 

33  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Why  do  the 
disciples  off  Jhon  fast  often,  and  praye, 
and  the  disciples  of  the  Pharises  also, 
and  thyne  eate  and  drynke  ] 

34  To  whome  he  sayde,  Can  ye  make 
the  children  of  the  wcddynge  fast,  as 
longe  as  the  bi-ydegrome  is  present  with 
them  ? 

35  The  dayes  will  come,  when  the  bryd- 
giomc  shalbe  taken  awaye  from  them, 
tiicu  shall  they  fast  in  thoosc  dayes. 


304 


GOTHIC,  360. 


36  Qa|)uh  }ian  yali  gaj'ukon  du  im ; 
patei  ainsliun  plat  snagins  nluyis  ni 
lagyid  ana  snagan  fairnyana  ;  ai})J)au 
yah  sa  niuya  aftaurnid,  yah  ):amma 
fairnyia  ni  gatimid  ]jata  af  |)amma 
niuyin. 

37  Yah  ainshun  ni  giutid  wein  niuyata 
in  balgins  fairuyans ;  aijjl'au  distairid 
Jiata  niuyo  wein  j^ans  balgins,  yah  silbo 
usgutni]?,  yah  Jjai  balgeis  fraqistnand. 

38  Ak  wein  yuggata'in  balgins  niuyans 
giutand,  yah  bayojjs  gafastanda. 

39  Yah  ainshun  driggandane  fairni,  ni 
suns  will  yugg ;  qij^ij?  auk,  pata  fairnyo 
batizo  ist. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Yah  war})  in  sabbato 
anj^aramma  frumin,  gaggan  imma  ];airli 
atisk,  yah  raupidedun  ahsa  siponyos  is  ; 
yah  naatidedun,  buauandans  haudum. 

2  Ijj  sumai  Fareisaie  qe|)un  du  im, 
Wha  tauyid,  J)atei  ni  skuld  ist  tauyan  in 
sabbato  dagam  1 

3  Yali  andhafyands  wi|)i'a  ins  lesus 
qaJ5,  iSTi  jjata  ussuggwud,  })atei  gatawida 
Daweid,  };au  gredags  was  silba,  yah  jjaiei 
mi])  imma  wesun ; 

4  Whaiwa  inngalaij)  in  gard  Gu|)S,  yah 
hlaibans  faurlageinais  usnam,  yah  mat- 
ida,  yah  gaf  J^aim  nil})  sis  wisandam ; 
])anzei  ni  skuld  ist  matyan,  nibai  ainaim 
gudyara. 

5  Yah  qa})  du  im,  patei  frauya  ist  sa 
sunus  mans,  yah,  jjamma  sabbato  daga. 

6  Yah  war))  J)an  in  an))aramma  daga 
sabbato,  galeij)an  imma  in  swnagogein, 
yah  laisyan.  Yah  was  yainar  manna, 
yah  handus  is  so  taihswo  was  }'aursus. 

7  Witaidedunuh  ]>an  Jjai  bokaryos  yah 
Fareisaieis,  yau  in  sabbato  daga  leik- 
inodedi,  ei  bigeteina  til  du  wrohyan 
ina. 

8  I|)  is  wissuh  mitonins  ize,  yah  qa]) 
du  I'amma  mann  ]iamma  ])aursya  haband- 
in  handu,  XJrreis,  yah  stand  in  midyaim. 
paruh  is  urreisands  gasto]). 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

36  Da  SEede  he  him  an  bigspell ;  Ne 
asent  nan  man  scyp  of  niwum  reafe  on 
eald  reaf ;  elles  dtet  niwe  slit,  and  se 
niwa  scyp  ne  hylp])  dam  ealdan. 


37  Ne  nan  man  ne  sent  niwe  win  on 
ealde  bytta  ;  elles  dixt  niwe  w^n  In-yc]) 
da  bytta,  and  Claet  win  byj)  agoten,  and 
da  bytta  forwurda]). 

38  Ac  niwe  win  is  to  sendenne  on 
niwe  bytta,  donne  beo])  da  bytta  ge- 
liealdene. 

39  And  ne  drincj)  n^n  man  eald  win, 
and  wylle  s5na  diet  niwe  j  he  cwy]), 
Daet  ealde  is  betere. 


Chap.  VI.  i  S6])lice  wses  geworden 
on  dam  sefteran  reste-d^ge  serest,  da 
he  ferde  ])urh  da  seceras,  hys  leorning- 
enihtas  da  ear  pluccedon ;  and  mid 
hyra  handum  gnidoii,  and  ttton. 

2  Da  cwsedon  sume  of  dam  Sundor- 
halgan,  Hwi  d5  ge,  dset  eow  alyfed  nis 
on  reste-dagum  1 

3  Da  andswarode  him  se  Hselend,  Ne 
rcedde  ge  dajt,  hwset  Dauid  dyde,  da 
hine  hingrede,  and  da  de  mid  him 
wseron ; 

4  Hii  he  code  into  Godes  huse,  and 
nam  da  offrung-hlafas,  and  hig  pet,  and 
dam  sealde  de  mid  him  wseron ;  da  nseron 
alyfede  to  etanne,  buton  sacerdum  an- 
um. 

5  And  he  ssede  him,  Dset  drihten  is 
manncs  sunu,  eac  swylce,  reste-da?ges. 

'  6  S6})lice  on  odrum  reste-da?ge  wses 
geworden,  diiet  he  on  gesamnunge  code, 
and  Iccrde.  And  dar  wjes  sum  man. 
and  his  s\A'ydre  hand  wres  forscruncen. 

7  Da  gymdon  da  boceras  and  Farisei, 
hwseder  he  on  reste-dtege  hselde,  dxt  hi 
hyne  gewregdon. 

8  S6])lice  he  wiste  hyra  ge])ancas,  and 
he  saede  dam  men  de  da  furscruncenan 
hand  hsefde,  A'ris,  and  stand  hei'  t' mid- 
dan.     Da  aras  he  and  stud. 


V.  36.-VI.  8.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

36  Forsoth  he  sciilc  to  hciu  also  a  lik- 
nesse  ;  For  no  man  sendlth  a  nietlling 
of  ncwc  cloth  in  to  an  old  cloth  ;  ellis 
and  lie  brekith  the  ncwc,  and  the  med-' 
ling  of  the  ncwc  acordith  not  to  the 
oolde. 

37  And  no  man  scndith  ncwc  wyn  in 
to  olde  wyn  vcsselis  ;  dlis  the  newe  wyn 
sehal  hrcke  the  wyn  vcsselis,  and  the 
wyn  sohal  be  schcd  out,  and  the  wyn 
vcsselis  schulen  perischc. 

38  But  newe  wyn  is  to  be  scut  in  to 
newe  wyn  vesselis,  and  bothe  ben  kept. 

39  And  no  man  drynkinge  old,  wole 
anon  newe  ;  sothli  he  seith,  The  olde  is 
the  betere. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


."(:.■> 


Chap.  YI.  i  Forsothe  it  is  doii  in  the 
secuiule  firste  saboth,  Avhanne  he  passidc 
by  cornes,  his  disciplis  pluckcdcn  eeris  ; 
and  thei  frotinge  with  her  hondis,  eeten. 

2  Sothli  summe  of  the  Pharisees  seideu 
to  hem.  What  don  56  this,  that  is  not 
leefful  iu  sabotis  ? 

3  And  Jhesu  answcvinge  seide  to  hem, 
Neithir  5e  han  rad  this,  that  Dauith 
dide,  whanne  he  hungride,  and  thei  that 
wercn  with  him  ; 

4  Hon  he  entride  in  to  the  lions  of 
God,  and  took  looucs  of  proposicioun, 
and  cet,  and  5af  to  hem  that  weren  with 
him  ;  whiche  looues  it  was  not  leefful  to 
etc,  no  but  to  preestis  aloone. 

5  And  he  seide  to  hem.  For  mannis 
sone  is  lord,  36,  of  the  saboth. 

6  Sothli  it  was  don  and  in  an  other 
saboth,  that  he  entride  in  to  a  synagoge, 
and  tau3te.  And  a  man  was  there,  and 
his  ri5thond  was  drye. 

7  For.sothe  scribis  and  Pharisees  aspi- 
cileu  him,  if  he  sclinlde  heele  him  in  the 
silioth,  that  thei  schulden  fyndc  cause, 
^\ll^■rof  thei  schulden  accuse  him. 

"s  Sothli  he  wiste  the  thou5tis  of  hem, 
and  he  seith  to  the  man  that  liadde  a 
•  live  bond,  Rise  vp,  and  stond  in  to  the 
iiivddel.     And  he  risintjc  stood. 


36  He  spake  vnto  them  iu  a  simili- 
tude ;  No  man  putthcth  a  jicce  of  an 
ncwc  garment  into  an  olde  vesture  ;  for 
yf  he  do,  thou  brcakcth  he  the  newe,  and 
the  pecc  that  was  taken  out  of  the  newe 
agrecth  nott  with  the  olde. 

37  Also  no  man  ])oureth  ncwc  wyne 
into  olde  vessels  ;  yi  he  do,  the  newe 
wyne  brcakcth  the  vessels,  and  runneth 
out  it  silfc,  and  the  vessels  perisshc. 

38  But  newe  wyne  must  be  poured 
into  newe  vessels,  and  boothe  are  pre- 
served. 

39  Also  no  man  that  drynkcth  olde 
wyne,  strayght  waye  can  awaye  Avith 
newe  ;  for  he  sayeth.  The  olde  is  plc- 
saunter. 


Chap.  VI.  i  Hit  happened  on  an 
aftersaboth,  they  went  thorowc  the  corne 
feldc,  and  his  disciples  plucked  the  eares 
of  corne  ;  and  ate  them,  and  rubbed  them 
in  their  hondes. 

2  Certayne  of  the  Pharises  sayde  vnto 
them,  Wliy  do  ye  that,  which  is  not  lau- 
full  to  be  done  on  the  saboth  dayes  ? 

3  Jesus  answered  them  and  sayde, 
Have  ye  nott  redde  what  David  did, 
when  he  hym  silfe  was  anhungred,  and 
they  which  were  with  hym  ; 

4  Howe  he  went  into  the  housse  off 
God,  and  toke,  and  ate  the  loves  oft* 
halowed  breed,  and  gave  also  to  them 
which  were  with  hym ;  which  was  nott 
laufnll  to  cate,  but  for  the  prestes  only. 

5  And  he  sayd  vnto  them,  The  sonno 
of  man  is  lorde,  even  of  the  saboth  daye. 

6  And  it  fortuned  in  a  nother  saboth 
also,  that  he  entred  into  the  sinagoge, 
and  taught.  And  there  was  a  man, 
whose  right  honde  was  dryed  vp. 

7  The  scribes  and  the  Pharises  watched 
hym,  to  se  whether  he  wolde  heale  on 
the  saboth  daye  or  not,  that  they  myght 
fyndc  an  accusacion  agaynst  hym. 

8  Butt  he  knewc  their  thoughtes,  and 
sayde  to  the  man  which  had  the  wyddred 
honde,  Piyse  vp,  and  stonde  forthe  in 
the  myddes.  He  arose  and  stepped 
forthe. 


30(5 


GOTHIC,  360. 


9  Q;i)>  Jjan  lesus  du  im,  Frcdhna  I'z- 
wis,  -wlia  skuld  i'sfc  sabbato  dagam  ])iu}) 
tauyuii,  Jjau  uujjiii})  tauyan'?  saiwala 
gauasyan,  Jjau  usqistyan  1 

10  Yah,  ussaiwliands  allaiis  ins,  qa))  du 
'imma,  Ufrakei  1)0  Iiandu  Jjeina.  paruli 
is  ufrakida,  yah  gasto})  so  handus  is 
swaswe  so  anjjara. 

11  I[»  eis  fuUai  waui'lain  unfrodeins, 
yah  rodidedun  du  sis  misso,  wha  taw- 
idideina  jjamnia  lesua. 

12  Yah  war]?  in  dagara  ])aim,  ei  usid- 
dj'a  lesus  in  fairguni  bidyan ;  yah  was 
iiaht  .bairhwakands  in  bidai  GuJjs. 

13  Yah  bi[)e  war}>  dags,  atwopida 
sipoayans  seinans,  yah  gawalyands  us 
im  twalib,  Jjanzei  yah  apaustuluus  uam- 
iiida  ; 

14  (Seuiion,  jianei  yah  namnida  Paitvu, 
yah  Andraian,  brojjar  is,  lakobu  yah 
iohanncn.  Filippu  yah  Barjjulomaiu, 

15  Ma]4'aiu  yah  poman,  lakobu  ])ana 
Alfaius,  yah  Seimon,  Jjana  haitanan 
Zelotcn, 

16  ludan  lakobaus,  yah  ludan  Is- 
karioten,  saei  yah  war]j  galewyands  iua. 

17  Yah  atgaggands  dalaj?  mij?  im,  ga- 
sto]) ana  stada  ibnamma  ;  yah  hiuma 
r^iponye  'is,  yah  hansa  mikila  manageins, 
af  allamma  ludaias,  yah  lairusalem,  yah 
\nze  faur  marehi,  Twre,  yah  Seidone, 
yah  an]):u-aizo  baurge,  ]7aiei  qemun 
itausyan  imma,  yah  hailyan  sik  sauhte 
seinaizo. 

18  Yah  Jmi  anahabaidans  fram  ahmam 
unhrainyaim,  yah  gahailidai  waur])un. 

1 9  Yah  alia  managei  sokidedun  attekan 
imma,  unte  mahts  af  imma  usiddya,  yah 
ganasida  allans. 

20  Yah  is,  ushafyands  augona  seina  du 
siponyam  seinami,  qa]j,  Audagai,  yus 
unledans  ahmin,  unte  izwara  ist  ])iud- 
angardi  himine. 

21  Audagai  yus,  gredagans  nu,  luite 
sadai  wairj)i]).  Audagai  yus,  gretandans 
uu,  unte  ufhlohyanda. 

22  Audagai   siyu}?,    J^an    fiyand   izwis 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

9  Da  cwse]>  se  Hselend  to  him,  Ic 
ahsige  eow,  alyfj;  on  reste-dagum  wel 
don,  oclde  yfele  1  sawle  hale  ged5n, 
hwaeder  de  forspillan  1 

10  And,  him  eallum  gesceawodum  mid 
yrre,  he  ssede  dam  men,  A'fjene  dine 
hand.  And  he  a])enode,  and  his  hand 
wses  ge-edniwod. 

11  Da  wurdon  hig  mid  unwisd5me 
gefyllede,  and  sprgccon  betwux  him, 
hwtet  hig  dam  Hselende  dydon. 

12  Sojjlice  on  dam  dagum,  he  ferde  on 
anne  muut  hine  gebiddan ;  and  wses 
dar  wacigende  on  Godes  gebede. 

13  And  da  da  da^g  wses,  he  clypode 
hys  leorning-cnihtas,  and  geceas  twelf 
of  him,  and  da  he  iiemde  apostolas  ; 

14  Simonem,  dasne  he  nemdc  Petrum, 
and  his  brodor,  Andream,  lacobum  and 
lohanuem,  Philippum  and  Bartholo- 
meum, 

15  Thomam  and  i\Iatheum,  lacobum 
Alphei,  and  Simonem,  se  is  genemned 
Zelotes, 

16  ludam  lacobi,  and  ludam  Scarioth, 
se  wtes  Icewa. 

17  And  mid  him  farendum,  he  stod  on 
fcldlicre  stowe  ;  and  mycel  wcred  his 
Icorning-cnihta,  and  mycel  menegeo, 
fram  ealre  ludea,  and  fram  Jerusalem, 
and  ofer  mujjan,  and  sse-gemsere,  Tiri, 
and  Sydonis,  da  comon,  dset  hi  hyne 
geliyrdon,  and  waeron  of  liyra  adlum. 
geheelede. 

18  And  da  de  wseron  of  unclsenum 
gastum  gedrehte,  AVctron  gehselede. 

19  And  eal  sco  menigeo  sohte  hine  to 
tet-hrinanne,  fordam  de  msegen  of  him 
code,  and  he  ealle  gehceldc. 

20  Da  cwpe]j  se  Hselend,  besconde  to 
his  leorning-cnihtum,  Eadige  synd,  ge 
Jjearfan  on  giiste,  fordam  de  Godes  rice 
is  eower. 

21  Eadige  synd,  ge  de  hingria])  nu, 
fordam  de  ge  beo])  gefyllede.  Eadige 
synd,  ge  de  nu  wepa}?,  fordam  ge  hlihajj. 

22  Eadige   beo   ge,   donne    eow   mea 


VI.  9-3  2.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

9  Sothli  .Thcsii  scitli  to  licm,  I  axe  5011,  | 
if  it  is  loofViil  to  do  wel  in  the  sabot,  j 
ether  yiu'le  ?  for. to  make  a  soulc  saf,  I 
ether  for  to  lecse  1  ! 

10  And,  alle  men  hiokidc  ahonte,  lie 
scidc  to  the  man,  llokl  forth  tliin  hond. 
And  he  hehl  fortli,  and  his  hond  was 
x'estorid  to  helthe. 

1 1  Sothli  tliei  weren  fulfilld  with  vn- 
wysilom,  and  spaken  to  gidcrc,  what 
thei  sohuklon  do  of  Jhcsn. 

12  Forsothc  it  is  don  in  tho  dayes,  lie 
wente  out  in  to  an  hil  for  to  pi-eye ;  and 
he  was  al  nv3t  dwellingc  in  the  preier 
of  God. 

13  And  whanne  the  day  was  maad,  he 
clepidc  his  disciplis,  and  dices  twclue  of 
hem,  whiche  he  clepide  also  apostlis ; 

14  Symound,  whom  he  clepide  Petre, 
and  Andrew,  his  brother,  James  and 
Jon,  riiilip  and  Bartolmcw, 

15  !Mathcu  and  Thomas,  James  Alphei, 
and  Symound,  that  is  clepid  Zclotis, 

1 6  Judas  of  James,  and  Judas  Scariot, 
that  was  traitour. 

17  And  Jhesu  comynge  doun  fro  the 
hil  with  hem,  stood  in  a  feeld  plaee ; 
and  the  cumpenye  of  his  di&ciplis,  and  a 
plenteuous  multitude  of  pore  peple,  of  al 
Judee,  and  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  sc 
coostis,  and  of  Tii-e,  and  of  Sydon,  whiche 
canien,  that  thei  schulde  heere  hym, 
and  that  thei  schuldcn  be  heelid  of  her 
langwischingis  ; 

18  And  tliei  that  wcrcn  trauelid  with 
vuclcne  spiritis,  wcrcn  heelid. 

19  And  cell  cumpony  of  the  peple 
sou5ten  for  to  touche  him,  for  vertu 
Avcntc  out  of  him,  and  heelide  alle. 

20  And,  his  y5en  reysid  vj)  in  to  his 
<lisciplis,  he  seidc,  Blcssid  be  56,  pore 
men,  for  the  kyngdom  of  God  is  30ure. 

21  I51cssid  be  50,  that  hungren  now,  for 
50  schulcn  be  fillid.  Jjlcssid  be  5c,  that 
wepcn  now,  for  5c  sehulcn  lcy5e. 

.22  3c  schulcn  be  blessid,  whanne  men 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


307 


9  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  them,  I  will 
axe  you  a  question,  whether  is  it  laufuU 
on  tlie  saboth  dayes  to  do  goodc,  or  to 
do  evill  ?  to  save  life,  oder  for  to  de- 
stroye  hyf? 

10  And  he  beheldc  them  all  in  com- 
passe,  and  sayd  vnto  the  man,  Stretchc 
forth  thy  lioiidc.  He  did  soo,  and  his 
honde  was  restored  and  made  as  whoolc 
as  the  other. 

11  And  they  were  filled  full  of  made- 
ncs,  and  counselled  won  with  another, 
what  they  myght  do  to  Jesu. 

1 2  Hit  fortuned  in  thoose  dayes,  he 
went  out  into  a  mountayne  for  to  praye  ; 
and  continued  all  nyght  in  pra}cr  to 
God. 

13  And  as  sone  as  it  was  daye,  he 
called  his  disciples,  and  of  them  he  chose 
twelve,  which  also  he  called  his  apo- 
steles ; 

14  Simon,  whom  also  he  named  Peter, 
and  Andrew,  his  brother,  Jauncs  and 
Jhon,  Philip  and  Bartlemeaw, 

15  Mathcw  and  Thoiiias,  James  the 
Sonne  of  Alphcus,  and  Simon,  called 
Zelotes, 

16  And  Judas  James  sonne,  and  Judas 
Iseariot,  which  same  was  the  traytour. 

17  And  he  cam  doune  with  them,  and 
stode  in  the  playne  felde ;  Avith  the 
company  of  his  disciples,  and  a  greate 
multitude  of  people,  out  off  all  parties 
off  Jewry,  and  Jerusalem,  and  from  the 
see  cooste  off  Tire,  and  Sidon,  which 
cam  to  hcare  hym,  and  to  be  healed  of 
their  diseases  ; 

1 8  And  they  also  that  were  vexed  with 
foule  sprctcs,  and  they  were  healed. 

19  And  all  the  people  preascd  to 
touche  hym,  for  there  went  vcrtue  out 
off  hym,  and  healed  them  all. 

20  And  he  leftc  vp  his  eyes  apon  hiii 
disciples,  and  sayde.  Blessed  arc  ye, 
povre,  for  youers  is  the  kyngdom  off 
God. 

2 1  Blessed  arc  ye,  that  lionger,  for  ye 
shalbe  satisfied.  Blessed  are  ye,  that 
wcpc,  for  ye  shall  laugh. 

22  Blessed  arc  ye,  when  men  hate  you, 

X2 


308 


GOTHIC,  360. 


mans,  yali  afskai eland  izwis,  yali  i'd- 
■\veityand,  yah  uswairpand  nainin  izwai'- 
amma  swe  ubilamma,  in  sunaus  mans. 

23  Faginod  in  yainamma  daga,  yali 
laikid  ;  unte  sai !  niizdo  izwara  nianaga 
in  hiniinam  ;  bi  Jjamina  auk  tawidedun 
praufetum  attans  ize. 

24  A])J)an  Aval  izwis,  Jiaim  gabeigam, 
unte  yu  Iiabaid  ga])lailit  izwara. 

25  Wai  'izwis  yus  sadans  nu,  unte 
gredagai  wairjjijj.  Wai  izwis  yus  blah- 
yandans  nu,  unte  gaunon,  yah  gretaii 
iluginnid. 

26  Wai,  jjan  waiU^  "izwis  qij^and  allai 
mans ;  samaleilvo  allis  tawidedun  ga- 
liugapraufetum  attans  ize. 

27  Akei  izwis  qi)>a  ];aim  hausyandam, 
friyod  ]?ans  hatandans  izwis,  waila  tau- 
3'aid  ]jaini  fiyandam  izwis  ; 

28  piuj>yai]j  Jjans  fraqij)andans  izwis, 
bidyaid  Irani  ])aim  anamahtyandam  iz- 
wis. 

29  paninia  stautandin  Jjuk  bi  kinnu, 
galewei  inima  yah  anjjara  ;  yali  j^amnia 
iiimandin  af  ))us  wastya,  yah,  paida  ni 
waryais. 

30  Whammeli  |)an  bidyandane  ])uk  gif, 
yah  af  ]jannua  uimandin  j:iein,  ni  lausei. 

31  Yah  swaswe  wileid  ei  tauyaina  iz- 
wis mans,  yah  yus  tauyaid  i'ni  samaleiko. 

32  A|>]5an  yabai  friyod  })ans  friyondans 
Yzwis,  wha  izwis  laune  ist  1  yah  auk  })ai 
frawaurhtans  ))ans  friyondans  sik  friyond. 

33  Yah  yabai  })iu])  tauyaid  })aim  ];iu]j 
tauyandam  izwis,  wha  izwis  laune  ist  ? 
yah  auk  j^ai  frawaurhtans  J^ata  same 
tauyand. 

34  Yah  yabai  leiwhid,  fram  jjaimei 
weneid  andniman,  Avha  izwis  laune  ist  1 
yah  auk  frawaurhtai  frawaurhtaim  leiwh- 
and.  ei  andnimaina  samalaud. 

35  Swejiauh  friyod  ])ans  fiyands  iz- 
warans,  \nu\>  tauyaid,  yah  leiwhaid,  ni 
Avaihtais  usAvenans,  yah  wair})i)5  mizdo 
izwara  managa,  yah  AA^airJii])  sunyus 
Hauhistins,  unte  is  gods  ist  jjaim  un- 
fagram  yali  unselyam. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

liatiaj?,  and  ehtaji,  and  onhisca]?,  and 
ilAvurj)a])  eoAA^erne  iianian  swa  SAva  yfel, 
for  inannes  suna. 

23  Geblissia}),  and  gefsegnia)?  on  dam 
dagum ;  nil !  eoAver  med  is  mycel  on 
lieofenum  ;  s6|;lice  sefter  disum  |)ingum 
hyra  fjederas  dydon  dam  witegum. 

24  Deah-liwsedere  Ava  eoAv  weligum, 
fordam  de  ge  eoAverne  frofer  habbajj. 

25  Wa  eoAv  de  ge  fyllede  synd,  fordam 
de  ge  hingria}'.  Wa,  eoAv  de  mi  liliha]?, 
fordam  de  ge  lieofia)?,  and  Avepajj. 

26  Wa  eow,  donne  eow  ealle  men 
bletsiap ;  ?efter  disum  }5ingum  hyra 
fpederas  dydon  dam  .  .  Avitegum. 

27  Ac  ic  eow  secge  fordam  de  ge 
gehyrajj,  lufia|)  eoAATe  fynd,  (16\>  dam  tala 
de  eoAv  hatedon  ; 

28  Bletsia[>  da  de  coav  AA'irgia]),  ge- 
biddajj  for  da  de  eoAv  onhisceaJ». 

29  And  dam  de  de  slihf)  on  din  ge- 
Aveiige,  Avend  oder  agen  ;  and  dam  de 
din  reaf  iiim|>,  ne  forbeod  him  na  dine 
tunecan. 

30  Syle  Belcum  de  de  bidde,  and  se  de 
nim))  da  jjing  de  dine  synd,  ne  mynega 
dii  hyra. 

31  And  SAva  ge  Avyllaj?  dset  eoAV  men 
d5n,  d6j>  him  gelice. 

32  And  Invylc  \>iinc  is  eoAV,  gif  ge 
lufiajj  da  de  eoAv  lufialj  1  s5)>lice  syii- 
fulle  lufiajj  da  de  hi  lufia}). 

33  And  gyf  ge  AA'el  doj)  dam  de  eoAV 
Avel  do]?,  liAvylc  Jjanc  is  eoAv  1  wltodlice 
da3t  dojj  synfulle. 

34  And  gif  ge  Isena]),  dam  de  ge  eft 
ajt-onfo)),  liAA'ylc  ])anc  is  eoAV  1  s6))lice 
synfulle  synfuUum  leenaj),  dtet  hi  gelice 
onfoii. 

35  Deali-hAA'asdere  lufiajj  eoAvre  fynd, 
and  him  Avel  do]',  and  Iseiie  sylla]),  nan 
))ing  danun  eft  gehilitende,  and  eoAA'er 
med  byjj  mycel  on  heofone,  and  ge  beo|) 
dses  Hehstan  beam,  fordam  de  he  is 
god  ofer  unJjancfuUe  and  ofer  yfele. 


VI.  23-35-]  WYCLIFFE,i3^9- 

sclmlpn  hate  ;ou,  and  scluileii  tlopartc 
50U  awey,  and  sduilen  puttc  sclienschip 
on  ^ou,  and  schulen  caste  out  5i)uve 
name  as  yuel,  for  mannis  sono. 
,  23  Joye  50  in  herte  in  that  day,  and 
ghxde  5e  ivith  oute  forth ;  loo !  sothli 
50urc  nicde  is  niochc  in  heuenc  ;  for- 
sothe  vp  thes  thinLjis  the  fach-is  of  hem 
<liden  to  proi)hctis. 

24  Nethelcs  avoo  to  50U,  richc  men, 
that  lian  ;;oure  comfort. 

25  Woo  to  50U  that  ben  fiiltillid,  for  56 
schulen  hungre.  Woo  to  50U  that  lau3heu 
now,  for  50  schal  niorue,  and  wepe. 

26  Woo,  whanne  alle  men  schulen 
blesse  50U  ;  aftir  thes  thingis  the  fadris 
of  hem  diden  to  .   .  prophetis. 

27  But  I  seie  to  50U  that  heeren,  loue 
56  5oure  cnemyes,  do  5e  wel  to  hem  that 
liaten  50U ; 

28  Blesse  5e  to  men  cursinge  50U,  preie 
36  for  men  falsly  chaleugynge  50U. 

29  And  to  him  that  schal  smyte  thee 
on  o  cheke,  5yue  also  the  tother ;  and 
fro  him  that  takith  awey  fro  thee  a  cloth, 
5he,  nyle  thou  forbede  the  coote. 

30  Sothly  5yue  to  ech  axinge  thee,  and 
■\vlio  takith  away  tho  thingis  that  ben 
thyne,  axe  thou  not  a5eyn. 

31  And  as  50  woleu  that  men  do  to 
30U,  and  do  56  to  hem  in  lyk  manere. 

32  And  if  5e  louen  hem  that  louen  50U, 
what  grace ■*■  is  to  50U  ]  for  whi  and  syn- 
ful  men  louen  men  louynge  hem. 

33  And  if  56  don  wel  to  hem  that  don 
wel  to  50U,  what  grace  is  to  50W  1  sothly 
and  synful  men  don  this  thing. 

34  And  if  50  5yuen  borwynge  to  hem, 
of  whichc  56  liopen  to  take  a5en,  what 
gi'ace  is  to  30U  ?  for  whi  and  synful  men 
leenen  to  synful  men,  that  the!  taken 
a3eyn  euene  thingis. 

35  Nethelcs  loue  5e  5oure  enemyes, 
and  do  5c  wel,  and  3yue  30  borwyng, 
hopinge  no  thing  therof,  and  3oure  mede 
schal  be  moche,  and  30  schulen  be  the 
soncs  of  the  lii3este,  for  he  is  benyngne 
on  vnkynde  men  and  yuele  men. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


300 


and  thrust  you  out  oft'  their  companye, 
and  raylc  on  you,  and  abhorre  youre 
name  as  an  cvill  thyngc,  for  the  sonne 
olV  mannes  sake. 

23  lleioyse  ye  then,  and  be  gladde ; 
for  beholde  !  youre  rewar^o  is  grcatc  in 
heven  ;  after  this  manner  their  fathers 
entreated  the  prophetes. 

24  But  wo  be  to  you,  that  are  ryche, 
for  ye  have  ther  in  youre  consolacion. 

25  Wo  be  to  you  that  are  full,  for  ye 
shall  honger.  Wo  be  to  you  that  nowe 
laugh,  for  ye  shall  wayle,  and  wepe. 

26  Wo  be  to  you,  when  all  men  prayse 
you ;  for  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  falce 
prophetes. 

27  But  I  saye  vnto  you  which  heare, 
love  youre  enemys,  do  goode  to  them 
whych  hate  you  ; 

28  Blesse  them  that  courssc  you,  and 
praye  for  them  which  wrongfully  tr(nible 
you. 

29  And  vnto  hym  that  smyteth  the 
on  the  one  cheke,  offer  also  the  other ; 
and  hym  that  taketh  awaye  thy  goune, 
forbid  nott  to  take  thy  coote  also. 

30  Geve  to  every  man  that  axeth  of 
the,  and  yf  eny  man  take  awaye  thy 
goodes,  axe  them  nott  agayne. 

31  And  as  ye  wolde  that  men  shulde 
doo  to  you,  soo  do  ye  to  them  lyke 
wyse. 

32  Yf  ye  love  them  which  love  you, 
what  thanke  ai'e  ye  worthy  of?  seinge 
that  the  very  synners  love  their  lovers. 

33  And  yf  ye  do  for  them  which  do 
for  you,  what  thanke  are  ye  worthy  of? 
for  the  very  sinners  doo  even  the  same. 

34  Y^ffye  lende  to  them,  off  Avhome  ye 
hoope  to  reccave,  what  thanke  shal  yc 
have  ?  for  the  very  synners  lende  to  sin- 
ners, to  reccave  as  moch  agayne. 

35  Love  ye  youre  enemys,  do  goode, 
and  lende,  lokyiigc  for  nothyngc  agayne, 
and  youi-e  rcwardc  shal  be  greate,  and  ye 
shalbe  the  ehyldren  off  the  Ilyest,  for  he 
is  kynde  vnto  the  vnkynde  and  to  the 
evyll. 


310 


GOTHIC,    360. 


36  Wairjjaid  blcl))yandans,  swaswe  yali 
atta  i'zwav  bleij^s  ist. 

37  Yah  ni  stoyid,  ei  ni  stoyaindau. 
Ni  afdomyaid,  yah  ni  afdomyanda ; 
fraletaidj   yah   fraletanda. 

38  Gibaid,  yah  gibada  izwis.  Mitads 
goda,  yah  ufarfulla,  yah  gawigana,  yah 
ufargutana  gibada  'in  barm  izwaraiia  ; 
j^izai  auk  samon  mitadyoii,  ]?izaiei  mitid, 
mitada  "izwis. 


39  Qa|>uh  |ian  gayulcon  im,  Ibai  mag 
blinds  blindana  tiuhan  ?  niu  bai  in  dal 
gadriusand  1 

40  Nist  siponeis  ufar  laisari  seinana ; 
'i\)  gamanwids,  wharyizuh  "svairjjai  swe 
laisaris  is. 

41  A])|jan  wha  gaumeis  gramsta  lu 
augin  brojjrs  })einis,  i]j  anza  in  ])einamma 
augin  ni  gaumeis  ? 

42  Ai]3]jau  whaiwa  magt  qij^an  du  bro])!- 
J)einamma,  BroJ)ar,  let,  i'k  uswairpa  gram- 
sta ]?amma  in  augin  |)einamma  1  silba  in 
augin  jjeinamma  anza  ni  gaumyands  1 
Liuta,  usAvairp  faurj)is  })amma  anza  us 
augin  })einamma,  yah  })an  gaurayais,  us- 
wairpan  gramsta  l)anima  in  augin  brojjrs 
Jjeinis. 

43  Ni  auk  1st  bagms  gods,  tauyands 
akran  ubil,  nih])an  bagms  ubils^  tauyands 
akran  god  ; 

44  Wharylzuli  raihtis  bagme  us  swe- 
samma  akrana  uskun|)s  ist.  JS^i  auk  us 
})aurnum  lisanda  smakkans,  nihjjan  us 
aiwhatundyai  trudanda  weinabasya. 

45  piujjeigs  manna  us  j^iujieiganmia 
luizda  hair  tins  seinis  usbairid  J)iu}),  yali 
ubils  manna  us  ubilarama  huzda  hairtins 
seinis,  usbairid  ubil  ;  uznh  allis  ufar- 
fullein  hairtins  rodeid  munjjs  is. 

46  A]j})an  Avha  mik  liaitid,  Frauya, 
Frauya,  yah  ni  tauyid  ])atei  qij^a. 

47  Whazuh  sa  gaggands  du  mis,  yah 
hausyands  Avaurda  meina,  yah  tauyands 
]>o,  ataugya  izwis,  whamma  galeiks  ist. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

36  ■•■  Eornostlice  bco)?  mild-heorte,  SAva 
eoAver  feeder  is  mild-heort. 

37  Nelle  ge  deman,  and  ge  ne  beo]> 
demede.  Nelle  ge  genycterian,  and  ge 
ne  beojj  genyderode  ;  Ibrgyfa}),  and  eoAV 
by]?  forgyfen. 

38  SyllaJ),  and  eoAV  byjj  geseald.  God 
gemet,  and  full,  and  geheapod,  and  ofer- 
floAveude  hig  syllajj  on  eoAverne  bearm  ; 
clam  sylfan  gemete  de  ge  meta]?,  eow 
by])  gemeten. 


39  Da  ssede  he  him  sum  bigspell,  Segst 
ctu  mpeg  se  blinda  ctsene  blindan  leedan  1 
hu  ne  fealla])  hig  begen  on  deene  pytt  ? 

40  Nis  se  leorning-cniht  ofor  done 
lareoAV ;  selc  by]?  fulfremed,  gif  he  is 
SAA'ylce  hys  lareoAv. 

41  Havi  gesihst  dil  da  egle  on  dines 
brodor  eagan,  and  ne  gesihst  daene  beam, 
on  dinum  eagan  1 

42  And  hii  miht  dii  secgan  dinum 
breder,  Brodor,  Iset,  da?t  ic  ateo  da  egle 
of  dinum  eagan  1  and  du  sylf  ne  ge- 
syhst  deene  beam  on  dinum  agenum 
eagan  ?  Eala  licetere,  teoh  merest  done 
beam  of  dinum  eagan,  and  donne  du 
gesihst,  dfet  du  ateo  da  egle  of  dines 
brodor  eagan. 

43  Nys  god  treoAV,  de  yfelne  wsestm 
de]>,  ne  nis  yfel  treoAv,  godne  weestm 
donde ; 

44  ^'Ic  treoAV  is  be  his  Avsestme  on- 
enuAA'cn.  Ne  hig  of  jjornum  fic-seppla 
ne  gaderia}),  ne  Avin-berian  on  gorste  ne 
nima)). 

45  God  man  of  godum  gold-horde  hys 
heortan  g5d  for[)-bring}),  and  yfel  man 
of  yfelum  gold-horde,  yfel  forj^-bring]) ; 
s5j)lice  se  niii})  sjoyc])  SAva  seo  heorte 
j?encj). 

46  Hay!  clypige  ge  me,  Drihten,  Drih- 
ten,  and  ne  d6\>  dset  ic  eoAV  secge. 

47  ^'Ic  dara  de  to  me  cym]?,  and  mine 
sprseca  gehyr[>,  and  da  dep,  ic  hina 
retyAA'e,  liAA^am  he  gcl.'c  is. 


YI.  36--17-]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

36  Tlicrforc  be  5c  incvcyfiil,  as  and 
joure  fatlir  is  incrcyful. 

.37  ^ylc  5c  (loine,  uiul  ;c  scluilcn  not 
1)0  ilenivd.  Xyle  50  CDndonipno,  and  5c 
schuleu  not  be  condcnipnod  ;  for5yue  5c, 
and  it  sehal  be  foi^ouuu  to  5011. 

38  3}'"*^  5^)  ^^'■^  't  schal  be  3ouun  to 
30U.  Tlici  schulcn  5yuc  in  to  5oiirc 
bo>;um  a  good  niosure,  and  wcl  till  id, 
and  sliaknn  to  gidere,  and  oucrflowynge  ; 
forsothe  by  the  same  nicsure,  by  which 
50  schulcn  mete,  it  schal  be  meteu  to 
50U. 

39  Sothli  he  scide  to  hem  and  a  lik- 
ncssc,  Whcthir  a  l)lynd  man  may  Iccde 
the  blynde]  whcthir  thci  falle  not  bothc 
in  to  the  dyche  ] 

40  A  disciple  is  not  aboue  the  maistir; 
sothli  cell  schal  be  pcrfyt,  if  he  is  as  his 
maistir. 

41  Sothli  what  seest  thou  in  tin  bvo- 
theris  y5e  a  festu/  but  thou  biholdist 
nut  a  bcem,  which  is  in  tin  owne  y^e  1 

42  Othii-  hou  maist  thou  seye  to  thi 
brother,  Brother,  sufFre,  I  schal  caste  out 
a  festu  of  thin  y5e  ]  thou  biholdist  not 
a  beeni  in  thin  owne  y5e  ?  Ypocrite, 
fii'st  tak  out  the  bcein  of  thyn  y^c,  and 
thanne  thou  schalt  biholde,  that  thou 
Icde  out  a  festu  of  thi  brotheris  y5e. 

43  Forsothe  it  is  not  a  good  tree,  that 
makith  yuele  frutis,  uotlier  an  yuele 
tree,  that  makith  goode  fruytis ; 

44  Sothli  euery  tree  is  knowun  of  his 
fruyt.  Sothli  neither  men  gederyn  fygis 
of  thornes,  neither  men  gederyn  a  grape 
of  a  boysch  of  breris. 

45  A  good  man  of  the  goode  tresour 
of  his  hcrte  br\Tigcth  forth  good  thing, 
and  an  }-uel  man  of  yuel  tresour,  bryng- 
ith  forth  yuel  thing  ;  sothli  of  the  plente 
of  the  hertc  the  mouth  spekith. 

46  Forsotlic  what  clepen  50  me,  Lord, 
Lord,  and  don  not  tho  thingis  that  I 
scyc. 

47  Ech  that  Cometh  to  me,  and  heerith 
my  wordis,  and  doth  hem,  I  schal  schcwe 
to  30U,  to  whom  he  is  lyk. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  311 

^6  Be  ye  thcrfore  mercifuU,  as  youre 
father  ys  morcifull. 

37  Jiulgo  nott,  and  ye  shall  nott  be 
judged.  Condomnc  nott,  and  ye  .shall 
not  be  condemned  ;  forgcve,  and  ye 
shalbe  forgeven. 

38  Gevc,  and  yt  shalbe  gevcn  vnto 
you.  Goode  measure,  pressed  doune, 
shaken  to  gedder,  and  runnynge  over 
shall  men  gevc  into  youre  besomcs  ;  for 
with  what  measure  ye  mete,  with  the 
same  shall  men  mete  to  you  agayne. 

39  And  he  put  forthc  a  similitude  vnto 
them,  Can  the  blyndc  ledde  the  I>lynde  ? 
do  they  nott  both  then  fidl  into  the 
dyche 1 

40  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master  : 
every  man  shalbe  perfecte,  even  as  hys 
master  ys. 

41  Why  seist  thou  a  moote  in  thy 
brothers  eye,  and  considerest  not  the 
beame,  that  is  in  thyne  awne  eye  1 

42  Other  howe  cannest  thou  saye  to 
tliy  brother,  Brother,  lett  me  pull  out 
the  moote  that  is  in  thyne  eye  I  when 
thou  pereeavcst  nott  the  beame  that  is  iu 
thyne  awne  eye  1  Ypocrite,  cast  out  the 
beame  out  ofi"  thyne  awne  eye  first,  and 
then  shalt  thou  sc  perfectly,  to  jnill  out 
the  moote  out  of  thy  brothers  eye. 

43  Hit  is  nott  a  goode  tree,  that 
bryngeth  forthe  evyll  frute,  nether  is 
that  an  evyll  tree,  whych  bryngeth  forthe 
goode  frute ; 

44  For  every  tree  ys  knowen  by  his 
frute.  Nether  off  thornes  gader  men 
fygges,  nor  of  busshes  gadrcr  they  grapes. 

45  A  goode  man  off  the  goode  treasure 
off  hys  liert  bryngeth  forthe  that  which 
ys  goode,  and  the  evyll  man  of  the  evyll 
treasure  off  hys  hert,  bryngeth  forthe 
that  whych  ys  evyll  ;  for  off  the  abound- 
aunce  off  the  hert  the  mought  speaketh. 

46  Why  call  ye  me,  Master,  blaster, 
and  do  not  as  I  bid  you. 

47  Whosoever  commeth  to  me,  and 
hearcth  my  sayingcs,  and  docth  the 
same,  I  wyll  shevve  you,  to  who  me  he 
vs  Ivke. 


312 


GOTHIC,  360. 


48  Galeiks  ist  mann  timryaudiu  I'azn, 
saei  grob  yah  gadiupida,  yah  gasatida 
grunduwaddyau  ana  staina.  At  ga- 
runyon  )?an  waurjjanai,  bistagq  awha  bi 
yaiaamma  vazna,  yah  ni  mahta  gawag- 
yaii  ita,  gasulid  auk  was  ana  |)amma 
staina. 

49  I]j  sa  hausyands,  yah  ni  tauyands, 
galeiks  ist  mann  timvyandin  razn  ana 
airjjai  inuh  grunduwaddyu ;  Jiatei  bistagq 
flodus,  yah  suns  gadraus  ;  yah  war]?  so 
uswalteins  bis  raznis  mikila. 


Chap.  VII.  i  Bij^e  jjan  usfullida  alia 
J)0  Avam-da  seina  lu  hliumans  manageins, 
galaijj  in  Kafarnaum. 

2  Hundafade  ])an  sumis  skalks  siuk- 
ands,  swultawairjjya,  saei  was  i'mma 
swers. 

3  Gahausyands  ]?au  bi  lesu,  insandida 
du  i'mma  sinistans  ludaie,  bidyands  ina, 
ei  qiiui,  yah  ganasidedi  jjana  skalk  is. 

4  Ij?  eis  qimandans  at  lesua,  bedun 
'ina  usdaudo,  qijiandans,  patei  wairjjs 
ist,  jjammei  fragibis  })ata  ; 

5  Unte  fiiyo])  Jjiuda  unsara,  yah  swn- 
agogein  is  gatimrida  unsis. 

6I|)  lesus  iddyuh  mil>  im.  Yah  yu})an 
iu  fairra  wisandin  imma  j^amma  garda, 
insandida  du  imma  sa  hundafads  fri- 
yonds,  qijjands  du  imma,  Frauya,  ni 
viraibei  Jjuk,  unte  ni  im  wairj^s,  ei  uf 
lirot  mein  inngaggais ; 

7  Dujjei  ni  mik  silban  wair]?ana  rah- 
nida,  at  jjus  qimau  ;  ak  (.[\p  waurda,  yah 
gahaihiid  sa  jjiumagus  meins. 

8  Yah  ]>an  auk  ik  manna  im  uf  wald- 
rifnya  gasatids,  habands  uf  mis  silbin 
;i^ad;auhtins;  yah  qijja  du  Jjamma,  Gagg, 
yah  gaggid,  yah  an})aramma,  Qim  her, 
yah  qimid,  yah  du  skalka  meinamma, 
Tawei  ];ata,  yah  tauyid. 

9  Gahausyands  ])an  );ata  lesus,  sil- 
daleikida  iaa  ;  yah  wandyands  sik  du 
\>iza.i  afarlaistyandein  sis  managein,  qa]>, 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

48  He  ys  gelic  timbriendum  men  his 
hus,  se  dealf  deope,  and  hys  gruud-weall 
ofer  dsene  stau  asette.  Sojjlice  gewoi-d- 
enum  flode,  hit  fleow  into  dam  hiise, 
and  hit  ne  mihte  d^et  hiis  astirian,  hit 
wses  ofer  dsene  stan  getrj'med. 

49  Se  de  gehyrjj,  and  ne  dej^,  he  is 
gelic  dam  timbriendan  men  his  hus  ofer 
da  eorj^au  butan  griind-Avealle  ;  and  dset 
flod  in-fleow,  and  hvredlice  hyt  afeoU  ; 
and  wearf)  mycel  hryre  dses  buses. 


Chap.  VII.  i  So|)lice  da  he  ealle 
his  word  gefylde  on  dses  folces  hlyste, 
he  eode  into  Cafarnaum. 

2  Da  wses  sumes  hundred-mannes 
J^eowa  untrum,  se  wses  sweltendlic,  se 
wses  him  dyre. 

3  And  da  he  gehyrde  be  dam  Haelende, 
he  sende  to  him  ludea  ealdras,  and  bsed, 
dset  he  come,  and  hys  Jjeow  gehselle. 

4  Da  hi  to  dam  Hselende  comon,  hi 
bgedon  hyne  geornlice,  and  dus  cwsedou, 
He  is  wyrde,  dtet  du  him  tilige ; 

5  WitodHce  he  lufa|)  lire  ]3e5de,  and  he 
us  lire  samnunge  getimbrode. 

6  Da  ferde  se  Hselend  mid  him.  And 
da  he  Wees  uufeor  dam  huse,  se  hundred- 
man  sende  hys  frynd  to  him,  and  cwsejj, 
Drihten,  nelle  dii  beou  gedreht,  ne  eom 
ic  wyrde,  dtet  du  ga  under  mine  J^ecene ; 

7  Fordam  ic  ne  tealde  me  sylfne,  dsefc 
ic  to  de  come ;  ac  ewe}?  din  Avord,  and 
min  cniht  byj)  gehaeled. 

8  Ic  eom  an  man  under  anwealde  ge- 
sett,  cempan  under  me  ha^bbende  ;  and 
ic  secge  dissum,  Ga,  and  he  gsej),  and 
ic  secge  dissum,  Cum,  donne  cymf)  he, 
and  ic  secge  minum  J^eowe,  Do  dis,  and 
he  de}>. 

9  Da  wundrode  se  Hseleiid,  dam  ge- 
hyredum  ;  and  cwsej),  to  dsere  menigeo 
be  wend,  Sojjlice  ic  secge  eow,  ne  fuude 


YI.  48.-VII.  9.]    WYCLIFFE,  1 389. 

48  He  is  lyk  to  a  man  bildingc  an 
lious.  that  (licfsjjidc  dccpc,  and  puttldc 
the  fonndenient  on  a  stoon.  Sothli 
•jieet  Howing  maad,  flood  was  huvtlid  to 
that  hons,  and  it  niy^te  not  niouc  it,  for 
it  was  fuundid  on  a  sad  stoon. 

49  Sothli  he  tliat  hccrith,  and  doth 
not,  is  lyk  to  a  man  bildingc  his  hous 
on  erthe  with  onto  foundenient ;  in  to 
Avhich  the  flood  was  hurlid,  and  a  non  it 
fclde  doun  ;  and  the  fallinge  douu  of 
that  hous  is  maad  Lrreet. 


Chap.  YII.     i  Forsothe  whanne  he 
badde  fnlfillid  alle  his  wordis  in  to  the 
f    ecris  of  the  peple,  he  eutride  in  to  Ca- 
pharnaum. 

2  Sothli  a  seruaunt  of  sum  man  cen- 
turio^  hauynge  yucl,  was  to  deyiuge, 
which  was  precious  to  him. 

.3  And  whanne  he  hadde  hei'd  of  Jhesu, 
he  scnte  to  him  the  eldere  men  of  Jewis, 
jireiynge  him,  that  he  come,  and  heele 
his  seruaunt. 

4  And,  whanne  thei  camen  to  Jhesu, 
thei  preieden  bisyli,  seyinge  to  him,  For 
he  is  worthi,  that  thou  5yue  to  liim  this 
thing  ; 

5  For  he  loueth  oure  folk,  and  he 
bildide  to  vs  a  synagoge. 

6  Sothly  Jhesu  wente  with  hem.  And 
whanne  now  he  was  not  fer  fro  the  hous, 
centurio  sente  to  him  frendis,  seyinge, 
Lord,  nyle  thou  be  trauelid,  for  I  am 
not  worthi,   that  thou   cntre  vndlr  my 

7  For  which  thing  and  I  demyde  not 
my  silf  worthi,  that  I  schulde  come  to 
thee  ;  but  seye  thou  by  word,  and  my 
child  sclial  be  heelld. 

8  For  whi  and  I  am  a  man  ordcyned 
vndir  power,  hauynge  kny5tis  vndir  me  ; 
and  I  seie  to  this.  Go  thou,  and  he  goth, 
and  to  anothir.  Come  thou,  and  he 
Cometh,  and  to  my  seruaunt,  Do  thou 
this  thing,  and  he  doth. 

9  The  which  thing  herd,  Jhesu  won- 
dride  ;  and  he  turnyd,  seidc  to  the  cum- 
panyes  suynge  him,  Trculi  I  seye  to  50U, 


TYNDALE,  1526.  313 

48  He  is  lyke  a  man  which  bilt  an 
housse,  which  digged  depe,  and  layde 
the  fouiulacion  on  a  rocke.  AVhen  the 
waters  arose,  the  fludde  bett  ajion  that 
housse,  and  couldc  nott  move  hyt,  for  it 
was  grounded  apon  a  rocke. 

49  But  he  that  heareth,  and  doth  not, 
is  lyke  a  man  that  with  out  fouudaeion 
bylt  an  housse  ajion  the  ertli  ;  agaynst 
which  the  fludde  bet,  and  it  fell  by  and 
by  ;  and  the  fall  of  that  housse  was 
fjreate. 


Chap.  YII.  i  When  be  had  ended 
all  his  sayinges  in  the  audience  of  the 
people,  he  entrcd  into  Capernaum. 

2  And  the  servaunt  off  a  certayne  cen- 
turion Avas  sicke,  and  redy  to  dye,  whom 
he  made  moche  of. 

3  And  when  he  herde  of  Jesu,  he  sent 
vnto  hym  the  seniours  of  the  lewes, 
besechynge  him,  that  he  wolde  come, 
and  save  his  servaunt. 

4  And  they  cam  to  Jesus,  and  besought 
him  instantly,  sayinge.  He  is  worthy, 
that  thou  shuldest  do  this  for  hym  ; 

5  For  he  loveth  oure  nacion,  and  hath 
bilt  vs  a  sinagoge. 

6  And  Jesus  went  with  them.  And 
when  he  was  nott  farre  from  the  housse, 
the  centurion  sent  to  In-m  hys  frendes, 
sayinge  vnto  hym,  Lorde,  trouble  not 
thy  silfe,  for  I  am  nott  worthy,  that 
thou  shuldest  enter  into  my  housse  ; 

7  ^^'herfore  I  thought  nott  my  silfe 
worthy,  to  come  vnto  the  ;  but  saye  the 
wordc,  ar.d  my  servaunt  slialbe  whoole. 

8  For  I  lyke  wyse  am  a  man  vnder 
power,  and  have  vnder  me  soudicrs ; 
and  I  saye  vnto  won.  Goo,  and  he  goeth, 
and  to  another.  Come,  and  he  cometh, 
and  to  my  servaunt.  Do  this,  and  he 
docth  it. 

9  ^V'llen  Jesus  herde  this,  he  mcrveyled 
at  him  ;  and  turned  hym  about,  and 
sayd  to  the  people  that  foluwcd  hym,  I 


314 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Amen  qi})a  izwis,  ni  'in  Israela  swalaiicia 
galaubein  bigat. 

10  Yah  gawandyandans  sik,  j^ai  in- 
sandidaus,  du  garda,  bigetun  jjana  siukan 
skalk  hailana. 

1 1  Yah  Avar])  'in  J^amnia  afar  daga 
iddya  in  baurg,  namnida  JSTaen,  yah 
mididdyedun  imma  siponyos  is  gauohai; 
yah  manageins  filu. 

12  Bijjeh  jjan  newha  -svas  daura  ))izo.s 
baurgs,  |aruh  sai !  utljaurans  was  naus 
sunus  ainaha  ai})ein  seinai  ;  yah  si  silbo 
widowo  ;  yah  manage!  })izos  baiirgs  ga- 
noha  mi])  izai. 

13  Yah  gasaiwhands  J-o  Frauya  lesus, 
infeinoda  du  izai,  yah  qa]>  du  izai,  Ni 
gret. 

14  Yah  duatgaggands,  attaitok  whilf- 
tryom ;  'i\)  ]>ni  bairandans  gasto])un. 
Yah  qa}),  Yuggalaud,  du  ]>us  qi})a,  urreis. 

15  Yah  ussat  sa  naus,  yali  dugann 
rodyan  ;  yah  atgaf  ina  ai])ein  is. 

16  Dissat  ])au  allans  agis,  yah  mik- 
ilidedun  Gu]),  qi])andans,  patei  praufetus 
mikils  urrais  in  unsis,  yah,  ])atei  ga- 
Aveisoda  Gu])  manageins  seiuaizos. 

17  Yah  usiddya  Jiata  Avain-d  and  alia 
ludaia  bi  ina,  yah  and  allans  bisitands. 

18  Yah  gataihun  lohannen  siponyos 
is  bi  alia  })0. 

19  Yah  athaitands  twans  siponye  sein- 
aize  Johannes,  insandida  ins  du  lesua, 
qi})ands,  pu  is  sa  qimanda,  ])au  an])aranu 
wenyaima  ] 

20  Qimandans  ])an  at  imma  })ai  Avairos, 
qe])un,  lohannes  sa  Daupyands  insand- 
ida ugkis  du  ])us,  qi])ands,  pu  is  sa 
qimanda,  ])au  an]>ai-anu  Avenyaima  1 

21  Inuh  ])an  Jjizai  wheilai  gahailida 
managans  af  sauhtim,  yah  slaliim,  yah 
ahmane  ubilaize  ;  yah  blindaim  manag- 
aim  fragaf  siun. 

22  Yah  andhafyands  Icsus  qaj)  du  im, 
Gaggandans  gateihats  lohannen  ]iatei 
gascAvhuts     yah    gahausideduts ;     Jjatei 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke. 
ic  on  Israhel  SAva  mycelne  geleafan. 

10  And  di  tta  ham  comon,  tJe  asende 
Avseron,  hig  genietton  hillne  clone,  de  £er 
vmtrum  AA'ajs.''' 

1 1  Da  AA'aes  syddan  geAvorden  he  ferde 
on  da  ceastre,  de  is  genemned  ISTaim, 
and  mid  him  ferdon  hys  leorning-cniht- 
as  ;  and  mycel  menego. 

12  Da  he  genealsehte  dsere  ceastre 
gate,  da  wses  dar  an  dead  man  geboren, 
anre  AvudeAvan  sunu,  de  nanne  oderne 
ntefde  ;  and  seo  AvudeAve  avecs  dar  ;  and 
mycel  menegu  dtere  burh-Avare  mid 
hyre. 

13  Da  se  Heelend  hig  geseah,  da  avjes 
he  mid  mild-heortnesse  ofer  hig  ge- 
fylled,  and  Gv,'se]>  to  hyre,  Ne  Avep  du  na. 

14  Da  geucaleehte  he,  and  da  cyste 
set-hran ;  da  eet-stodon  da  de  hyne 
bseron.  Da  CAvee})  se  HBelend,  Eala 
geonga,  de  ic  secge,  aris. 

1 5  Da  aras  se  de  dead  AVPes,  and  ongan 
sprecan ;  da  agef  he  hine  hys  meder. 

16  D;1  ofer-eode  ege  hig  ealle,  and  hig* 
God  msersodon,  and  CAA^sedon,  Da^t  msere 
Avitega  on  us  aras,  and,  Dset  God  hys 
folc  geneosode. 

17  Da  ferde  deos  spsec  be  him  on 
ealle  ludea,  and  embe  call  dtet  rice. 

18  Da  cyddon  lohannes  leorning-cniht- 
as  him  be  eallum  dysum  ])ingum. 

1 9  Da  clypode  lohannes  twegen  of  his 
leorning-cnihtum,  and  sende  to  dam 
Hselende,  and  dus  cAvse}),  Eart  du  de 
to  cumenne  eart,  liAVPeder  de  Ave  odres 
sculon  onbydan  1 

20  Da  hig  to  him  comon,  dus  hig 
CAVsedon,  lohannes  se  Fulluhtere  us 
sende  to  de,  and  dus  CAva3]>,  Eart  du 
de  to  cumenne  eart,  de  Ave  sculon  cdres 
onbidan  ? 

21  S6])hce  on  dterc  tide  he  geh^elde 
manega  of  adlum,  ge  of  AA'itum,  and  of 
yfelum  gtlstum  ;  and  manegum  blindum 
he  gesih])e  forgeaf. 

22  Da  CAVfe]»  se  Ha51end,  Fara]»  and 
cyda])  lohanne  da  ])ing  de  ge  gesaAA'on 
and  gchyrdon ;  dset  blinde  geseoj),  and 


Yir.  IO-22.]    AMTCLIFFE,  1389. 
iKtliir  in  Israel  I  fond  so  inoclie  feith. 


10  And  tlici  that  wcvcn  sent,  turnyd 
ii'^on  honi,  ioiinden  the  scrmuint  hool, 
■which  was  syk. 

1 1  And  it  was  don  aftirwavd  Jhcsu 
wente  in  to  a  cite,  that  is  elepid  Nayni, 
and  his  disciphs  ;  and  fid  greet  cuni- 
panye  of  peplo  wentc  with  him. 

1 2  Sothly  whannc  lie  cam  nyj  to  the 
5atc  of  the  citec,  loo  !  an  oonlypi  sone 
of  his  modir  Avas  born  out  deed  ;  and 
this  was  a  widowc  ;  and  moche  cumpany 
of  the  citee  loas  with  hir. 

13  "Whom  whanne  the  Lord  Jhesu 
hadde  scyn,  he  meuyd  by  mercy  on  hir, 
seide  to  hir,  Nyle  thou  wepe. 

14  And  he  nei5ede,  and  touchide  the 
bcre  ;  and  thei  that  baren  stooden. 
And  he  seith,  5oiig  man,  I  seie  to  thee, 
ryse  ^■p. 

15  And  he  that  was  deed  sat  vp,  and 
biyan  to  speke ;  and  he  5af  him  to  his 
modir. 

16  Sothli  drcde  took  alle  men,  and 
thei  magnyfieden  God,  seyinge,  For  a 
greet  prophete  hath  risun  among  vs, 
and,  For  God  hath  visitid  his  peple. 

1 7  And  this  word  wente  out  of  him  in 
to  al  Judee,  and  in  to  al  the  cuntre 
aboute. 

18  And  disciplis  of  John  toklcn  him  of 
alle  thes  thingis. 

19  And  Jolni  clepide  to  gidere  tweyne 
of  his  disciplis,  and  sente  to  Jhesu,  sey- 
inge, Art  thou  that  art  to  comynge, 
other  we  abiden  another  1 

20  Sothli  whanne  the  men  haddcn 
come  to  him,  thei  seiden,  Jolin  Baptist 
sente  vs  to  thee,  seyinge,  Art  thou  that 
art  to  comynge,  other  we  abiden  an- 
other ? 

21  Forsothe  in  that  our  he  hcelide 
many  men  of  her  sykenessis,  and  woundis, 
and  yucle  spiritis  ;  and  he  jaf  si3t  to 
manye  blynde  men, 

22  And  JheijU  answeringe  scitle  to 
hem,  5e  goynge  telle  a3en  to  John  tho 
thingis  that  ^e  ban  herd  and  seyu ;  for 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


31;x 


sayc  vnto  you,  I  have  not  foundc  soo 
greate  fayth,  noo  nott  iu  Israhel  ccr- 
taynly. 

10  And  they  that  wcr  sent,  turned 
backe  home  agayne,  and  founde  the  scr- 
vaunt  that  was  sicke,  whoole. 

1 1  And  it  fortuned  after  that  he  Avent 
into  a  cite,  called  Naym,  and  hys  dis- 
cij)les  went  with  him ;  and  a  greate 
number  off  people. 

1 2  When  he  cam  nye  to  the  gate  off 
the  cite,  beholde  !  there  was  a  deed  man 
caried  out  which  was  the  only  sonne  of 
his  mother  ;  and  she  was  a  Avidowe  j. 
and  moche  people  off  the  cite  Avas  Avith 
her. 

13  And  the  Loi'de  saAve  her,  and  had 
compassion  on  hei-,  and  sayde  A^nto  her^ 
Wepe  not. 

1 4  And  AA'cnt,  and  touched  the  colfyn  ; 
and  they  that  bare  hym  stodc  still.  And 
he  sayde,  Yonge  man,  I  sayc  vnto  the^ 
aryse. 

15  And  the  deed  sate  vp,  and  began 
to  spcake  ;  and  he  delivered  hym  to  his- 
mother. 

16  And  there  cam  a  feare  on  them  all^ 
and  they  glorified  God,  sayinge,  A  greate 
prophet  ys  rysen  amonge  vs,  and,  God 
liath  visited  hys  people. 

1 7  And  thys  rumor  off  hym  Avent  forthe 
throughout  all  Jewry,  and  thoroAvout  all 
the  regions  AA'hych  lye  rounde  about. 

18  And  vnto  Jhon  shcAved  hys  disciples 
ofi'  all  these  thyngcs. 

1 9  And  Jhon  called  vnto  hym  tAvo  off 
hys  disciples,  and  sent  them  to  Jesus, 
sayinge,  Arte  thou  he  that  shall  come, 
or  shall  we  loke  for  another  1 

20  When  the  men  Aver  come  vnto  hym, 
they  sayde,  Jhon  Baptiste  sent  vs  vuta 
the,  sayinge.  Arte  tliou  he  that  shall 
come,  or  shall  avc  Avayte  for  another  ] 

2 1  Att  that  same  tyme  he  cured  many 
off  their  infirmittes,  and  plages,  and  off 
evyll  spretes  ;  and  vnto  many  thatt 
were  Idyndc  he  gave  sightt. 

22  And  he  answered  and  sayd  vnta 
them.  Goo  youre  Avaycs  and  shewe  Jhon 
Avhat  thingcs  ye  have  herde  and  sene ; 


316 


GOTHIC,  360. 


blindai  ussaiwhand,  lialtai  gaggand, 
Jjrutsfillai  gahrainyanda,  baudai  gahaus- 
yand,  uaweis  urreisand,  unledai  waila- 
meryanda. 

23  Yah  audags  ist,  sawhazuh  saei  ni 
gamarzyada  "in  mis. 

^24  At  galeij^andam  ]jan  Jjaim  airum 
lohannes,  dugann  I'odyan  du  managein 
bi  loliannen,  Wlia  us'iddyedu]j  in  au)>ida 
saiwhan  ?  raus  fram  wiuda  wagid  *? 

25  Akei  wha  usiddyedu})  saiwlian  ? 
mannan  in  hnasqyaim  wastyom  ga- 
wasidana  1  Sai !  Jsai  in  wastyom  yralp- 
agaim  yah  fodeinai  wisandans,  in  j^iud- 
angardyom  sind. 

26  Akei  wha  usiddyeduj)  saiwhan  1 
praufetu  1  Yai  qi|)a  izwis,  yah  mais 
praufetu. 

27  Sa  ist,  bi  j^anei  gamelid  ist,  Sai ! 
'ik  insandya  aggilu  meinana  faura  and- 

wair]jya  J)einammaj  saei  gamanweid  Avig 
Jjeinana  faura  J}us. 

28  Qijja  allis  izwis,  maiza  in  bam-im 
qinono  praufetus,  lohanne  J^amma  Daup- 
jandinj  ainshun  nist ;  'i\>  sa  minniza  im- 
ma  in  ])iudangardyai  GuJjs,  maiza  im- 
ma  ist. 

29  Yah  alia  managei  gahausyandei, 
yah  motai-yos,  garaihtana  domidedun 
Gu)j,  ufdaupidai  daupeinai  lohannis  ; 

30  If)  Fareisaieis  yah  witodafastyos, 
runa  Gu])S  fraqejjun  and  sik,  ni  daup- 
Idai  fram  imma. 

31 Whe  nu  galeiko  ]>ans 

mans  jjis  kunyis,  3'^ah  Avhe  siyaina  ga- 
ieikai  1 

32  Galeikai  sind  barnam  Jjaim  in  ga- 
runsai  sitandam,  yah  wopyandam  seina 
misso,  yah  qijjandam,  Swiglodedum  iz- 
wis, yah  ni  plinsidedu]? ;  gaimodedum 
'izwis,'''  yah  ni  gaigrotuJ>. 

33  Urrann  raihtis  lohannes  sa  Daup- 
yands,  nih  hiaif  matyands,  nih  wein 
drigkands,  yah  qi])i]),  ■lJuhulJ)on  habaij). 

34  Urrann  sunus  mans  matyands  yah 
drigkands,  yah  c[\]>i]>,  Sai !  manna  afetya, 
yah  weindrngkya,  friyonds  motarye  yah 
frawaurhtaize. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

healte  ga)?,  hreoflan  synd  gehselede,  deafe 
gehyra]),  deade  arisaj^^  fiearfan  bodia]). 


23  And  eadig  ys,  swa  hwylc  swa  ne 
by}>  on  me  ge-uutreowsod. 

24  And  eta  da  lohannes  serend-racan 
ferdon,  da  cwsej;  se  H^lend  to  dam  folce 
be  lohanne,  Hwi^  ferde  ge  on  westene 
geseon?  dait  hreod  de  byj>  mid  winde 
astyred  1 

25  Ac  hwi  ferde  ge  to  seonne  ?  done 
man  mid  hnescum  reafum  gescrydne  ? 
da  de  synd  on  deorwurjjum  reafe  and 
on  estum,  [^synd  on  cyninga  husum]. 


Witodlice  ic  eow  secge,  he  is 


26  Ac   liAvi   ferde   ge   da3ne    Avitegan 
geseon  1 
niara  donne  witega 

27  Des  is,  be  dam  de  awriten  is,  Nu ! 
ic  asende  minne  engel  beforan  dine 
ansyne,  se  gegearwa])  dinue  weg  beforan 
de. 

28  S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  Nis  betwux 
wifa  bearnum,  nan  mserra  witega,  donne 
lohannes  se  FuUuhtere ;  se  de  is  Isessa 
on  Godes  rice,  se  is  his  mara. 

29  And  eall  folc  dis  gehyrende,  Sun- 
dor-halgan  God  heredon,  and  gefullede 
on  lohannes  fulluhte ; 

30  S6])lice  da  Sundor-halgan  and  da 
8e-gleawan,  forhogodon  djes  Hselendes 
gejjeaht  on  him  sylfum,  na  fram  dam 
Hselende  gefullode. 

31 Hwam  telle  ic  gelice 

disse   cneorisse    men,  and   hwam   synd 
hi  gelice  1 

32  Hi  synd  gelice  cildum  on  straete 
sittendum,  and  specendum  betwux  him, 
and  cwedendum,  We  sungon  eow  be 
hearpan,  and  ge  ne  saltedon ;  we  heof- 
don,  and  ge  ne  weopon. 

33  Sojjlice  lohannes  com  se  FuUuhtere, 
hlaf  ne  etende,  ne  win  drincende,  and 
ge  cwedaj',  Deofol-seocnysse  he  hajfjj. 

34  Mannes  sunu  com  etende  and  drin- 
cende, and  ge  cweda]),  Des  man  is 
swelgend,  and  win  drincende,  manfulra 
and  synfulra  freond. 


YII.  23-34-]   WYCLIFFE,i389. 

blynde  men  seen,  crokido  men  gon, 
niesclis  ben  niaiul  clene,  deef  men  hceren, 
deede  men  rysen  ii^en,  pore  men  ben 
taknn  to  jjrechinge  of  the  gospel.^ 

23  And  lie  that  sehal  not  be  selaundrid 
in  me,  is  blessid. 

24  And  whanne  the  messangers  of 
John  hadilen  gon  away,  he  bigan  to 
seye  of  John  to  tlie  cumpanyes,  AVhat 
■\venten  56  ont  in  to  desert  for  to  se  1  a 
reed  wawid  with  tlic  vrynd  1 

25  But  what  weutc  50  out  for  to  se  1  a 
man  clothid  with  softe  clothis  1  Lo ! 
thei  that  ben  in  a  precious  cloth  and  in 
tlelices,  ben  in  kousis  of  kyngis. 

26  But  Avhat  thing  wente  5e  out  for  to 
se  I  a  i)rophete  ?  Sothli  I  seie  to  50U, 
and  more  than  a  i)rophetc. 

27  This  it  is,  of  Avhom  it  is  writen, 
Lo  !  I  sende  myn  aungel  l)yfore  tin  face, 
the  which  schal  make  thi  weye  redy 
bifore  thee. 

28  Sothly  I  seye  to  50U,  among  the 
childeren  of  wymmen,  no  man  is  more 
than  John  Baptist,  prophete  ;  sothli  he 
that  is  lesse  in  the  kyngdom  of  heuenes, 
is  more  than  he. 

29  And  al  the  peplc  heeringe,  and  pup- 
plicans,  baptisid  with  baptyra  of  John, 
iustifieden  God  ; 

30  Forsoth  Pharisees  and  wyse  men  of 
the  lawc,  not  baptisid  of  him,  dispiseden 
the  conseil  of  God  in  hem  silf. 

31  Sothli  the  Lord  seyde,  Therfore  to 
whom  schal  I  seye  men  of  this  genera- 
cioun  lyk,  and  to  whom  ben  thei  lyk  1 

32  Thei  ben  lyk  to  children  sittinge  in 
chcpinge,  and  spekyngc  to  gidere,  and 
seyinge.  We  ban  sougun  to  50U  with 
])ipis,  and  5c  han  not  daunsid  ;  we  ban 
iiiiuid  lamentacioun,  and  ^e  han  not 
wept. 

33  Forsoth  John  Ijaptist  cam,  nethir 
ctinge  breed,  nether  drynkynge  wyn, 
and  5e  seyn,  He  hath  a  fend. 

34  Mannis  sone  cam  etinge  and  drynk- 
inge,  and  ^e  seyn,  Lo  !  a  man  deuourere,^ 
and  drynkinge  wyn,  frend  of  pupplicaus 
and  of  synful  men. 


TYNDALE,i526. 


317 


howe  that  the  blynde  se,  the  halt  goo,, 
the  lepers  are  clensed,  the  deafc  heare, 
the  deed  arysc,  to  the  pover  is  the 
gospel  1  preached. 

23  And  hapi)i  is  he,  that  falleth  not 
by  the  reason  of  me. 

24  When  the  messengers  of  Jhon  wer 
departed,  he  began  to  speak e  vnto  the 
people  of  Jhon,  What  went  ye  out  for 
to  se  in  to  the  desert  ?  went  ye  to  se  a 
rede  shaken  with  the  wynde  l 

25  But  Avhat  went  ye  out  for  to  se  1  a 
man  clothed  in  saufte  raymentl  Beholde  I 
they  which  are  gorgeously  apparelled 
and  lyve  delicatly,  are  in  kynges  courtes. 

26  Butt  what  went  ye  forth  to  se  1  a 
])ro])het  1  Ye  I  saye  to  you,  and  moare 
then  a  prophet. 

27  This  is  he,  of  whom  hit  is  wrytten, 
Beholde  !  I  sende  my  messenger  before 
thy  face,  to  prepare  thy  wayc  before 
the. 

28  I  saye  vnto  you,  a  gi-eater  prophett 
then  Jhon,  amonge  wemens  children,  is 
there  none ;  neverthelesse  won  that  is 
lesse  in  the  kyngdom  of  God,  is  greater 
then  he. 

29  And  all  the  people  that  herde,  and 
the  publicans  iustified  God,  which  wer 
baptised  in  the  baptim  of  Jhon  ; 

30  But  the  Pharyses  and  scribes  de- 
spised the  counsell  off  God  agaynst  them 
selves,  and  wer  not  baptised  of  hym. 

31  And  the  Lordc  sayd,  Where  vnto- 
shall  I  lyken  the  men  of  this  generacion^ 
and  whatt  tliynge  are  they  lykc  1 

32  They  are  lyke  vnto  chyldren  sitt- 
ynge  in  the  market  place,  and  cryinger 
one  to  another,  and  sayinge.  We  haver 
pyped  vnto  you,  and  ye  have  nott 
daunsed ;  we  have  mourned  to  you,  and 
ye  have  not  wept. 

33  For  Jhon  Baptist  cum  vnto  you, 
nether  eatynge  breed,  ner  drynkynge 
wyne,  and  ye  saye,  lie  hath  the  devyll. 

34  The  Sonne  off  man  is  come  and 
eateth  and  drynketh,  and  }e  saye,  lie- 
holdc !  a  man  which  is  a  glotton,  and  a 
drynker  of  wyne,  the  frende  of  publicans 
and  sinners. 


318  GOTHIC,  360. 

35  Yali  gasunyoda  war  J?  liaudugei  fram 
barnam  seinaim  allaim. 

36  Baj'  ]>an  iua  sums  Fareisaie,  ei 
matidedi  mijj  imma.  Yah  atgaggaiids 
'in  gard  ))is  Faveisaiaus,  auakumbida. 

37  pavuli  sai!  qino  in  )nzai  baurg,  sei 
was  frawaurhta,  yah  ufkunnandei,  {latei 
auakumbida  in  razna  }ns  Fareisaiaus, 
brio-o-andei  alabalstraun  balsams  : 

38  Yah  standandei  faura  fotuni  is, 
aftaro  greitandei  dugann  natyan  fotuns 
is  tagram,  yah  skufta  haubidis  seinis 
biswarb,  yah  kukida  fotum  is,  yah  ga- 
salboda  Jjamma  balsana. 

39  Gasaiwhands  })an  sa  Faveisaius,  saei 
haihait  ina,  rodida  sis  ains,  qij)ands,  Sa 
ij>  wesi  praufetus,  ufkun|}edi  j^au,  who 
yah  whileika  so  qino  sei  teki}>  imma, 
j^atei  frawaurhta  1st. 

40  Yah  andhafyands  lesus  qa|)  du 
Paitrau,  Seimon,  skal  })us  wha  qi|)an. 
I|)  is  qajj,  Laisari,  qijj. 

41  Twai  dulgis  skulans  wesun  dul- 
gahaityin  sumamma;  ains  skukla  skatte 
limf  hunda,  i]?  an))ar  fimf  tiguns. 

42  Ni  habandam  j'an  wha])ro  usgebeina, 
bairn  fragaf.  Whajiar  nu  |)ize,  qijj,  mais 
ina  friyod  1 

43  Andhafyands  pan  Seimon  qa]?,  pana 
gawenya,  ]jammei  managizo  fragaf.  par- 
:uh  is  qa])  du  imma,  Eaihtaba  stauides. 

44  Yah,  gawandyands  sik  du  Jjizai 
qinon,  qaJj  du  Seimona,  Gasaiwhis  ]>o 
■qinon  1  Atgaggandin  in  gard  jieinana, 
wato  mis  ana  fotuns  meinans  ni  gaft ; 
1})  si  tagram  seinaim  ganatida  meinans 
fotuns,  yah  skufta  seinamma  biswarb. 

45  Ni  kukides  mis  ;  i])  si,  fram  ]jam- 
mei  innatiddya,  ni  swaif  bikukyan  fot- 
uns meinans. 

46  Alewa  haubid  meinata  ni  salbodes  ; 
i\>  si  balsana  gasalboda  fotuns  meinans. 

-47  In    J)lzei    qijja   J;us,  afletanda   fra- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

35  And  wisdom  is  gerihtwisod  on  eall- 
um  his  bearnum.''' 

36  Da  b?ed  hine  sum  of  clam  Sundor- 
halgum,  ctset  he  mid  him  fete.  Da  eode 
he  into  dees  Fariseiscan  liuse,  and  ge- 
sset. 

37  And  da  clait  wif,  de  wses  on  dtere 
ceastre,  synful,  dii  heo  oncneow,  da3t  he 
S0et  on  dses  Faviseus  huse,  heo  brohte 
byre  sealf-box  ; 

38  And  stod  Avid-osftan  his  fet,  and 
ongan  mid  byre  tearum  hys  fet  ];wean, 
and  drigde  mid  hjre  heafdes  feaxe,  and 
cyste  hys  fet,  and  mid  sealfe  smyi-ede. 


39  Da  se  Sundoi'-halga,  de  hyne  in- 
gelajjode,  dtet  geseah,  he  cwa3|)  on  hys 
ge|)ance,  Gyf  des  man  witega  wsere, 
wltodlice  he  Aviste,  hwpet  and  hwylc  dis 
wif  WEere  de  his  8et-hriu)>,  daet  heo 
synful  is. 

40  Da  cwpe}>  se  Hselend  him  aud- 
swariende,  Symon,  ic  hiebbe  de  to  sec- 
genne  sum  jnng.  Da  cwse]?  be,  Lareow, 
sege  donne. 

41  Twegen  gafol-gyldan  wgeron  sum- 
um  Isenende  ;  an  sceolde  fif  bund  pen- 
ega,  and  oder  fiftig. 

42  Da  big  noefdon  hwanon  hi  hyt 
aguldon,  he  hit  him  bam  forgeaf.  Hwted- 
er  .   .  .  lufode  hyne  SAvydor  1 

43  Da  andswarode  Simon,  Ic  wene,  se 
de  he  mare  forgeaf.  Da  cwx]>  be,  Rihte 
du  demdest. 

44  Da  bewende  he  hyne  to  dam  Avife, 
and  ssede  Simone,  Gesyhst  dii  dis  wif? 
Ic  eode  into  dinum  hiise,  ne  sealdest 
dii  me  wfeter  to  minum  fotuni ;  deos 
mid  byre  tearum  mine  fet  |)w6h,  and 
mid  byre  loccuni  drigde. 

45  Coss  du  me  ne  sealdest  ;  dcos, 
syddan  ic  in-eode,  ne  geswiic  diet  heo 
mine  fet  ne  cyste. 

46  Min  heafod  dii  mid  ele  ne  smyred- 
est ;  deos  smj'-rede  mid  sealfe  mine  fet. 

47  Fordam   ic    secge    de,  byre    synd 


YII.  35-47]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

35  And  wysdom  is  jiistifioil  of  allc  her 
souos. 

36  Forsotli  sum  Pharisc  proicilc  Jlicsu, 
tliat  ho  SfhuUlo  etc  with  him.  And  he 
entringe  iu  to  the  hous  of  the  riiurisc, 
sat  at  the  mete. 

37  And  lo !  a  womman  synneressc, 
that  was  in  the  citee,  as  sche  knew,  that 
Jlicsu  hadde  sctc  at  the  mete  in  the 
hous  of  the  Pharisee,  brou5te  an  ahi- 
l)astre  box  of  oyucment ; 

38  And  sche  stondingc  byhyndc  l^isydis 
his  feet,  higan  to  moiste  his  feet  witli 
teeris,  and  wyi)ide  with  heeris  of  hir 
hoed,  and  kiste  his  feet,  and  anoyutido 
with  oyucment. 

39  Sothli  the  Pharise  seynge,  that 
ck'pidc  him,  scith  with  ynnc  him  silf, 
sciyuge,  If  this  were  a  prophcte,  sothU 
he  schulde  wito,  who  and  wliat  manor 
womman  it  were  that  touchith  him,  for 
she  is  a  synnercsse. 

40  And  Jhesu  ausweringe  seide  to  him, 
Symound,  I  hauc  sum  thing  for  to  seye 
to  thee.  And  he  seith,  Maistir,  seie 
thou. 

41  ^Vnd  he  answcride,  Tweye  dettours 
were  to  sum  lecnere  ;+  oon  ou5te  fyue 
hundrid  pens,  and  an  other  fyfty. 

42  Sothli  hem  not  hauynge  wherof 
thei  schuklen  5ekle,  he  5af  frely  to  euer 
eythir.  Who  therfore  .  .  .  loueth  him 
more  1 

43  Symound  answeringe  seide,  I  gesse, 
for  he  to  whom  he  frely  jaf  more.  And 
lie  answcride  to  him,  Thou  hast  demyd 

I         44   And  he,  turnyd  to  the  womman, 
seide  to  Symound,  Seest  thou  this  wom- 
man ?    I   outride  in  to   tlii   hous,  thou 
I       liast  not  30uun  watir  to  my  foot ;  forsoth 
f       this  womman  hath  moistid  my  foot  with 
teeris,  and  hath  wypt  with  hir  liecris. 

45  Thou  hast  not  jouun  to  me  a  cosse  ; 
forsoth  this  womman,  sitlien  sche  entridc, 
ceessidc  not  to  kisse  my  feet. 

46  Thou  hast  not  anoyntid  myn  heed 
with  oylc  ;  forsothe  this  oyutide  my  feet 
with  oynemcnt. 

47  For  which    thing  I   scie   to   tlicc, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


319 


35  And  wisdom  is  iustilioil  of  all  Jior 
(.•hyldren. 

36  And  one  off  the  Pharyses  desired 
liyni,  that  he  woldc  eatc  with  hym. 
And  he  cam  in  to  the  Pharises  housse, 
and  sate  dounc  to  mcate. 

37  And  beliolde !  a  woman  in  that 
cite,  which  was  a  synncr,  as  sone  as  slie 
knewo,  that  Jesus  sate  at  meate  in  the 
Pharises  housse,  she  brought  an  ala- 
l)laster  boxe  of  oyntment  ; 

38  And  she  stode  at  his  fete  bchynde 
hym  wcpynge,  and  began  to  wesslic  his 
fete  with  tcaros,  and  chd  wipe  them 
with  the  heares  off  her  heed,  and  kysscd 
his  fete,  and  anoynted  them  Avith  oynt- 
ment. 

39  When  the  Pharise  which  bade  hym 
to  his  housse,  sawe  that,  he  spake  with 
in  hym  sylfc,  sayinge,  Yf  this  man  wer 
a  prophet,  he  wolde  surely  have  knowen, 
who  and  what  manor  woman  this  is 
which  toucheth  hym,  for  she  is  a  synner, 

40  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Simon,  I  have  somwhat  to 
saye  vnto  the.  And  he  sayd,  Master, 
saye  on. 

4 1  There  was  a  cortayne  lender  which 
had  two  dctters ;  the  one  ought  five 
hondrcd  pence,  and  the  other  fifty. 

42  When  they  had  nothinge  to  paye, 
he  forgave  them  boothe.  Which  of  them, 
tell  me,  will  love  hym  moost  % 

43  Simon  answered  and  sayde,  I  sup- 
pose, that  he  to  whom  he  forgave  moost. 
And  he  sayde  vnto  him,  Thou  hast 
truely  iudgod. 

44  And  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and 
sayde  vnto  Simon,  Seist  thou  thys  wo- 
man ?  I  ontrod  into  thy  housse,  and 
thou  gavest  me  noo  water  to  my  fete  ; 
butt  she  hath  wcsshte  my  fete  with 
teares,  and  wiped  them  with  the  lieeres 
of  her  heed. 

45  Thou  gavest  me  no  kysse;  but  she, 
seuce  the  tyme  I  cam  in,  hath  not 
ceased  to  kysse  my  fete. 

46  Mync  heed  Avith  oyle  thou  didesfc 
nott  anoynte ;  and  she  hath  aunoyntcd 
my  fete  with  oyntment. 

47  Wherefore  I  saye  vnto  the,  many 


320  GOTHIC,  360. 

wauvhteis  izos  ]>os  nianagoiis,  iinte  friyoda 
filu ;  i]j  ])aniinei  leitil  fraletada,  leitil 
friyod. 

48  Qajuili  l^aii  dix  izai,  Afletanda  ])us 
frawauvhteis  jjeiuos. 

49  Yah  duguunim,  ])ai  mipauakumb- 
yandans,  qijjan  'in  sis  silbara,  Whas  sa 
ist  saei  fvawaurhtins  afletai  1 

50  I})  i'5  qa})  ]jan  du  J)Izai  qinon,  Ga- 
laubeins  |)eina  ganasida  Jjuk  :  gagg  la 
gawair})!. 


Chap.  VIII,  i  Yah  Avar]?  bijje  afar 
]>ata,  ei  yah  is  wi-atoda  and  baurgs  yah 
haimos,  meryands  yah  wailaspillonds 
|)iudangardya  Guj?s,  yah  j'ai  twalib  mi]) 
imma  ; 

2  Yah  qinons  Jjozei  wesiin  galeikinodos 
ahmane  ubikuze  yah  sauhte,  yah  Marya, 
sei  haitana  was  Magdalene,  ns  ])izaiei 
usiddyedun  unhuljjons  sibun, 

3  Yah  lohanna,  qens  Kusins,  faur- 
agagyins  Herodes,  yah  Susanna,  yah 
an])aros  manages,  ]jozei  andbahtededun 
im  us  aiginam  seinaim. 

4  Gaqumanaim  Jjan  hiumam  managaim, 
yah  ])aiui  ]jaiei  us  baurgini  gaiddyedua 
du  imma,  qaj?  ])airh  gayukon, 

5  IJrrann  saiands  du  saian  fraiwa  seiu- 
amma.  Yah  mi])]3anei  saiso,  sum  ga- 
draus  faur  wig,  yah  gatrudan  war]?,  yah 
fuglos  himinis  fretun  Jjata. 

6  Yah  anjjar  gadraus  ana  staina,  yah 
uskiyanata  ga])aui-snoda,  in  Jjizei  ni  hab- 
aida  qrammi])a. 

7  Yah  sum  gadraus  in  midumai  ]'aurn- 
iwe,  yah  mi])uskeinandaus  ])ai  J^aurnyus 
iifwliapidedun  })ata. 

8  Yah  an]jar  gadraus  ana  air])ai  godai, 
yah  uskeinoda,  yah  tawida  akran  taih- 
untailumdfaljj.  pata  J)an  qi])ands  uf- 
wopida,  Saei  habai  ausona  du  hausyan, 
gahausyai. 

9  Frehun  ])an  ina  siponyos  is  qijjan- 
dans,  wha  siyai  so  gayuko. 

10  I])  is  qa]',  Izwis  atgiban  ist  kunnan 
runns  J)iudinassaus  GuJjs  ;  ij>  {jaim  au- 
jiaraim  in  gayukom,  ei  saiwhandans  ni 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke 

manega  sinna  forgyfene,  fordam  heo  me 
swyde  lufode  ;  Ifesse  lufa]',  cfani  Cte  Isesse 
forgyfen  ys. 

48  Da  cwse])  he  to  byre,  Dc  synd  ctine 
synua  forgyfene. 

49  Da  begunnou,  da  de  dar  sseton, 
betwux  him  ewedan,  Ilwiet  is  des  de 
manna  synna  forgyfj?? 

50  Da  cwse})  he  to  dam  wife,  Din  ge- 
leafa  de  dyde  hale  ;  gfi  nu  on  sybbe. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  Syddan  wees  ge- 
worden,  dpet  he  ferde  })urh  da  ceastre 
and  da^t  castel,  Godes  rice  prediciende 
and  bodiende,  and  big  twelfe  mid  him ; 

2  And  sume  wif  de  wseron  gehselede- 
of  awyrgdum  gastum  and  untrumnes- 
sum,  seo  Magdalenisce  Maria,  of  dsere 
seofen  deoflu  ut-eodon, 

3  And  lohanna,  Chuzan  wif,  Herodes 
gerefan,  and  Susanna,  and  manega  odre, 
de  him  of  hyra  spedum  jjenedon. 

4  S6]']ice  da  mycel  menegco  com,  and 
of  dam  ceastrum  to  him  efstun,  he  stvde 
him  an  bigspel, 

5  Sum  man  bis  sfvd  seow.  Da  he  dset 
seow,  sum  feoU  wid  done  weg,  and 
Avear])  fortreden,  and  heofones  fugulaa 
hit  frgeton. 

6  And  sum  feoll  ofer  dfene  stan,  and 
hit  forscranc,  fordam  de  hit  Avsetaa 
npefde. 

7  And  sum  feoll  on  da  J^ornas,  and  da 
jjornas  .     .      .  liyt  for])rysmodon. 

8  And  sum  feoll  on  gode  eor))an,  and 
worhte  hundfealdne  wsestm.  Da,  clypode 
he  and  cwse]?,  Gehyre,  se  de  earan 
hoebbe. 

9  Da  ahsodon  bine  hys  leoniing-cniht- 
as,  hwajt  d?et  bigspel  weere. 

10  Da  cwfe})  he,  Eow  is  geseald  doet 
ge  Aviton  Godes  rices  geryne ;  and  6d- 
rum    on   bigspellum,   diet  hi   geseonde 


VII.48.-Vlir.  lo.]  WrCLIFFE,  1389. 

manyc  synnes  ben  for50uun  to  hire,  for 
sclie  hath  loucd  iiiyohe  ;  sothli  he  to 
whom  is  lesse  foi^ouun,  loucth  Icsse. 

48  Sothli  Jhcsu  seide  to  liir,  Synnes 
ben  £013011110  to  thee. 

49  And  thei  that  saten  to  gidcre  at  the 
mete,  bigunne  to  scic  with  ynne  hem 
silf,  Wlio  is  this  that  also  for3yueth 
synnes  1 

50  Forsothe  he  seidc  to  the  M-omnian, 
Thi  foith  hath  maad  thee  saf ;  go  thou 
in  pees. 


TYXDALE,  1526. 


V,2l 


Chap.  YIII.  i  And  it  was  don  aftir- 
ward,  and  Jhcsu  made  iorney  by  citees 
and  castelis,  prechinge  and  euangelys- 
iuge  the  rewme  of  God,  and  twelue  with 
him ; 

2  And  summe  wyminen  that  wcren 
heelid  of  wickide  spiritis  and  syknessis, 
Marie,  that  is  clepid  Mawdeleyu,  of 
whom  scuenc  deuelis  AA'euten  out, 

3  And  Jone,  the  wyf  of  Chuse,  procu- 
ratour  of  Eroude,  and  Susanne,  and 
manye  othere,  whiche  mynystriden  to 
him  of  her  riches. 

4  Forsoth  whanne  ful  moche  cumpanye 
cam  to  gidere,  and  fro  citees  hastiden  to 
him,  he  seide  by  a  liknesse, 

5  He  that  so  with,  5ede  out  for  to 
sowe  his  seed.  And  the  Avhile  he  sow- 
ith,  sum  felde  by  sydis  the  weye,  and 
was  defoulid,  and  briddis  of  the  eyi* 
eeten  it. 

6  And  another  felde  doun  on  a  stoon, 
and  it  sprungeu  vp  dryede,  for  it  hadde 
not  moisture. 

7  And  anothir  felde  doun  among 
thornes,  and  the  thornes  sprungen  vp 
T'>  gidere  strangliden  it. 

;  And  another  felde  doun  in  to  good 
t  rthe,  and  it  sprungun  vp  made  an  hun- 
drid  foold  fruit.  He  seyinge  thes  thingis 
<  riede,  He  that  hath  eeris  of  heeringe, 
lucre  he. 

9  Sothli  his  disciplis  axiden  him,  what 
this  parable  was. 

10  To  whiche  he  seyde,  To  50U  it  is 
5ouun  to  knowe  the  mysterie  of  the 
kyngdom   of  God ;    forsothe  to   othere 


.synnes  arc  forgeveu  her,  because  she 
loved  moche  ;  to  whom  lesse  is  forgeven, 
the  same  doeth  lesse  love. 

48  And  he  sayde  vnto  her,  Thy  synnes 
are  forgeven  the. 

49  And  they  that  sate  at  meatc  wytli 
hym,  began  to  saye  with  in  them  selves, 
Who  is  this  whych  forgcveth  synnes 
also? 

50  And  he  sayde  to  the  woman.  Thy 
fayth  hath  saved  the;  goo  in  peace. 


Chap.  VIII.  i  And  it  fortuned  after 
that,  he  hym  silfe  Avent  troughout  cities 
and  tonnes,  preachynge  and  shewinge 
the  kyngdom  of  God,  and  the  twelve 
Avith  hym ; 

2  And  also  certaync  Avemen  AA'hych 
Aver  healed  of  vnclene  spretes  and  in- 
firmittes,  IMary,  called  Magdalen,  out  of 
Avhora  AA'ent  seven  dcA'yls, 

3  And  Joanna,  the  Avyfe  of  Chusa, 
Herodes  stcAA'arde,  and  Susanna,  and 
many  other,  Avhich  ministred  \'uto  hym 
of  their  substaunce. 

4  When  moch  people  AA^er  gadred  to 
gether,  and  were  come  to  him  out  of 
the  cities,  he  spake  by  a  similitude, 

5  A  soAver  went  out  to  soAve  his  seede. 
And  as  he  soAved,  some  fell  by  the  AA^aye 
syde,  and  hit  Avas  troden  vnder  fete,  and 
the  foules  of  the  ayre  devoured  it  vp. 

6  And  some  fell  on  ston,  and  as  sone 
as  yt  Avas  spronge  vp  yt  Aviddred  aAA-aye, 
because  yt  lacked  moystncs. 

7  And  some  fell  amonge  thornes,  and 
the  thornes  spronge  vp  Avith  it  and 
choked  it. 

8  And  some  fell  on  goode  grounde,  and 
spronge  vp  and  bare  frute  an  hondred 
foolde.  And  as  he  sayde  these  thynges 
he  cryed,  He  that  hath  cares  to  heare, 
lett  hyni  heare. 

9  H}s  disciples  axed  hym,  sayinge, 
what  maucr  similitude  this  shulde  be. 

10  And  he  sayde,  Vnto  you  is  it  geven 
to  knowe  the  secretes  of  the  kyngdom 
of  God  ;    butt  to  other  in  similitudes, 

Y 


322  GOTHIC,  360. 

gasaiwiiaina,  yali  galiausyandans  ni  frajj- 
yainu. 

HI  A])|)an  ])ata  1st  so  gayuko.  pata 
fralw  ist  waurd  Gu])S  ; 

12  1]^  |)ai  wijjra  wig,  sind  Jjai  haus- 
yandans ;  })a])roh  qimij)  diabulus,  yah 
«snimi])  })ata  waurd  af  hairtiii  ize,  ei 
galaubyandans  ni  ganisaiua. 

13  I])  Jjai  ana  jjamma  staina,  ize  )'an 
hausyand,  mij?  falieidai  andnimand  ]jata 
waurd.  Yali  J)ai  waurtins  ni  haband  ; 
{miei  du  mela  galaubyand,  yab  in  mela 
feaistubnyos  afstandand. 

14  Ij)  })ata  in  jjavu'nuns  gadriusando, 
])ai  sind  J)aiei  galiausyandans,  yah  af 
«aurgom,  yah  gabeiu,  yah  gal)auryo})um 
\nzos  Hbainais  gaggandans  afwhapnand, 
jail  Fxi  gawrisqand. 

15  II'  j'fita  ana  J^izai  godon  airj^ai,  ]?ai 
'.^ind,  Jiai  I'ze  in  hairtin  godamma  yah 
selyamma,  gahausyandans  ))ata  waurd 
gahaband,  yah  akrau  bairand  in  ])ul- 
aitiai. 

16  A))))an  ni  manna  hikarn  tandyands 
dishulyijj  ita  kasa,  ai]?J)au  uf  ligr  ga- 
satyi]>,  ak  ana  hikarnasta})in  satyi]>,  ei 
|jai  iniigaggandans  saiAvhaiua  liuliad. 

£7  Ni  auk  ist  analaugn,  ]?atei  swikun}) 
•ni  wairjjai,  nih  fulgin,  ^atei  ni  ga- 
'Jcunnaidau,  yah  in  swekunjjamnia  qimai. 

18  SaiAvhi])  nu,  Avhaiwa  hausei|j ;  unte 
vaei  habai])  gibada  imma,  yah  saei  ni 
habaij),  yah  ];atei  Jjugkeijj  habau,  afnim- 
iida  af  imma. 

'S9  Atiddyedun  Jjan  du  imma  ai|jei  yah 
Ijrojjryus  is  ;  yah  ni  malitedun  andqijjan 
imma  faura  managein. 

20  Yah  gataihan  war])  imma,  patei 
i\i\>ei  ]>eina  yah  bro]7ryus  Jjeiuai  standand 
uta,  gasaiwhan  ])uk  gairnyandona. 

31  Xj)  is  andhafyands  qa]?  du  ini,  Ai))ei 
aieina  yah  brojjryus  meinai  ))ai  sind,  jjai 
v.aurd  Gu])3  gahausyandans,  yah  tau- 
yandans. 

22  War})  ]iSin  in  ainamma  ])ize  dage, 
^yah  is  galai])  in  skip  yah  siponyos  is. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 
and    gehyrende     ne     on- 


ne     geseon 
gyton. 


1 1  S6|)lice  dis  is  doet  bigspelL  Dset 
Seed  j's  Godes  word  ; 

12  Da  de  synd  wid  d?ene  weg,  dset 
synd  da  de  gehyra]) ;  syddan  se  deofol 
cyraj),  and  set-bryt  da3t  word  of  liyra 
heortan,  diet  hig  ])urli  done  geleafan 
hale  ne  geweordon. 

13  Da  de  synd  ofer  dsene  stun,   . 

da  dast  word  mid  gefean  onfo]).  And 
da  nabba])  wyrtruman ;  fordam  de  hi 
hwilum  gelyfa]),  and  awacia])  on  dsere 
costnunge  timan. 

14  Dset  ssed  de  feoll  on  da  |)0rnas, 
dfet  synd  da  de  gehyra]),  and  of  carura, 
and  of  Avelum,  and  of  lustum  dyses  lifes 
synd  for]/rysmede,  and  nrnine  wtestm  ne 
bringa]). 

1 5  Dtet  feoll  on  da  godan  eorJ;an,  dset 
synd,  da  de  on  g5dre  and  on  selestre 
heortan,  gehyrende  dset  word  healda]), 
and  wa^stm  on  ge])ylde  bringa}). 

16  Ne  ofer-wrih})  nan  man  mid  fsete 
his  on-£elede  leoht-ftet,  odde  under  bed 
dset,  ac  ofer  candel-steef  aset,  dset  da 
in-gangendan  leoht  geseon. 

17  S6]ilice  nis  nan  ])ing  digle,  dset  ne 
sy  geswutelod,  ne  behydd,  dset  ne  sy 
cii};,  and  025en. 

1 8  Warnia]),  hu  ge  gehyran  ;  dam  by}) 
geseald  de  hsef[),  and  swa  hwylc  swa 
nsef}),  dset  he  wene  da^t  he  hsebbe,  him 
by})  afyi-red. 

19  His  modor  and  his  gcbrodru  him 
to  comon  ;  and  hi  ne  mihton  hine  for 
doere  manegu  geneosian. 

20  Da  wses  him  gecyded,  Din  modor 
and  dine  gebrodru  standa})  her  lite, 
wylla])  de  geseon. 

21  Da  cwse})  he  to  him,  Min  modor 
and  mine  gebrodru  synd  da,  de  ge- 
hyra}), and  do})  Godes  word. 

22  S6])lice  anum  dtege  wses  geworden, 
da  he  on  scyp  code  and  his  leorning- 


Vlir.  1I-22.J  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

men  in  parablis,  that  thei  seynge  se  not, 
and  tliei  liecringe  vudirstondc  not. 

1 1  Sothli  this  is  the  parable.  The 
seed  is  Goddis  word  ; 

1 2  iSothli  thei  that  ben  bisydis  the  wcye, 
ben  thes  that  hecrcn  ;  aftirward  the 
feud  Cometh,  and  takith  awcy  the  word 
fro  her  herte,  lest  thei  bileuynge  be 
maad  saaf. 

13  Forwhi  tliei  that  felden  cloiin  on  a 
stoon,  ben  these  men  whiche  whenne 
thei  han  herd,  receyucn  the  word  with 
ioye.  And  thes  han  not  roote;  for  ut  a 
tyme  thei  bileuen,  and  in  tyme  of  tenip- 
tacionn  thei  gon  awoy. 

14  Forsothe  thes  that  fcldcn  domi  in 
thornes,  ben  thes  that  herden,  and  of 
bysinessis,  and  richessis,  and  lustis  of  lyf 
thei  goynge  ben  stranglid,  and  bryugcn 
not  a3ein  fi-uyt. 

15  Foi'soth  this  th&t  felde  doun  in  to 
good  erthe,  ben  thes  men  whiche,  in 
good  herte  and  best,  heeringe  the  word 
lioldnu,  and  bryngen  forth  fruyt  in 
])acieiice. 

16  Forsoth  no  man  li5tiuge  a  lanterne 
hihth  it  with  a  vessel,  ethir  puttith  vndir 
a  bed,  but  on  a  candilstickc,  that  men 
eutringe  se  li3t. 

17  Forsoth  no  thing  is  priuey,  which 
schal  not  be  openyd,  neither  hid,  which 
schul  not  be  knowuu,  and  come  into 
■apert. 

18  Therfore  se  je,  hou  5c  heeren  ;  for- 
sothe it  sehal  be  5ouun  to  him  that 
liatli,  and  who  euere  hath  not,  also  this 
he  gessith  liim  silf  to  hauc,  schal  be 
takun  awey  fro  him. 

ig  Forsoth  his  modir  and  britheren 
camen  to  him ;  and  thei  my3ten  not  go 
fully  to  him  for  the  cumpany  of  peple. 

20  And  it  is  told  to  him,  Thi  modir 
nud  thi  britheren  stonden  with  oute 
forth,  willinge  to  se  thee. 

21  Which  answeringe  seide  to  hem, 
My  modcr  and  my  britheren  ben  thes, 
whiche  heeren  the  word  of  God,  and 
don. 

22  Forsoth  it  was  don  in  oon  of  duyes, 
;.nd  he  sti5ede  in  to  a  boot  and  his  dis- 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


323 


that  when  tliey  so  they  shuldc  nott  se, 
and  when  they  heare  they  shukle  not 
vnderstoudo. 

1 1  The  similitude  is  this.  The  secdo 
ys  the  Avordc  of  God  ; 

12  Thoosc  that  are  besyde  the  waye, 
are  they  that  heare ;  and  afterwai-de 
commeth  the  devyll,  and  takcth  awaye 
the  wordc  out  of  their  hertes,  lest  they 
shuldc  bclcvc  and  be  saved. 

13  They  on  the  stonncs,  are  they  which 
when  they  heare  the  worde,  receavc  yt 
with  ioye.  And  these  have  noo  rotes ; 
Avhich  for  a  whyle  belevc,  and  in  tyme 
of  temtacion  goo  awaye. 

14  That  which  fell  amongc  thornes, 
are  they  which  heave,  and  goo  forth  and 
are  choked  with  care,  and  riches,  and 
voluptrous  livyngc,  and  brynge  forth 
noo  frute. 

15  That  in  the  good  grounde,  ar  they 
which,  with  a  goode  and  pure  hert,  heai-e 
the  worde  and  kepe  it,  and  brynge  forth 
frute  with  pacience. 

16  No  man  lyghtcth  a  candell  and 
coverit  liyt  vndcr  a  vesscll,  nether  putt- 
eth  hit  vuder  the  table,  but  setteth  it 
on  a  candelsticke,  that  they  that  enter 
in  mayc  se  lyght. 

17  Noo  thinge  is  in  secret,  that  shall 
nott  come  abroode,  nether  eny  thinge 
hyd,  that  shall  not  be  knoweu,  and 
come  to  light. 

18  Take  hedc  therfore,  how  ye  heare; 
for  whosoever  hath  to  him  shalbe  geven, 
and  whosoever  hath  not,  from  hym  slialbe 
taken,  even  that  same  Avhiche  he  sup- 
poseth  that  he  hath. 

19  Then  cam  to  hym  hys  mother  and 
his  brethren ;  and  coulde  nott  come  at 
hym  for  prcacc. 

20  And  they  tolde  hym,  sayinge.  Thy 
mother  and  thy  brethren  stonde  wyth 
out,  and  wolde  se  the. 

21  He  answered  and  sayd  vnto  them, 
]\ly  mother  and  my  brethren  are  these, 
which  heare  the  worde  of  God,  and 
do  it. 

22  Hit  chaunsed  on  a  ccrtaync  daye, 
that  he  went  into  a  shlppe  and  his  dis- 

Y  2 


324 


GOTHIC,  o^o. 


Yah  qaj)  c]u  im,  Galeijjam  liindar  j^ana 
inurisaiw.     Yali  gali])un. 

23  paruli,  I'aii  swe  faridedim,  anasai- 
slep.  Yali  afiddya  skuva  wiudis  'in  );ana 
marisaiw,  yah  gafuUnodeduu,  yah  hirek- 
}ai  Avaurjjuu. 

24  Duatc^aci'gandans  ]>an  nrraisidedun 
'ilia,  qi])andaiLS,  Talzyand,  fraqistnam. 
1\>  is  urreisands  gasok  Avinda,  yah  ]?ara- 
ma  wega  watins  ;  yah  anaslawaidedun, 
yah  \var|j  wis. 

25  Qa))  J?an  du  im,  Whar  ist  ga- 
]aul)ems  izwara?  Ogaudans  ]>an  sikl- 
aknkidedun,  qijiandans  du  sis  misso, 
Whas  siai  sal  ei  yah  -windam  faurbiudi}) 
yah  Avatnam,  yah  ufhausyand  imma. 

26  Yah  atfaridedun  in  gawi  Gad- 
darene,  Jjatei  ist  wijjrawair}?  Galeilaia. 

27  Usgaggandin  jjan  imma  ana  airjia, 
ganiotida  imma  -wair  sums  us  baurg, 
saei  liabaida  unhul}ions  mela  lagga,  yah 
wastyom  ni  gawasij^s  was,  yah  in  garda 
ni  gawas,  ak  in  hlaiwasnoin. 

28  Gasaiwhands  J'an  lesu,  yah  uf- 
hropyands  draus  du  imma,  j'ah  stibnai 
mikilai  qa}?,  Wha  mis  yah  }>us,  lesu, 
sunau  Gu);s  hauhistinsl  Bidya  ])uk,  ni 
balwyais  mis. 

29  Unte  anabaud  ahmin  j^amma  im- 
lirainyin,  usgaggan  af  j^amma  mann. 
j\Ianag  auk  mel  frawalw  ina,  yah  bund- 
ans  was  eisarnabandyom  yali  fotuband- 
yom  fastai]7S  was,  yah,  dishniupands 
I'os  bandyos,  draibij^s  was  fram  }}amma 
unhul})in  ana  au);idos. 

30  Frah  jan  ina  lesus,  qij^ands,  Wha 
ist  namo  |?ein  ]  paruh  qa}>,  Haryis ; 
nnte  unhuljjons  manages  gali|)un  in 
ina. 

31  Yah  bad  ina,  ei  ni  anabudi  im,  in 
a!'grundi])a  galeijjan. 

32  Wasu]5-|'an  j-ainar  hairda  sweine 
mauagaize  haklanaize  in  jiamma  fair- 
gunya,  yah  beduu  ina,  ei  uslaubidedi  im 
in  |;o  galei])an.     Yah  uslaubida  im. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke      ' 

cnihtas.  Da  cwrej)  he  to  liim,  Uton 
scglian  ofer  ttisue  mere.  And  hig  seg- 
ledon  da. 

23  Da  hig  reowon,  da  slep  he.  Da 
com  Avindi  yst, 

and  hig  forhtodon. 

24  Da  genealseliton  hig  him  to,  and 
cwpedon,  Hlaford,  Ave  forweordaj).  Da 
tiras  he  and  ];reade  dsene  Avind,  and 
dses  Avsetei-es  hreohnesse ;  da  gesAA'ac  se 
wind,  and  wear];  my  eel  smyltnes. 

25  Da  CAV8e|>  se  Hselend,  HAA^ar  is 
eoAver  geleafa  1  Da  adredon  hig  and 
AA'undredon,  and  betAvux  him  CAVeedonj 
Wenst  du,  hAvset  is  des  1  dtet  he  bebyt 
ge  vrindum  ge  sse,  and  hig  him  hyr- 
sumiajj. 

26  Da  reowon  hig  to  Gerasenorum> 
rice,  da?t  is  f5ran  ongen  Galileam. 

27  Da  he  to  landc  com,  liim  ugen-arn 
sum  man  .  .  .  ,  se  hasfde  deofokseocuesse- 
lange  tide,  and  ntes  mid  niinum  reafe 
gesciyd,  and  ne  milite  on  hiise  ge- 
wunian,  ac  on  b3'rgenura. 

28  Da  he  geseah  dsene  Htelend,  he 
astrehte  hyne  tofoi'an  him,  and  cw8e]> 
myceh-e  stefne  hrymende,  HAVset  is  me 
and  de,  la  Hselend,  dses  hehstan  Godes 
sunu  1  Ic  lullisige  de,  d?et  du  ne  Jjreage 
me. 

29  Da  bead  he  dam  uncleenan  gaste, 
d*t  he  of  dam  men  icrde.  iS6])lice 
lange  tide  he  hine  gegrap,  and  he  AA'ses- 
mid  racenteagum  gebunden  and  mid 
fot-copsura  gehealden,  and,  toborstenum 
bendum,  he  Avses  fram  deofle  on  Avesten 
gelsed. 

30  Da  ahsode  se  Hselend  hine,  HAvset 
is  din  namal  Da  CAA^feJj  he,  Legio, 
dset  is  on  lire  ge|^eode,  Eored  ;  fordam 
de  manega  deofiu  on  hyne  eodon. 

3 1  Da  bsedon  hig  hine,  dset  he  him  ne 
bude,  da;t  hi  on  griind  ne  bescuton. 

32  And  dar  Ava^s  mycel  heord  SAvyna 
on  dam  miinte  kT?siendra,  da  baedon  hy, 
dajt  he  lyfde  him  on  da  gan.  Da  lyfde 
he  him. 


Vlir.  23-32.]    ^VYCLIFFE,  1389. . 

ciplis.  Ami  he  seith  to  hem,  Passe  Ave 
(UKT  the  stoudinge  watir.  And  thei 
;-ti:;odeu  vp. 

.\";  Sothli,  hem  vowynrfO,  he  slcpto. 
And  a  tenii)cst  of  Avyiul  cam  douii  in  to 
the  watir,  and  thci  wereu  driucu  hidur 
iind  thiihir  with  wawis,  and  Avcrcn  in 
pevel. 

24  Forsothc  thci  coniyngc  ny3  reysiden 
him,  seyingo,  Comaundonr,  we  perischeu. 
And  he  risynge  bhimyde  the  wynd,  and 
the  tempest  of  watir ;  and  it  cccsside, 
i.\i(\  pesyblete  was  maad. 

:;5  Forsoth  he  seyde  to  hem,  Where  is 
5oure  foith  1  "NVhiche  dredinge  won- 
driden,  scyinge  to  gidere,  Who,  gessist 
thou,  is  this  ]  for  ho  comaundith  to 
wyndis  and  to  the  see,  and  thei  oljcyeu 
to  him. 

26  And  thei  rowiden  to  the  cuntree  of 
Gorasenus,  wliich  is  a5ens  Galilee. 

27  And  whaune  he  wcnte  out  to  the 
lond,  sum  man  ran  to  him  .  .  .  ,  Avhich 
hadde  a  deuyl  now  longe  tymes,  and  was 
not  clothid  with  cloth,  neither  dwellide 
in  hous,  but  in  sepulcris. 

28  This  as  he  sy3  Jhesu,  felde  doun 
bifore  him,  and  criynge  with  greet  voys 
seide,  What  to  nie  and  to  thee,  Jhesu, 
the  sone  of  God  the  hi5este  1  I  beseche 
thee,  that  thou  turmcnte  not  me. 

29  Sothlihe  comaundlde  to  the  vnclene 
spirit,  that  he  schulde  go  out  fro  the 
man.  Forsothe  he  took  him  longe 
tymes,  and  he  kept  in  stoekis  was 
bounden  with  chaynes,  and,  the  boondis 
broken,  he  was  led  of  fendis  in  desert. 

.";o  Sothli  Jlicsu  axide  him,  seyinge. 
What  name  is  to  thee  ?  And  he  seyde, 
A  legioun  ;  for  manye  fendis  hadde 
cntrid  in  to  him. 

31  And  thei  preidcn  him,  that  he 
schulde  not  comaunde  hem,  that  thci 
schulden  go  in  to  the  depnessc. 

32  Forsothe  a  flok  of  manye  hoggis 
was  there  lesewynge  in  an  hil,  and  thci 
preieden  him,  that  he  schulde  suffre  hem 
to  cntru  in  to  hem.  And  he  suffride 
hem. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


325 


eiples  alsoo.  And  he  saydc  vnto  them, 
Lett  vs  goo  over  vnto  the  other  sydc  of 
the  lake.     And  they  lanched  forthc. 

23  And,  as  they  saylcd,  he  fell  a  sicpc. 
And  there  arose  a  storme  of  wyndc  iu 
the  lake,  and  they  wer  fylled  with  water, 
and  wer  in  icoparciy. 

24  And  they  went  to  hym  and  awoke 
hym,  sayinge,  ^Master,  master,  we  are 
loost.  He  arose  and  rebuked  the  wynde, 
and  the  tempest  off  water ;  and  they 
ceased,  and  it  wexcd  calme. 

25  And  he  sayd  vnto  them,  Where  is 
youre  fayth  1  They  feared  and  wondrcd, 
sayinge  one  to  another.  Who  is  this? 
for  he  commaundcth  wiudes  and  water, 
and  they  obey  him. 

26  And  they  sayled  vnto  the  region  of 
the  Gaderens,  which  is  over  agaynst 
Galile. 

27  As  he  went  out  off  the  shippe  to 
londe,  there  met  hym  a  certayne  man 
out  off"  the  cite,  whych  had  a  devyll 
longe  tyme,  and  ware  noo  clothes,  nether 
aboode  in  eny  housse,  but  amonge  graves. 

28  When  he  sawe  Jesus,  he  cryed,  and 
fell  doune  before  hym,  and  with  a  loude 
voyce  saydc,  What  have  I  to  do  wyth 
the,  Jesus,  the  sonnc  off  the  moost 
Hyesfc  1  I  beseche  the,  torment  me  noot. 

29  For  he  commaundcd  the  foule 
spretc,  to  come  out  of  the  man.  For 
ofte  tymes  he  caught  hym,  and  he  was 
bounde  with  chaynes  and  kept  with 
fetters,  and  he  brake  the  bondes,  and 
was  caryed  of  the  fende  into  wilderncs. 

30  Jesus  axed  hym,  sayinge.  What  is 
thy  name  ?  And  he  saydc,  Legion  ;  be 
cause  many  dcvyls  wer  entred  into  hym. 

31  And  they  besought  hym,  that  he 
wolde  nott  commaunde  them,  to  goo 
into  the  depe. 

32  There  was  thex'by  an  heerde  of  many 
swyne  feadynge  on  an  hill,  and  they 
prayed  hym,  that  he  wolde  soffie  them 
to  enter  into  them.  And  he  eofl'ered 
them. 


320 


GOTHIC,  360. 


33  TJsgaggandans  }'au  suns  j^ai  unhulj'- 
aiis  af  j<ainma  mann,  galijjun  "in  })0 
sweina  ;  yah  rann  so  ■\vi'i]jus  and  driuson 
in  })ana  marisaiw,  yah  afwhapnodeduu. 

34  Gasaiwhandans  ]?an  );ai  haldandans 
]nita  waurjjano,  gaj^lauhun,  yah  gataihun 
in  baurg,  yah  in  weihsa. 

35  Usiddyedim  Jjan  saiwhan  jjata  waur])- 
ano.  Yali  qemun  at  lesua,  yah  Liget- 
iin  sitandan  ])ana  mannan,  af  j^ammei 
unhul])ons  usiddyedim,  ga\vasidana  yah 
fra|^'yandan,  faura  fotum  lesuis ;  yah 
ohtedun. 

36  Gataihun  ]?an  im  yah  ]>ai  gasaiwh- 
andans, whaiwa  ganas  sa  daimonareis. 

37  Yah  bedun  ina  allai  gauyans  J)ize 
Gaddarene,  galeij)an  fah-ra  sis,  unte 
agisa  mikilamma  dishabaidai  wesun. 
I]j  is  galeijjands  in  skip  gawandida  sik. 


38  Ea}>  l^an  ina  sa  Avair,  af  |;amniei  ]>os 
iinhuljjons  usiddycdun,  ei  wesi  mi|>  im- 
ma.     Fralailot  Jjan  ina  lesus,  qi|3ands, 

39  Gawandei  ])ulc  du  gavda  Jjeinamma, 
yah  usspillo  whan  fiki  gatawida  ];us 
Gup.  Yah  gahaij)  and  baui-g  alia,  mer- 
yands,  whan  filu  gatawida  imma  lesus. 


40  War|>  jjan,  mi))]3anei  gawandida  sik 
lesus,  andnam  ina  managei ;  Avesun  auk 
allai  beidandans  is. 

41  Yah  sai  !  qam  wair,  j^izei  namo 
laeirus,  sah  faurama|)leis  swnagogais 
Avas  ;  3'ah,  driusands  faura  fotum  le- 
suis, bad  ina  gaggan  in  gard  seinana, 

42  Unte  dauhtar  ainoho  Avas  imma 
swe  AvintriAve  twalibe,  yah  so  swalt. 
Mijjjianei  Jiau  iddya  is,  manageins  J)vaih- 
un  ina. 

43  Yah  qino  Avisandei  in  runa  blo))is 
3'ei-a  twalif,  soei  in  lekyans  fraqam 
allamma  aigina  seinamma,  yah  ni  mahta 
Avas  fram  ainomehun  galeikinon, 

44  Atgaggandei  du  aftaro,  attaitok 
skauta  Avastyos  is,  yah  suns  gasto])  sa 
runs  blobis  izos. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

33  Da  eodon  hig  of  tJam  men,  on  da 
SAvyn ;  da  ferde  seo  heord  mycelum 
rjese  on  dtene  mere,  and  wear})  dar 
adruncen. 

34  Da  da  hyrdas  diet  gesawon,  da 
flugon  hig,  and  cyddon  on  da  ceastre, 
and  on  tunum. 

35  Da  eodon  hig  iit  dset  liig  gesaAVon 
diet  dar  2;eAvorden  Avses.  Da  comon  hisf 
to  dam  Hselende,  da  fiindon  hig  da?ne 
man,  de  deofol  of  eode,  gescrydnc,  and 
halum  mode,  set  his  fotum ;  and  hig 
adredon  him. 

36  Da  cyddon  him  da  de  gesawon,  hu 
he  Avpes  hfd  geworden  of  dam  eorede. 

37  Da  bfed  hyne  eall  menego  da?s  rices 
Gerasenorum,  doet  he  fram  him  gewite, 
fordam  hig  mycelum  ege  gehsefte  Avtcr- 
on.     Da  Avende  he  on  scype  agen. 


38  Da  bfed  hyne  se  man,  de  se  deofol 
of  eode,  dost  he  mid  him  Avunede.  Da 
forlet  se  Hselend  hyne,  and  CAvae|j  to 
him, 

39  Wend  to  dinum  huse,  and  cfp  hii 
mycel  de  God  gedon  href]).  Da  ferde 
he  into  eall  da  ceastre,  and  cydde  lui 
mycel  se  Hselend  him  gedon  haefde.''' 


40  Soplice  AA'ses  geAVOi'den,  da  se  Hsel- 
end  agen-com,  seo  manegeo  hine  onfeng  j 
ealle  hig  gebidon  his. 

41  And  da  com  an  man,  dses  nama 
Avaes  lairus,  se  wses  dsere  gesamnunge 
ealdor  ;  da  feoll  he  to  dtes  Hselcndes 
fotum,  and  bred  hyne,  dret  he  ferde  to 
hys  huse, 

42  Fordam  he  hrefde  ane  dohtor  nean 
twelf  Avintre,  and  seo  forjjferde.  Da  ge- 
byrede  hyt,  da  he  ferde,  of  dam  men- 
egum  he  wres  of-])rungen. 

43  Da  Avres  sum  Avif  on  blod-i-yne 
tAvelf  ger,  seo  for-dselde  on  leecas  eall 
dset  heo  ahte,  and  ne  mihte  deah  of 
senegum  beon  gehgeled, 

44  Da  gcneal?ehte  lieo  Avidreftan,  and 
a^t-liran  hys  reafes  fnred,  da  ret-stod  sona 
dres  blodes  ryne. 


Till.  33-44-]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

33  Thcrforc  fenclls  wontcn  out  fro  the 
man,  and  entride  in  to  hocfcfis  ;  and 
with  hire  the  floe  wcntc  hcdlincjc  in  to 
the  hike  of  watir,  and  was  strani;lid. 

34  AVhicli  thintjf,  as  thoi  tliat  losewidcn 
sy5en  don,  tlioi  Heddon,  and  toklcn  in  to 
the  citee,  and  in  townes. 

35  Sothli  the!  5eden  out  to  se  that  thing 
that  was  don.  .  .  .  And  tliei  fonnden  tlie 
man  sittinge  clotliid,  fro  whom  tlie  fendis 
wenten  out,  and  in  liool  myndc  at  his 
feet ;  and  tliei  dredden. 

36  Sothli  and  the!  that  sy5en  tolden 
to  hem,  how  he  was  maad  hool  of  the 
legiouu. 

37  And  al  the  multitude  of  the  cun- 
tree  of  Gcrascnus  preieden  him,  that  he 
schulde  go  fro  hem,  for  thci  wercn  holde 
with  greet  drede.  Sothli  he  sti3ynge  in 
to  a  boot  turned  a5ein, 

38  And  the  man  of  whom  the  fendis 
Avente  out,  preied  him,  that  he  schulde 
be  with  him.  Sothli  Jhesu  lefte  him, 
seyinge, 

39  Go  a5eyn  in  to  thin  hons,  and  telle 
hou  grete  thingis  God  hath  don  to  thee. 
And  he  wente  thorw  al  the  citee,  prech- 
inge,  hou  grete  thingis  Jhesu  hadde 
don  to  him, 

40  Forsothe  it  was  don,  whanne  Jhesu 
hadde  gon  a5e3'n,  the  cumpanye  of  ])C2)le 
reccniede  him  ;  forsothe  alle  weren 
abidinge  him. 

41  And  loo  !  a  man,  to  whom  the  name 
was  Ja}Tus,  and  he  was  a  prince  of  a 
synagoge ;  and  he  fel  doun  to  the  feet 
of  Jhesu,  proiynge  him,  that  he  schulde 
entre  in  to  his  hous, 

42  For  olypi  dou5tir  was  to  him  al- 
moost  of  twelue  ^eer,  and  this  deiede. 
Anil  it  bifel,  the  while  he  wente,  he  was 
throngun  of  the  cumpeny. 

43  And  suni  wommaii  Avas  in  flix  of 
blood  fro  twelue  5eer,  wliich  hadde 
spendid  al  hir  catel  in  to  Icchis,  nether 
my5te  be  cur  id  of  onj', 

44  Cam  ny3  bihynde,  and  touchide  the 
hem  of  his  elootli,  and  a  non  the  flix  of 
bir  blood  stood. 


TYNDALE,  1^26. 


327 


33  Then  went  the  devyls  out  off  the 
man,  and  entred  into  the  swyne ;  and 
the  heerd  toko  their  course  and  ran 
hcedlyngc  into  the  lake,  and  wer  choked. 

34  When  the  herdnien  sawe  what  had 
chaunsed,  they  flood,  and  tuldc  it  in  the 
cite,  and  in  the  villages. 

35  And  they  cam  out  to  se  what  was 
done.  And  cam  to  Jesus,  and  foundc 
the  man,  out  of  Avhom  the  devyls  wer 
departed,  sittynge  att  the  fete  of  Jgsu.s 
clothed,  and  in  hys  right  mynde ;  and 
they  wer  afiayde. 

36  They  also  which  sawe  it  tolde  them, 
by  what  meanes  he  that  was  possessed 
of  the  devyll  was  healed. 

37  And  all  the  whole  multitude  of  the 
(Tadarens  besought  hym,  that  he  woldc 
departe  from  them,  for  they  Avor  taken 
with  greate  fcaro.  And  he  gate  hym 
into  the  shyppc  and  returned  backe 
agayne. 

38  The  man  out  off"  Avhom  the  devyl.s 
Avere  departed,  besought  hym,  that  he 
myght  be  Avith  hym.  But  Jesus  sent 
hym  aAvaj-e.  sajinge, 

39  Goo  home  agayne  into  thyne  awne 
housse,  and  shewe  Avhat  thyngcs  God 
hath  done  to  the.  And  he  Avent  his 
waye,  and  preached  thoroAve  out  all  the 
cite,  Avhat  thynges  Jesus  had  done  vnto 
hym. 

40  Hit  fortuned,  that  Avhcn  Je?;rs  Avas 
come  agayne,  the  people  receaved  hym ; 
for  they  all  longed  for  hym. 

41  And  bcholde  !  there  cam  a  man, 
named  Jairus,  and  he  Avas  a  ruler  off 
the  sinagoge  ;  and  he  fell  doune  at 
Jesus  fete,  and  besought  hym,  that  he 
Avolde  come  into  his  housse, 

42  Ffor  he  had  but  a  doughter  only 
of  twelve  ycrc  of  ago,  and  she  laye  a. 
dyinge.  As  he  AA'cnt,  the  people  throngc 
hym. 

43  And  a  Avoman  liaA'ynge  an  issue  of 
blond  twelve  yeres,  AA'hiehc  had  spent  all 
her  substannce  amonge  phisicions,  nethei" 
coulde  be  holpen  of  eny, 

44  Cam  behinde  hym,  and  touched  the 
hem  of  his  garment,  and  immediatly  her 
issue  off  blond  staunched. 


328 


GOTHIC,  360. 


45  Yah  qaj'  lesus,  Whas  sa  tekands 
mis  1  Laugnyandam  pan  allaim,  qa|j 
Paitrus,  yali  Jjai  mij)  imma,  Talzyand, 
mauageins  blwhairbaiid  jjuk,  yali  ))reih- 
aud,  yah  qi]>is,  Whas  sa  tekands  mis  1 

46  panih  'is  qa]?,  Taitok  mis  sums,  ik 
auk  ufkun|)a  maht  usgaggandein  af  mis. 

47  GasaiAvhandei  )?an  so  qino,  j^atei  ni 
galaugnida,  reivandei,  yah  atdriusandei 
du  imma,  in  Jnzei  attaitok  imma  gataih 
imma  in  andwair))ya  allaizos  manageins, 
yah  Avhaiwa  gahailnoda  suns. 

48  I{>  lesus  qa]j  du  izai,  prafstei  Jiuk, 
dauhtar,  galaubeins  jieiua  ganasida  ])uk  ; 
gagg  in  gawalrjjya. 

49  Nauhjjan  imma  rodyandin,  gaggi}j 
sums  manne  fram  ]jis  faurama])leis  swn- 
agogeis,  qi))ands  du  imma,  patei  ga- 
daujinoda  dauhtar  Jjeina,  ni  draibei  }>ana 
laisari. 

50  1\>  is  gahausyands,  andhof  imma 
qijjands,  ISTi  faurhtei,  j^atainei  galaubei, 
yah  ganasyada. 

51  Qimands  fian  in  garda,  ni  fralailot 
ainohun  inngaggaii,  alya  Paitvu  yah 
lakobu  yah  lohannen,  yah  jiana  attan 
j)izos  mauyos  yah  aij^eiu. 

52  Gaigrotun  ])an  allai,  yah  faiflokun 
])0.  pavuh  qa]5,  Ni  greti}),  unte  ni  ga- 
swalt,  ak  slepif?, 

53  Yali  bihlohun  ina,  gasaiwhandans 
Jjatei  gaswalt. 

54  panuh  is  usdreibands  allans  ut,  yah 
fairgreipands  handu  izos  Avopida,  qi];- 
ands,  Mawi,  urreis. 

55  Yah  gawandida  ahman  izos,  yah 
ustop  suns.  Yah  anabaud  izai  giban 
mat. 

56  Yah  usgeisnodedun  fadrein  izos  ; 
i]j  is  faurbaud  im,  ei  mann  ni  qijjeina 
{)ata  waur])ano. 


Chap.   IX.      i    Gahaitands  ]?au  ])ans 
twalif  apaustauhms,  atgaf  im  maht  yah 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

45  Da  cwpe]>  se  Hselend,  HwEet  is  se 
de  me  -set-hran  1  Da  hig  ealle  a3t-s6con, 
da  cwiBj)  Petrus,  and  c!a  de  mid  him 
wsevon,  Eala  hlafoi'd,  das  menegeo  de 
]>i-inga]>,  and  geswenca];,  and  dii  segst, 
iLwl  a3t-hran  me  1 

46  Da.  cwfie};  he,  >Sum  me  set-hran,  ic 
wiste  dset  msegen  of  me  code. 

47  Da  dset  wif  geseah,  dset  hit  him 
mies  dyi-ne,  heo  com  forht,  and  astrohte 
hig  to  his  fotum,  and  geswiltelode  be- 
foran  ealkini  folce  for  hwylcum  |nnge 
heo  hine  tet-hran,  and  hii  heo  Avear)) 
sona  hal. 

48  Da  CAVse])  he  to  hyre,  Dohtor,     . 

.  din  geleafa  de  hale  gedyde ;  ga  nu 
on  sybbe. 

49  Him  da  gyt  sprecendum,  da  com 
sum  man  to  dsere  gesamnunge  ealdrc, 
and  cwtej)  to  him,  ''[Dyn  dohtor  ys  dead,] 
ne  drece  dii  hyne. 

50  Da  se  Heelend  dset  Avord  gehyrde, 
he  andsAvarode  dffis  msedenes  feeder,  Ne 
ondraed  du  de^  gelyf  Avitodlice,  and  heo 
bijj  hal. 

51  And  da  da  he  to  dam  huse  com,  ne 
let  he  nanne  mid  him  in-gan,  buton 
Petrum  and  lohannem  and  lacobum, 
and  d?es  msedenes  feeder  and  hyre 
modor. 

52  Dii  Aveopon  hig  ealle,  and  heofodon 
hi.  Da  cwoe})  he,  Ne  Avepe  ge,  s6])lice 
nis  dis  ma'den  dead,  ac  heo  slctp}\ 

53  Da  tseldon  hig  hyne,  and  Aviston 
diet  heo  dead  AVies. 

54  .  .  .  .  Da  nam  he  hyre  hand, 
and  CAVie]?,  Mseden,  de  ic  secge,  aris. 

55  Da  gehwearf  hyre  gast  agen,  and 
heo  sona  uras.  And  he  het  hyre  syllau 
etan. 

56  Da  Avundredon  hyre  magas ;  da 
bead  he  dam,  dret  hi  hit  nanum  men  ne 
siedon  dset  dar  gedon  Avses. 


Chap.  IX.   ''•'i  Da   clypode   he   to- 
gcedere  his  twelf  apostolas,   and    sealde 


Tin.  45.-IX.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

45  And  Jhesu  seith,Who  is  it  that  toucli- 
ide  me  I  iSotlili  alio  men  denyinnc,  Pctre 
seide,  and  tliei  that  werou  with  him, 
Comaundour,  cumpanyes  thriu<>;en,  and 
turmentyn  thee,  and  thou  seist,  ^Vho 
touchide  me  I 

46  And  Jhesus  seide,  Sum  man  touch- 
ide me,  forwhi  and  I  haue  knowe  vcrtu 
to  liaue  gon  out  of  me. 

47  Suthly  the  "womman  seynge,  for  it 
•was  not  i)nucy,  sche  trcmblinge  earn, 
and  felde  doun  bifore  his  feet,  and  for 
■what  eause  sche  haddc  touohid  him  sche 
sehewide  byfore  al  the  peple,  and  hou  a 
lion  sche  "was  heelid. 

48  And  he  seide  to  hir,  Dou5tir, .... 
thi  feith  hath  maad  thee  saaf;  go  thou 
in  pees. 

49  5it  him  spekinge,  sum  man  cam  to 
the  prince  of  the  synagoge,  seyiuge  to 
him,  For  thi  dou3tir  is  deed,  nyle  thou 
ti'auaile  the  maystir 

50  Sothli  this  AYord  herd,  Jhesu  an- 
sweride  to  the  fadiv  of  the  damysele, 
Xyle  thou  drede,  but  oonly  bileue  thou, 
and  sche  slial  be  saaf. 

51  And  Avhanne  he  had  come  to  the 
hous,  he  suffride  not  ony  man  for  to 
cntre  with  him,  no  but  Petve  and  John 
and  James,  and  the  fadir  and  the  modir 
of  the  damysele. 

52  Sothli  alle  wepten,  and  biwayleden 
liir.  And  he  seide,  Nyle  50  wepc,  sothli 
the  damysele  is  not  deed,  but  slepith. 

."3  And  tiiei  scoruiden  him,  witinge 
for  sche  was  deed. 

54  ...  .  Forsothe  he  holdinge  hir 
bond  criede,  scyinge,  Damysel,  ryse  vp. 

55  And  hir  spirit  tm-nyde  a5eyn,  and 
sche  roos  anon.  And  he  comaundide  to 
5iue  to  hir  for  to  ete. 

56  And  hir  fadir  and  modir  wondriden 
gretly ;  to  whiche  he  comaundide,  that 
thci  schulden  not  scyc  to  ony  man  the 
thiuj;  that  was  don. 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


32i) 


Chap.  IX.     i  Forsothe  twelue  apo- 
stlis  depid  to  gidere,  Jhesu  3af  to  hem 


45  .And  Jesus  saydc,  Who  is  it  that 
touched  me  I  Wiien  every  man  denyed, 
Peter  and  they  that  were  with  hym 
sayde,  Master,  the  people  thrust  the, 
and  vexe  the,  and  thou  sayest.  Who 
touched  me  I 

46  And  Jesus  sayd.  Some  boody  touched 
me,  for  I  perceave  that  vertue  is  goue 
out  of  me. 

47  When  the  woman  sawe,  that  she 
was  not  hid  from  hym,  she  cam  trim- 
blynge,  and  fell  at  his  fete,  and  tolde 
hym  before  all  the  people  for  what  eause 
she  had  touched  hym,  and  howe  she 
was  healed  imniediatly. 

48  And  he  sayde  vuto  her,  Doughter, 
be  of  goode  comforte,  thy  fayth  hath 
made  the  safe ;    goo  in  peace. 

49  Whyll  he  yett  speake,  there  cam 
won  from  the  rulers  off  the  synagogis 
housse,  which  sayde  to  hym,TIiy  doughter 
is  deed,  disease  not  the  master. 

50  When  Jesus  hcrde  that,  he  answered 
to  the  maydeus  father  sayinge,  Feare 
nott,  beleve  only,  and  she  shalbe  made 
waole. 

51  And  when  he  cam  to  the  housse,  he 
suftVed  no  man  to  goo  in  with  hym, 
save  Peter  James  and  Jhon,  and  the 
father  and  the  mother  of  the  mayden. 

52  Every  body  wecpt,  and  sorowed  for 
her.  And  he  sayde,  Wepe  nott,  for  she 
is  nott  deed,  butt  slcpeth. 

53  And  they  lewgh  hym  to  scorne,  for 
they  knew  thatt  she  was  deed. 

54  And  he  thrust  them  all  out  att  the 
dores,  and  caught  her  by  the  honde  and 
cryed,  sayinge,  Mayde,  aryse. 

55  And  her  sprete  cam  agayne,  and 
she  roose  strayght  wave.  And  he  com- 
maunded  to  geve  her  meate. 

56  And  the  father  and  the  mother  of 
her  were  astonyed  ;  but  he  warned,  thatt 
they  shulde  tell  noo  man  whatt  was 
doue. 


Chap.  IX.     1  Then  called  he  the  .xij, 
together,    and    gave    tlieni    power   and 


330  GOTHIC,  360. 

wakliifni    iifar    allaim    uuliul]5om,    yali 
sauhtiiis  galiailyan. 

2  Yali  insandida  ins  meryan  ]>iudan- 
gardya  GuJ>.s,  yali  galiailyan  allans  |)ans 
unhailans. 

3  Yah  qa]j  du  im,  Ni  "waiht  nimai])  in 
wig,  nih  waluns,  nih  matibalg,  nih  hlaib, 
nih  skattans,  nih  J^an  tweihnos  paidos 
haban. 

4  Yah  in  Jjanei  gard  gaggai}',  jav 
salyi}>,  yah  pajn-oh  usgaggaij'. 

5  Yah  swa  managai  swe  ni  andnimaina 
izwis,  usgaggandans  us  |)izai  baurg 
yainai  yah  mulda  af  fotum  izwaraim 
afhrisyai])  dn  weitwodij^ai  ana  ins. 

6  Usgaggandans  j^an,  J)airhiddyedun 
and  haimos,  wailameiyandans  yah  leik- 
inondans  and  all. 

7  Galiausida  )an  Herodis,  sa  taitrarkes, 
})0  waur))anona  tram  i'mma  alia,  yah  Jjahta, 
unte  qejjun  snmai,  })atci  lohannes  urrais 
us  daujjaim ; 

8  Sumai  ]jan  qe])un  Helias  ataugida 
sik ;  suraaiu|5-)jan,  )iatel  praufetus  sums 
Jjize  airizane  ussto}'. 

9  Yah  qaj'  Hcvodes,  lohamiau  ik  haub- 
i))  afmaimait ;  i|>  wlias  ist  sa,  bi  J^auci  ik 
hausya  swaleikl  Yah  sokida  ina  ga- 
saiwhan. 

10  Yah  gawandyandans  sik  apau- 
stauleis  visspillodedun  imma,  swa  filu  swe 
gatawidedun.  Yah  audnimands  ins,  af- 
iddya  sundro  ana  sta})  aujjyana  baurgs, 
namnidaizos  Baidsaiidan. 

I J  1{)  j-'os  Bianageins  fii!j»andeins,  laist- 
idedun  afar  imma.  Yah  andnimands 
ins,  rodida  du  im  })0  bi  ])iudangardya 
Gu))S ;  yah  Jians  [arbans  leikinassaus 
gahailida. 

12  pamdi  dags  yiij^nn  dugann  hneiwan, 
atgaggandans  ]jan  du  imma  jiai  twalif 
qej)un  du  imma,  Fralet  ]>o  managein,  ei 
galei])andans  i'n  ])0s  bisunyane  liaimos 
yah  Aveilisa,  salyaina,  yah  bugyaina  sis 
matins,  unte  her  in  au})yamma  stada 
sium. 

13  panuh  qa]j  du  "im,  Gibijj  im  yus 
matyan.  I]?  cis  qej-un  du  imma,  Nist 
hiiidar  uns  maizo  fimf  hlaibam  yah 
fiskos   twai,  niba  J^au  J^atei  weis  gagg- 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke 

him  mihte  and  anweald  ofer  ealle  deofol- 
seocnessa,  and  dset  adla  hi  gehseldon. 

2  And  he  sende  big  to  bodianne  Godes 
rTce,  and  untrume  gehselau. 

3  Da,  c\va?Jj  he  to  him,  ]S'e  nime  ge 
nan  })ing  on  wege,  ne  gyrtle,  ne  codd, 
ne  hlaf,  ne  feoh,  ne  ge  nabbon  twa 
tunecan. 

4  And  on  swa  hwylc  hus  swa  ge  in- 
gajj,  wunia])  dar,  od  ge  ut-gan, 

5  And  swa  hwylce  swii  eow  ne  onfo}?, 
donne  ge  of  dsere  ceastre  gaj?  asceaca|> 
eower  fota  dust  ofer  hig  on  witnesse. 

6  Da  ferdon  hig  J^ui'h  da  burhga,. 
bodiende  and  eeghwar  hcelende. 

7  Da  gehyrde  Herodes,  se  feorj^an  dteles 
rica,  ealle  da  J^ing  de  be  him  wseron  ge- 
wordene,  dil  tweonode  him,  fordam  de 
sume  SBedon,  d;x?t  lohannes  of  dea])e 
aras ; 

8  iSume  ssedon,  dset  Helias  set-pvde  ; 
sume,  dset  an  eald  witega  aras. 

9  Da  cw£e})  Herodes,  lohannem  ic 
beheafdode ;  hwaet  is  des,  be  dam  ic 
dilc  gehyre  ?  Da  smeade  he  diet  he 
hine  gesawe. 

10  Da  cyddon  him  da  apostolas,  swa 
hwaet  swa  hig  dydon.  Da  nam  he  hig, 
and  ferde  ou-sundron  on  weste  stuwe, 
seo  is  Bethsaida. 

1 1  Du  da  menego  d?et  wiston,  du  fili- 
don  hig  him.  Da  onfeng  he  hig,  and 
spr0ec  to  him  be  Godes  rice  ;  and  da  he 
gehcelde  de  lacnunga  bejjorfton.^ 

12  Da  gewat  se  dseg  for|),  and  hig 
twelfe  him  geiiealsehton  and  Scedon  him, 
Lcet  das  menego,  deet  hig  faron  on  das 
castelu  and  on  di's  tunas,  de  her  abutan 
synd,  and  him  mete  findon,  fordam  de 
we  synd  her  on  Avestere  stowe. 

13  Da  cwa?])  he  to  him,  Sylle  ge  him 
ctan.  Dfi.  cw?edon  liig.  We  nabba); 
biiton  fif  hlafas  and  twegen  Hxas,  buton 
we  gan,  and  us  mete  bicgon  and  callum 


IX.  J- 1 3.]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

vertu  and  power  on  allc   ilcuolis,  and 
that  tlici  si'Iiuldc  heelo  sykoncssis. 

2  And  he  sentc  hem  for  to  ]n-echc  the 
kyngdoni  of  God,  and  for  to  hcclc  syke 
men. 

3  And  he  seith  to  hem,  Take  5c  no 
thing  in  the  -weye,  netliir  5erd,  ncthir 
sorippe,  ncthir  brood,  ncthir  money,  and 
nctliir  hauc  5c  twoy  cootis. 

4  And  in  to  what  cnere  hous  50  schidou 
entre,  dwclle  5c  there,  and  go  50  not  out 
thennis. 

5  And  wlio  cuore  schulcu  not  roooyne 
50W,  5c  goyngc  out  of  that  citeo  schakc 
of  also  the  poudir  of  5oure  feete  in  to 
Avitnossinge  on  hem. 

6  Sothli  thci  gon  out,  eumpassidcn  bi 
castels,  euangelisinge  and  heelinge  euere- 
whorc. 

7  Forsoth  Eroudc,  the  fourthe  prince, 
horde  alle  the  tliingis  that  weron  don  of 
him,  and  he  doutide,  for  that  it  was  seid 
of  sum  men,  for  Joon  roos  a5cu  fro 
docdc  men  ; 

8  Forsoth  of  sum  men,  for  Elye  ap- 
peride  ;  sothli  of  othere  men,  for  oon  of 
the  olde  prophotis  roos. 

9  xVud  Eroude  seith,  I  haue  bihedid 
Joon  ;  sothli  who  is  this,  of  whom  I 
heere  thes  thingis?  And  he  sou3te  for 
to  se  him. 

I  o  And  apostlis  turnynge  a5eyn  toolden 
to  him,  what  cuere  thingis  thci  diden. 
And  hem  takun  to,  he  wente  on  an- 
othere  half  in  to  desert  place,  which  is 
Bethsayda. 

I I  Which  thing  whanne  the  cumpanyes 
hadden  knowcn,  thei  folo\viden  him. 
And  he  receyuyde  hem,  and  s\)ak  to 
hem  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  heel- 
ide  hem  that  hadden  node  of  cure. 

12  Sothli  the  day  bigan  for  to  bowe 
doun,  and  the  tweluc  comynge  ny3 
seiden  to  him,  Lccue  the  cumpanyes, 
that  thci  goynge  turne  in  to  castels  and 
townes,  that  ben  aboute,  that  thei  fynde 
metis,  for  we  ben  here  in  a  desert 
place. 

13  Forsothe  he  seith  to  hem,  3yue  50 
to  hem  to  ete.  And  thei  seiden,  Tlicr 
Iten  not  to  vs  more  than  fyue  loouys 
arid  tweye   fischis,  no  but  i)erancnturc 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


331 


auctoritc  over  all  devyls,  and  that  they 

myght  hcale  diseases. 

2  And  he  sent  them  to  prcache  the 
kyngdom  of  God,  and  to  cure  the  sick. 

3  And  he  sayd  to  them,  Take  noo 
thinge  to  sucker  you  by  the  wayc,  nether 
staffe,  nor  scripe,  nether  breed,  nether 
money,  nether  have  two  cootcs. 

4  And  watsoever  housse  ye  enter  into, 
there  abyde,  and  thence  departe. 

.r;  And  whosoever  will  not  reccave  you, 
when  ye  departe  from  that  citie  shake 
of  the  very  dust  froni  youre  fete  lor  a 
testimony  agaynst  them. 

6  They  went  forthe,  and  went  thorowe 
the  tounes,  preachynge  the  gospcll  and 
healynge  every  whcare. 

7  Herod,  the  tetrarch,  hcrde  off'  all 
thatt  by  hym  was  done,  and  douted, 
because  that  it  was  sayd  of  some,  that 
Jhon  was  rysen  agayne  from  decth  ; 

8  And  off"  some,  that  Helias  had  apered  ;. 
and  off"  other,  that  won  off"  the  olde  pro- 
phettes  was  rysen  agayne. 

9  And  Herod  sayde,  Jhon  have  Y  be- 
hedded  ;  who  is  this,  of  whom  I  here 
suche  thynges  ]  And  he  desired  to  se 
hym. 

10  And  the  apostles  retourned  and 
tolde  hym,  all  that  they  had  done.  And 
he  toke  them,  and  Avent  a  syde  into  a 
solitary  place,  neye  to  a  citie  called  Bcth- 
saida. 

1 1  The  people  knewe  off"  it,  and  folow- 
ed  hym.  And  he  receaved  them,  and 
spake  vnto  them  of  the  kyngdom  off 
God ;  and  healed  them  that  had  node 
to  be  healed. 

12  The  daye  began  to  wcare  aAvaye, 
then  cam  the  twelve  and  sayde  vntO' 
hym,  Sende  the  people  awaye,  that  they 
maye  goo  in  to  the  tounes  and  villages 
i-ouudabout,  and  lodge  and  get  meate, 
for  we  are  here  in  a  place  of  wildcrnes. 

13  Then  sayde  he  vnto  them,  Geve  ye 
them  meate.  And  they  sayde,  We  have 
no  moo  but  five  loves  and  two  fisshes,. 
except  we  shuld  goo,  and  bye  meate  for 


132 


GOTHIC,  360. 


andans,  bugyainia  allai  })izai  manaseiclai 
matins. 

14  Wesun  auk  swe  fimf  })Usundyos 
Avaire.  Qa]>  ])au  du  sipouyam  seinaim, 
Gawaurkei))  im  anukumbyan  kubituns, 
ana  wharyanoli  fimftiguns. 

15  Yah  gatawideduii  swa,  yah  ga- 
ttawideJun  auakumbyau  alhms. 

16  Nimands  })an  ))ans  fimf  hlaibans  yah 
twans  fiskans,  insaiwhands  du  himina, 
gajjiu))ida  ius,  yah  gabrak,  yah  gat" 
siponyam,  du  faurhigyan  [sizai  man- 
agein. 

17  Yah  matidedun,  yah  sadai  waurjvun 
allai ;  yah  ushafau  Avar]?  jjatei  aflifnoda 
i'm  gabruko,  tainyons  twalif. 

1 8  Yah  war}?,  mi|)];anei  was  is  bidyands 
sundro,  gamotideduu  imma  siponyos  is, 
yah  frah  ins,  qij^ands,  Whaua  mik  qijj- 
and  wisan  ])0S  manageins  1 

19  I))  eis  andhafyandans,  qe{)un,  lo- 
hannen  J^ana  Daupyand,  anjmrai  l^an  He- 
leian,  sumai  J;an,  j'atei  praufetus  sums 
J)ize  airizane  ussto)?. 

20  Qa]j  }ian  du  im,  A|?])an  yus  whana 
mik  qi[)i})  wisan?  Andhafyands  })an 
Paitrus  qa]?,  pu  is  Christus  sunus  Gu})S. 

2 1  I]>  is  ])an  gawhotyauds  im  faurbau}> 
ei  manu  ni  qi|)eina  jiata, 

22  Qij^ands,  patei  skal  sunus  mans 
manag  Avinnan,  yah  uskusans  fram  sin- 
istani  Avair);an,  yah  gudyam,  yah  bok- 
aryam,  yah  usqiman,  yah  piridyin  daga 
xirreisan. 

23  Qaj)  ])an  du  allaim,  Yabai  AAdias 
will  afar  mis  gaggan,  afaikai  sik  silbau, 
yah  nimai  galgan  seinana  dag  Avhanoh, 
yah  laistyai  mik. 

24  Saei  allis  Avili  saiwala  seina  nasyan, 
fraqisteij:>  izai ;  a]j})an  saei  fraqistei]? 
saiwalai  scinai  in  meina,  ganasyij)  ])0. 

25  Who  allis  })aurfte  gatauyi|i  sis  man- 
na, gageigands  ])0  manased  alia,  ij>  sis 
silbin  fraqistyands,  ail)l7au  gasleibyandsl 

26  Saei  allis  skamai}?  sik  meina  ai})}jau 
meinaize  Avaurde,  jjizuh  sunus  mans 
skamaid  sik,  bijje  qimi]?  in  avuIjju  sein- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 
dissum  Averede. 

14  Dar  AV?eron  neah  fif  ];usenda  Avera. 
Da  cwa3|)  he  to  his  leorning-cnihtum, 
D6)y  Cta^t  hig  sitton  }au'h  gebeorscypas, 
fiftiguni. 

15  And  hig  swa  dydon,  and  hi  ealle 
Sceton. 

16  Da  nam  he  eta  fif  hlafas  and  cJa 
tAvegen  fixas,  and  on  done  heofon  be- 
seah,  and  bletsode  hig,  and  brtec,  and 
dselde  his  leorning-cnihtum,  dset  hig 
asetton  hig  bef5ran  dam  menegum. 

17  Da  seton  hig  ealle,  and  wurdon  ge- 
fyllede ;  and  man  nam  da  gebrotu  de 
dar  belifon,  twclf  cypan  fulle. 

18  Dii  Ava?s  gcAvorden,  da  se  Haelend 
Ava-s  ana  hine  gebiddende,  hys  leorning- 
cnihtas  Ava>ron  mid  him,  da  Tihsode  he 
hig,  HAVpet  seegj;  dis  folc  dset  ic  s^''  1 

19  Da  andswarodon  hig,  and  CAVsedon, 
lohannem  Baptistam,  sume  Heliam, 
sume,  dset  sum  Avitega  of  dam  caldum 
aras. 

20  Da  Scede  he  him,  HAVset  secge  ge 
dset  ic  sy  1-  Da  andswarode  Petrus,  Dii 
eart  Crist  Godes  sunu. 

2 1  Da  Jjreade  he  hig  and  bead  da3t  hig 
hit  nanum  men  ne  stedou, 

22  .  .  Fordam  de  hit  gebyre)>  dset 
mannes  sunu  fela  Jnnga  |'olige,  and  beo 
aAVorj^en  fram  ealdrum,  and  ealdor-man- 
num,  and  li-am  bocerum,  and  beo  of- 
slagen,  and  ];riddan  dtege  arise. 

23  Da  CAVse'p  he  to  eallum,  Gyf  hwa 
Avyle  sefter  me  cuman,  tetsace  hine 
sylfne,  and  nime  his  cwylminge,  and 
me  folgige. 

24  Se  de  Avyle  Iia's  saAvle  hale  gedon, 
so  hig  forspil]j ;  Av.'todlice  se  de  his 
sawle  for  me  forspilj',  he  In  gehselejj. 

25  Hwset  frema])  eenegum  men,  deali 
he  ealne  middan-eard  on  eehtbegite,  and 
hyne  sylfne  forspille,  and  hys  forwyi-d 
Avyrce  1 

26  Se  de  me  and  mine  spseca  forsyh]-", 
done  mannes  sunu  forsyhjj,  donne  he 
cym]>  on  his   ma^gen-jjrymme,   and  hys 


IX.  i4--^o.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

and  Avc  ^o,  ami  bycu  metis  in  to  al  the 
cuni]iiiny. 

14  S')tlili  the  men  weren  almoost  fyuc 
thousynde.  Forsothe  he  seith  to  his 
tlisciplis,  Make  liem  to  sittc  to  mete  by 
feestis,  fyftyes. 

15  And  thei  diden  so,  and  thel  maden 
alle  men  sitte  to  the  mete. 

16  Forsothe  fyue  looucs  and  twcyc 
fysehcs  takun,  he  bylie'.d  in  to  lienene, 
and  blesside  hem,  and  brak,  and  delidc 
to  his  disciplis,  that  tiiei  sehuhlen  piittc 
bifore  the  cnmpan}es. 

17  And  alle  men  ceten,  and  weren 
fillid ;  and  this  that  lel'te  to  hem  of 
broken  metis  was  taken,  tweluo  coffyns. 

18  And  it  was  don,  whanne  he  was 
aloone  preiynge,  and  his  disciplis  weren 
Avith  him,  and  he  axide  hem,  seiynge, 
AVIiom  seyn  the  cumpanycs  me  to  be  1 

19  And  thei  answeriden,  and  seiden, 
John  Baptist,  forsothe  othere  se7/e7i 
Elye,  bnt  othere  seyen,  for  o  prophete 
of  the  formere  hath  risnn. 

20  Sothli  he  seide  to  hem,  But  Avhom 
seye  50  me  to  be  1  Symonnd  Petre  an- 
swering-e  seide,  The  Crist  of  God. 

2 1  And  he  blamynge  hem  comaimdide 
hem  that  thei  schulden  seie  to  no 
man, 

22  And  seith  thes  thingis,  For  it  bi- 
lioueth  mannis  sone  to  suffre  manye 
thingis,  and  to  be  repreued  of  the  eldere 
men,  and  of  princes  of  prestis,  and  of 
scrihis,  and  for  t<j  be  slayn,  and  in  the 
tin-idde  day  to  ryse  a3en. 

23  For.sothe  he  seide  to  alle  men,  If 
ony  man  wole  come  aftir  me,  denye  he 
liim  silf,  and  take  he  his  cross  euery 
day,  and  sue  he  me. 

24  Sothli  he  that  schal  wilne  to  make 
liis  lyf  saaf,  schal  leese  it ;  forwhi  he 
that  schal  leese  his  lyf  for  me,  sehal 
make  it  saaf 

25  Forsothe  what  profitith  it  to  a  man, 
if  he  Wynne  al  the  world,  sothli  leese 
him  silf,  and  do  peyringe  of  him  silf  1 

26  Forwhi  who  that  schal  schamc  me 
and  my  wordis,  and  mannis  sone  schal 
schame  him,  whanne  he  schal  conic  in 


TYNDALE,  1526.  333 

all  this  people. 

1 4  And  they  wer  about  a  five  thousanddo 
men.  He  sayde  vnto  his  disciples. 
Cause  them  to  sit  doune  by  fyftie,  in  a 
company. 

15  And  they  did  soo,  and  made  them 
all  sit  doune. 

16  He  tokc  the  five  loves  and  the  two 
fisshes,  and  loked  vp  to  heven,  and  blessed 
them,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  his  dis- 
ciples, to  sett  before  the  people. 

1 7  And  they  all  ate,  and  wer  satisfied  ; 
and  there  was  taken  vp  oft'  thatt  re- 
mayned  to  them,  twelve  baskettes  full 
oft"  broken  mcate. 

1 8  Hit  fortuned,  as  he  was  alone  pray- 
inge,  hys  disciples  were  with  hym,  and 
he  axed  them,  sayinge,  Who  saye  the 
people  that  I  am  1 

1 9  They  answered,  and  sayd,  Jhon 
Baptist,  some  saye  Helias,  and  some 
saye,  won  of  the  olde  prophetcs  is  risen 
agayne. 

20  He  sayde  vnto  them,  Who  saye  ye- 
that  I  am.1  Peter  answered  and  sayde. 
Thou  arte  the  Christ  oft"  God. 

21  He  warned  and  commaundcd  them 
that  they  shulde  tell  no  man  that 
thinge, 

22  Sayinge,  That  the  sonne  off  man 
must  suffi-e  many  thynges,  and  be  re- 
proved of  the  seniour.s,  and  of  the  hy 
prcstes,  and  scribes,  and  be  slayne,  and 
the  thirde  daye  rise  agayne. 

23  And  he  sayde  to  them  all,  Yf  eny 
man  will  come  after  me,  let  hym  denye 
hym  silfe,  and  take  his  crosdc  on  hym 
dayly,  and  folowe  me. 

24  Whosoever  will  save  his  life,  shall 
lose  it ;  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life 
for  my  sake,  the  same  shall  save  it. 

25  For  what  shall  itt  avauntage  a  man,, 
to  wyn  the  whole  worlde,  yft"  he  loose 
hym  silfe,  or  runnc  in  doniage  oft  hynt 
silfe? 

26  For  whosoever  is  ashamed  of  mo 
and  oft"  my  .sayinges,  off  hym  shall  the 
Sonne    of  man    be   ashamed,    when   ho 


334 


GOTHIC,  360. 


amma,   yah   attins,    yah    J)ize    •\veihane 


aggele. 


27  Qijjuh  Jian  "izwis,  sunya  sincl  suraai 
})ize  her  standaudaue,  j^aiei  ni  kaus- 
yaucl  dau|jau,  unte  gasaiwhaud  Jjiud- 
iuassau  GuJ)S. 

28  WaurJ;un  J^an  afar  ]^o  -svaurda  swe 
dagos  ahtau,  gauimauds  Paitru  j^ah 
lakobu  yah  lohanuen,  usiddya  in.  fair- 
guni  bidyaD. 

29  Yah  -wai'l?  mi))])anel  ba]j  is,  siuns 
audwairjjyis  is  aii];ara,  yah  gawaseius  is 
wheita  skeinaudei. 

30  Yah  sai !  Avairos  twai  mi|)rodideduu 
imma,  ))aiei  wesun  Moses  yah  Helias, 

31  pai  gasaiwhauaus  in  wul|;au  ;  qe];- 
un  urruus  is,  |)oei  skukla  usfullyan  iu 
lairusalem. 

32  Ijj  Paitvus,  yah  ])ai  mij)  imma, 
wesuu  kauridai  slepa,  gawakuandans  J)an 
gascwhun  avuIIju  is,  yah  })ans  twans 
wairaus  ])ans  mi|)staudandans  imma. 

33  Yah  Avar}},  mi]))5anei  afskaiskaidun 
sik  af  imma,  qaj)  Paitrus  du  lesua, 
Talzyand,  god  ist  unsis  her  wisan,  yah 
gawam-kyaima  hleij'ros  }n-ins,  aina  })us, 
yah  aiua  Mose,  yah  aina  Heliyiu ;  ui 
witauds  Avha  qijjij'. 

34  pata  ])aii  imma  qij'audiu,  Avarjj 
inillima,  yah  ufarskadwida  ins  ;  faui'ht- 
idedun  jian,  iu  jjammei  yainai  qemuu 
in  |jamma  milhmin. 

35  Yah  stibna  Avav)j  us  ))amma  milh- 
min, qij^andei,  Sa  ist  sunus  meius  sa 
liuba,  l^amma  hausyai]?. 

36  Yah  Avarj)  mi}))3anei  so  stibna,  bi- 
gitans  AA^arJ)  lesus  ains.  Yah  eis  })ah- 
nidedun,  yah  mann  ni  gataihnn  in  yain- 
aim  dagam  ui  Avaiht,  J)izei  gascwhun. 

37  War]?  ]ian  in  |)amma  daga,  dala)j 
atgaggauclam  im  af  fairgunya,  gamotida 
imma  manageins  filu. 

38  Yah  sai  !  manna  us  jjizai  managein 
ufwopida,  qipands,  Laisari,  bidya  J)uk, 
insaiwhan  du  sunu  meinamma,  unte 
fiinaha  mis  ist ; 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 
fteder,  and  halegra  eugla. 


27  Ic  secge  eoAV,  sojjlice  her  synd  sume 
staudende,  da  deade  ne  Avurda]),  ser  hig 
Godes  rice  geseon. 

28  Da  Avses  geAvorden  sefter  dam  AA^ord- 
um  nean  eahta  dagas,  dset  he  nam 
Petrum  and  lohannem  and  lacobum, 
and  eode  on  anne  miint,  dset  he  hyne 
geb^de. 

29  Da  he  hyne  gebsed,  da  wses  hys 
ansyn  odres  hiAves,  and  his  reaf  hAvit 
scinende. 

30  Da  sprjecon  tAvegen  Averas  Avid  hyne, 
Moyses  and  Heh'as 

3 1  GescAvene  on  msegen-jirymme  ;  and 
ssedon  his  geAvitendnesse,  de  he  to  ge- 
fyllenue  AA^ses  on  Hierusalem. 

32  Petrus,  and  da  de  mid  him  Avwron, 
Avurdou  mid  slsepe  gehefegode,  and  da 
hi  ouAvsecnedon  hi  gesaAA'on  his  msegen- 
jjrym,  and  twegen  A\^eras  de  mid  him 
stodon. 

33  .  .  .  And  hi  him  fram  eodon,  Petrus 
cw8e|>  to  him,  Eala  bebeodend,  god  is 
da't  Ave  her  beon,  and  uton  Avyrcan  jn-eo 
cavdung-stowa,  ane  de,  and  ane  Moyse, 
and  aue  Helie  ;  and  he  nyste  hAva^t  he 
c^^'0e)5. 

34  Da  he  dis  sj^jbc,  da  Avear]?  genip, 
and  ofer-sceadede  hig;  and  hi  ondredon, 
him  gangende  on  diet  genip. 

35  Dii  com  stefen  of  dam  genipe,  and 
c\va?J?,  Des  ys  min  leofa  sunu,  ge- 
hyrajj  hyne. 

36  Da  seo  stefen  Avjes  gehyred,  da  Ava^s 
se  Hselend  gemet  ana.  And  hi  suav- 
odon,  and  ne  ssedon  nauum  men  on 
dam  dagum  nan  |nng,  dses  de  hi  ge- 
saAvon. 

37  O'tlrum  djege,  him  of  dam  munte 
farendum^  him  agen  arn  mycel  menego. 


38  Da  cl}^ode  an  Aver  of  diere  menego, 
and  c\vse]>,  LareoAV,  ic  halsige  de,  geseoh 
minne  sunu,  fordam  he  is  min  anhca 
sunu  : 


IX.  27-38.]  \VYCLIFFE,i389. 

his  mageste,  aud  of  the  fadir,  and  of  the  ' 
hooly  aungcls. 

27  Forsoth  I  soyc  to  50U,  verily  thcr  ben 
suiuino  stondiuLje  hero,  whicho  schuleu 
not  taste  dooth,  til  tlioi  srcii  the  rowme 
of  God. 

28  Sothli  it  was  don  aftir  thos  wordis 
almoost  eijte  dayes,  and  he  took  Petre 
and  James  and  John,  and  he  sti3ede  in 
to  an  hil,  that  ho  schulde  i)reic. 

29  And  the  while  he  pveiede,  the  Hk- 
nesse  of  his  checre  was  niaad  othir  nianer, 
and  his  clothing  whit  t-chynynge. 

30  And  loo  !  twcye  men  spakcn  with 
him,  forsothe  Moyses  and  Elye 

3 1  Weren  seyn  in  mageste  ;  and  thei 
seyden  his  go}nge  out,  which  he  was  to 
fillinge  in  Jerusalem. 

32  Forsothe  Petre,  and  thei  that  weren 
with  him,  weren  greuyd  with  sleep,  and 
thei  wakinge  sy5en  his  mageste,  and 
tweye  men  that  stooden  with  him. 

33  And  it  was  don,  whanne  thei  depart- 
iden  fro  him,  Petre  seith  to  Jhcsu,  Com- 
andour,  it  is  good  to  vs  for  to  be  here, 
and  make  we  here  thre  tabernaclis,  oon 
to  thee,  and  oon  to  ^loyses,  and  oon  to 
Elye  ;  not  witinge  what  he  schulde 
seye. 

34  Sothli  him  spckinge  thes  thingis,  a 
cloude  was  maad,  and  schadewide  hem  ; 
and  thei  dredden,  hem  entringe  in  to 
the  clowde. 

35  And  a  voys  was  maad  fro  the  elowde, 
seyinge,  This  is  my  dereworthe  sone, 
Leere  je  him. 

36  And  the  while  the  vols  was  maad, 
Jhesu  was  foundcn  aloonc.  And  thei 
helden  pecs,  and  seide  to  no  man  in  tho 
dayes  ou3t  of  tho  thingis,  whiclie  thei 
hadden  herd. 

37  Forsothe  it  was  don  in  the  day 
suynge,  hem  comynge  doun  of  the  hil, 
myche  cumpanye  of  peple  renneth  to 
hem. 

38  And  loo !  a  man  of  the  cumpanye 
criede,  seyinge,  ^laistir,  I  biseche  thee, 
byhold  in  to  my  sone,  for  he  is  oou 
aloonc  to  me ; 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


;};}:» 


coninit'th  in  his  awnc  maicsto,  and  in 
the  maioste  of  his  father,  and  of  the 
holy  angels. 

27  I  tell  you  of  a  surety,  some  there 
are  of  them  thatt  here  stonde,  which 
shall  not  tast  of  deeth,  till  they  se  the 
kyngdom  of  (Jod. 

28  And  it  folowed  about  an  viij.  dayes 
after  thoose  sayinges,  he  toke  Peter 
James  and  Jhon,  and  went  vp  into  a 
mountayne  to  praye. 

29  And  as  he  prayed,  the  fassion  of  his 
countcnauuce  was  changed,  and  his  gar- 
ment was  whyte  and  shoone. 

30  And  beholde  !  two  men  talked  with 
him,  and  they  were  Moses  and  Helias, 

3 1  Which  apered  gloriously ;  and  spake 
of  his  dcpartinge,  whych  he  shulde  ende 
att  Jerusalem. 

32  Peter,  and  they  that  wer  with  hym, 
wer  hevy  a  slepe,  and  when  they  woke 
they  sawe  his  maieste,  and  two  men 
stondinge  with  him. 

33  And  hit  chaunsed,  as  they  departed 
from  hyiu,  Peter  sayde  vnto  Jesus, 
IMaster,  it  is  goode  beinge  here  for  vs, 
let  vs  make  thre  tabernacles,  won  for 
the,  and  won  for  Moses,  and  won  for 
Helias  ;  and  wist  nott  what  he  sayde. 

34  Whyll  he  thus  spake,  there  cam  a 
cloude,  and  shadowed  them  ;  and  they 
feared,  when  they  entred  into  the  cloude. 

35  And  there  cam  a  voyce  out  of  the 
cloude,  sayinge,  This  is  my  deare  sonne, 
heare  hym. 

36  And  as  sone  as  the  voice  was  past, 
Jesus  was  founde  alone.  And  they  kept 
it  cloosse,  and  tolde  noo  man  in  thoose 
da}-cs  eny  of  those  thynges,  which  they 
had  seue. 

37  Hyt  chaunsed  on  the  nexte  daye, 
as  they  cam  douue  from  the  hyll,  mochc 
people  cam  and  met  hym. 

38  And  Ijcholde!  a  man  off  the  com- 
pany crycd  out,  sayinge,  ]Ma~.tcr,  I  be- 
seche  the,  beholde  my  sonne,  for  he  is 
all  that  I  have  ; 


336 


GOTHIC,  360. 


39  Yah  sal !  alima  nimij)  ina  unlirains, 
yah  anaks  hropei]),  yah  tahyij)  ina  mi]j 
whajjon,  yah  halisaiw  aflinni];  af  imma 
gabrikands  ina. 

40  Yah  ba|>  siponyans  {^eiiians,  ei 
■usdribeina  imma,  yah  ni  mahtedun. 

41  Andhafyands  ])an  Icsus  qa.'p,  0  ! 
kuni  ungahxubyando  yah  inwindo,  xind 
wha  siau  at  izwis,  yah  ])ulau  izwis  1 
attiuh  Jjana  sunn  })einana  hidrei. 

42  paruh  nauh|)an  duatgaggandin  im- 
ma, gabrak  ina  sa  unhul];a,  yah  tahida. 
Gawhotida  )ian  lesus  ahmin  Jjamma  nn- 
hrainyin,  yah  gahailida  ))ana  magu,  yah 
atgaf  ina  attin  is. 

43  Usfihiians  pan  waui-lnin  allai  ana 
])izai  mikllein  Gu)?s.  At  allaim  })an 
siklaleikyandam  bi  alia  Jjoei  gatawida 
lesus,  qa|5  Paitrus,  Frauya,  duwhe  weis 
ni  mahtedum  usdrcibau  jjamma?  Ij? 
lesus  cp\>,  pata  kuni  ni  usgaggijj,  nibai 
an  bidom  yah  in  fastubnya.  Qa|>  Jmn 
du  siponyam  seinaim, 

44  Lagyijj  yus  in  ausona  izwara  ]>o 
waurda,  unte  sunus  mans  skulds  ist 
atgiban  in  handuns  manne. 

45  Ij)  els  ni  fro])un  ))amma  Avaurda, 
yah  was  gahulij?  fauva  im,  ei  ni  froj^eina 
'imma ;  yah  ohtedun  fraihnan  ina  bi 
Jiata  waurd. 

46  Galail^  ))an  mitons  in  ins,  J^ata 
wharyis  ];au  ize  maists  -wcsi. 

47  lJ3  lesus  gasaiwhands  ]>o  miton 
hairtins  ize,  fairgreipands  barn,  gasatida 
faura  sis ; 

48  Yah  qajj  du  im,  Sawhazuh  saei 
andnimi])  j^ata  barn  ana  namin  mein- 
amma,  mik  andnimi)) ;  yah  sawhazuh 
saei  mik  andnimij^,  andninii])  Jmna  sand- 
yandan  mik ;  unte  sa  minnista  AA'isands 
in  allaim  izwis,  sa  wair)?i[7  mikils. 

49  Andhafyands  ]5an  lohannes  qaji, 
Talzyand,  gasewhum  sumana  ana  |)ein- 
amma  namin  usdreibandan  unhulj'ons, 
yah  Avaridedum  imma,  unte  ni  laistei]) 
m\\>  unsis. 

50  Yah  qajj  du  im  lesus^  Ni  waryif^. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke. 

39  And  mi!  se  unclcena  gast  bine 
fet-hrin]),  and  he  fserlice  hrym]),  and 
foi-nim]j  hyne,  and  fsemj),  and  hyne  tyr]> 
and  slit. 

40  And  ic  hsed  cline  leorning-cnihtas, 
dfet  big  bine  ufc-adrifon,  and  big  ne 
mihton. 

41  DiX  cwfpjj  se  H^lend  him  to  and- 
sware,  Eala !  ungeleafulle  and  })weore 
cneoresse,  swa  lunge  swil  ic  beo  mid 
eow,  and  eow  })olie  1  Ised  hider  dinue 
sunu. 

42  And  da  he  hyne  Isdde  him  to,  se 
deofol  hine  fornam,  and  fordyde.  Da 
nydde  se  Hselend  done  unclssnan  giist 
lit,  and  gehselde  dtene  enapan,  and  ageaf 
hine  his  fteder. 

43  Da  wundredon  big  ealle  be  Godes 
mserjje.  And  eallum  wundriendum  be- 
dam  ])ingum  de  gewurdon, 


he  cwajjj  to  his  leorning-cnihtum, 

44  A'setta])  das  sprseca  on  eowruni 
heortum,  hit  ys  toweard,  deet  manner 
sunu  si  geseald  on  manna  banda. 

45  Da  |)ohton  big  dis  Avord,  and  hit 
AA'?es  bewrigen  beforan  him,  d?et  hi  hit 
ne  ongeton ;  and  hi  ne  dorston  hine  be 
dam  Avorde  ahsian. 

46  S6]dice  da?t  gepanc  code  on  big, 
liAvjdc  hyra  yldest  Avssre. 

47  Da  se  Hselend  geseh  hyra  heortan 
ge))ancas,  he  gesette  dtene  enapan  Avid 
bine ; 

48  And  CAvoe]?  to  him,  Se  de  dysne 
enapan  on  minum  naman  onfehjj,  se  me 
onfeh|) ;  and  se  de  me  onfeh]?,  he  onfeh)? 
dfene  dc  me  sende ;  Avitodlice  se  de  is 
Isest  betweox  eoAV  ealle,  se  is  mara. 

49  Dfi  andswarode  lohannes,  Bebeod- 
end,  AA'e  gesriAvon  sumne  on  dinuni 
naman  deofol-seocnessa  iit-adrifende,  and 
Ave  hine  forbudon,  fordam  he  mid  us  ne 

50  Da  CAV?e}j  he,  Ne  forbeode  ge,  se  de 


IX.  39-50.]    WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

39  Ami  lo !  a  .spirit  takith  liiuu  and 
sudi-nly  lie  orictli,  and  luirtlith  clown, 
and  t()-dra\vitli  liim  with  froth,  and 
vnncthc  he  goth  awoy  to-druwinge  him. 

40  And  I  preiede  thi  discijdis,  that 
thei  schulde  caste  him  out,  and  thei 
my5tcn  not. 

41  Sothli  Jhesu  answeringe  seide  to 
hem,  A !  vnfeithful  generaoioun  and 
woyward,  hou  longe  schal  I  be  anentis 
50U,  and  schal  satire  50U  ]  lecd  hidur 
thi  sonc. 

4:;  And  whannc  he  cam  ny5,  the  feud 
hxulide  him  donn,  and  to-brayd.  And 
Jhosu  blamede  the  vnclene  spirit,  and 
JiCLiide  the  child,  and  5cld  him  to  his 
fadir. 

43  Sothli  alle  men  wondriden  greetly 
in  the  greetnesse  of  God.  And  alle  men 
Avuudriuge  iu  alle  thmgis  whiche  he  dide, 


he  sciile  to  his  disciplis, 
4-1  Putte  50  thes  wurdis  in  50ure  hertis, 
't  is  to  comynge,  that  mannis  sone 
litrayed  in  to  the  houdis  of  men. 

:  ■;  And  thei  knewen  not  this  word,  | 

i    it  was  hid  bifore  hem,  that  thei  1 

,.    .iden  it  not :  and  thei  dredeu  to  axe  | 
him  of  this  word. 

1 

46  Forsotlie  a  thou5t  entride  in  to 
Li.ni,  who  of  hem  schulde  be  more. 

47  And  Jhe-u  seynge  the  thou5tis  of 
the  herte  of  hem,  takynge  a  child 
scttidc  him  bisydis  him  silf; 

And  seith  to  hem.  Who  eucre  schal 

yue  this  child  in  my  name,  receyueth 

!      ;    and  who  euere  schal  receyue  me, 

1      yueth  hym  that  sente  me;  for  whi 

1     that  is  lesse  among  50U  alle,  is  the 

i-e. 

I    Forsoth   John    answeringe    seide, 

iiaundour,  we  .sy3en  sum  man  cast- 

■  out  fondis  in  thi  name,  and  we  han 

'i  1  bodyn  him,  for  he  sueth  not  thee  with 

r ^ 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


:;37 


39  And  se!  a  sprete  takcth  hym,  :iiid 
sodeiily  he  cryetli,  and  he  toareth  hym, 
that  he  fometh  ag;iyiie,  and  vneth  dc- 
partc'th  he  from  liiiu  when  he  hath 
rent  him. 

40  And  I  have  besought  thy  disciples 
to  cast  hym  out,  and  they  coulde  nott. 

41  Jesus  answered  and  saydc,  O  !  genc- 
racion  with  oute  fayth  and  croked,  howc 
longe  shall  I  be  with  you,  and  shall 
sutfre  you  ?  brynge  thy  sonne  bidder. 

42  As  he  yett  was  a  commynge,  the 
fende  rent  hym,  and  tare  hym.  Jesus 
rebuked  the  vnclene  sprete,  and  healed 
the  chvlde,  and  delivered  hym  to  hys 
f^vther. " 

43  And  they  wer  all  amased  att  the 
myghty  power  of  God.  AMiyll  they 
woudred  eveiy  one  att  all  thynges  whych 
he  did, 


he  sayde  vnto  hys  disciples, 

44  Lett  these  sayinges  synke  doune 
into  youre  eares,  the  tyine  wyll  come, 
when  the  sonne  off  man  shalbe  delivered 
into  the  hondes  off  men. 

45  Butt  they  wist  nott  what  that 
worde  meant,  and  ji;  was  hyd  from 
them,  thatt  they  vnderstod  hytt  nott ; 
and  they  feared  to  axe  hym  off  that 
sayinge. 

46  There  arose  a  disputacion  amonge 
them,  who  sliulde  be  the  greatest. 

47  When  Jesus  perceaved  the  thoughtes 
off  their  hertes,  he  toke  a  chylde,  and 
sett  hym  hard  by  hym  ; 

48  And  sayde  vnto  them.  Whosoever 
receave  thys  chylde  in  my  name,  re- 
ccaveth  me  ;  and  whosoever  receaveth 
me,  receaveth  hym  that  sent  me ;  for 
he  that  amongest  you  ys  the  least,  the 
same  shalbe  gi'eate. 

49  Jhon  answered  and  sayde,  Master, 
we  sawe  won  castynge  out  devyls  in  thy 
name,  and  we  forbade  hym,  be  cause  he 
foloweth  not  with  vs. 

50  And  Jesus  saydc  vnto  hym,  Forbid 

z 


338 


GOTHIC,  360. 


unte  saei  iiist  wi[)i'a  i'zwis,  faur  'izwls 
1st.  +Ni  ainshun  auk  1st  manne,  saei 
ni  gawaurkyai  maht  ia  namin  mein- 
amma. 

51  War]>  |)an,  'in  jjammei  usfulnodedun 
dagos  andanumtais  is,  yah  is  andwairj^i 
seinata  gatulgida,  du  gaggan  in  lairu- 
salem  ; 

52  Yah  insandida  airuns  fam-a  sis.  Yah 
gaggandans  galij)uii  in  haim  Saraareite, 
swe  manwyan  inima. 

53  Yah  ni  andnemun  ina,  unte  and- 
■\vairjji  is  was  gaggando  du  lairusaleni. 

54  Gasaiwhandans  pan  siponyos  is, 
lakobus  yah  lohannes,  qejiun,  Frauya, 
wileizu  ei  qi])aima,  fon  atgaggai  us  him- 
ina,  yah  fraqimai  im,  swe  yah  Heleias 
gatawidal 

55  Gawandyands  Jjan  gasok  im,  yah 
qa})  da  im,  Niu  witu]?,  whis  ahmane 
siyu}>  ; 

56  Unte  sunus  mans  ni  qam  saiwalom 
qistyan,  ak  nasyan.  Yah  iddyedun  in 
aujjara  haim. 

57  War]j  \)an,  gaggandam  im  in  wiga, 
qajj  sums  du  imma,  Laistya  ]juk,  Jjis- 
Avhaduh  Jjadei  gaggis,  Frauya. 

58  Yah  qa])  du  imma  lesus,  Fauhons 
grobos  aigun,  yah  fuglos  himinis  sit- 
lans,  i\>  sunus  mans  ui  habaijj  whar 
haubijj  galagyai. 

59  Qa|)  )  an  du  an])ai'amma,  Laistei  mik. 
I|j  is  qaj),  Frauya,  uslaubei  mis  galeij^an 
faurjjis,  yah  usfilhan  attan  meinana. 

60  Qajjf  jjan  du  imma  lesus.  Let  Jjans 
dau|jai;s  usfilhan  seinans  nawins ;  i|>  ]>u 
gagg,  yah  gaspillo  jjiudangardya  Guj'S. 

61  Qa]j  \)an  yah  anjiar,  Laistya  |juk, 
Frauya,  \\>  faurl'is  uslaubei  mis  andqijjan 
l)aim  |)aiei  sind  in  garda  meinamma. 

62  Qa\)  |-an  du  imma  lesus,  Ni  manna 
uslagyands  handu  seina  ana  hohan,  yah 
saiwhands  aftra,  gatils  ist  in  piudan- 
gardya  Gu})S. 


Chap.  X.      i  Afarujj-Jjan  }'ata  ustaik- 
nida  Frauya  yah  an})arans  sibuntehund, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 
nls  ongen  eow,  se  is  for  cow 


51  S6})lice  wses  geworden,  da  his  and- 
fenga  dagas  weex-on  gefyllede,  he  ge- 
trymede  hys  ansyne,  daet  he  fei-de  to 
Hierusalem ; 

52  Da  sende  he  bodan  befcran  his 
ansyne.  Da  eodon  hig  on  da  ceastre 
Sanaaritanorum,  deet  hi  him  gegear- 
wodon. 

53  And  hig  ne  onfengon  hine,  fordam 
de  he  wolde  faran  to  Hierusalem. 

54  Da  his  leorning-cnihtas  deet  ge- 
sawon,  lacobus  and  lohannes,  da  cweed- 
on  hig,  Drihten,  wylt  du  we  secga)), 
dvet  fyr  cume  of  heofone,  and  fornime 
hig?  .... 

55  And  he  hine  bewende,  and  hig 
))reade. 


56 


And  hig  ferdon  on  oder  castel. 

57  Da  hi  ferdon  on  wege,  sum  him 
to  cwse)),  Ic  fylige  de,  swa  hwyder  swa 
du  fterst. 

58  Da  cwsej)  se  Heelend,  Foxas  habba)> 
holu,  and  heofones  fugelas  nest,  soj'lice 
mannes  sunu  nsefj)  hwar  he  hys  heafod 
aliylde. 

59  Da  cw?e]j  he  to  odrum,  Filig  me. 
Da  cwvep  he,  Drihten,  ulj'f  me  serest 
byrigan  mlnne  feeder. 

60  Da  cwBe|j  se  Hselend,  Leet  da  dead- 
an  byrigan  hyra  deadan ;  ga  du,  and 
boda  Godes  rice. 

61  Da  c\v0e|)  oder,  Ic  fylige  de,  Drih- 
ten, ac  Iset  me  serest  hit  cydan  dam  de 
aet  ham  syud. 

62  Da  cwje]j  se  Hselend  him  to.  Nan 
man  de  hys  hand  aset  on  hy.-i  sulh,  and 
on-bsec  besyh}),  nys  audfenge  Godes 
rice. 


Chap.  X.     '''  i  ^fter  dam  se  Hjelend 
jremearcode  odre  twa  and  hund-seofentig, 


IX.  5I.-X.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

foibcde,  forsotlic    ho  that  is  not  1150113 
50U,  is  foi-  50U 


51  Sothli  it  was  don,  wliaimo  the  (hiycs 
of  his  takynoe  vp  woron  Hllid,  and  he 
scttidc  fastc  his  face,  that  he  scliulde  go 
in  to  Jerusalem  ; 

52  And  he  sente  mcssangeris  biforc  his 
si3t.  And  thei  ijoynge  eutrideu  in  to  a 
citee  of  Samaritans,  that  thei  schulden 
make  redy  to  him. 

53  And  thei  receyueden  not  him,  for 
tlie  face  was  of  him  goynge  in  to  Jeru- 
salem. 

54  Forsothe  whanne  James  and  John, 
liis  disciplis,  hadden  seyii,  thei  seidcn. 
Lord,  wolt  thou  we  seye,  that  Her  come 
tloun  fro  heueue,  and  waaste  hem,  as 
Helye  did  ? 

55  And  he  turned  blamyde  liem,  sey- 
iuge,  3e  witeu  not,  whos  spiritis  5e  ben ; 

56  Forsothe  mannis  sone  cam  not  for 
to  leese  soulis,  but  for  to  saue.  And 
thei  wenten  in  to  another  castel. 

57  Forsoth  it  Avas  don,  hem  walkynge 
in  the  weye,  sum  man  seide  to  him,  I 
schal  sue  thee,  whidur  euere  thou  schalt 

58  And  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  Foxis  ban 
dennys,  and  briddis  of  the  eyr  lian  nestis, 
but  mannis  sone  hath  not  where  he  schal 
reste  his  heed. 

59  Forsothe  he  seide  to  another.  Sue 
thou  me.  Sothli  he  seide,  Lord,  suffre 
me  first  to  go,  and  to  burie  my  fadir. 

60  And  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  SufTre  that 
deedc  men  burie  her  deede ;  but  go 
thou,  and  telle  the  kyngdom  of  God. 

61  And  anothir  seide.  Lord,  I  schal 
sue  thee,  but  first  suftVe  nie  to  telle  a3en 
to  hem  that  ben  at  home. 

62  Forsothe  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  No 
man  scndynge  his  bond  to  the  plouj, 
and  biholdinge  a3en,  is  able  to  the 
rewme  of  God. 


TYNDALE.  1R26. 


33f) 


Chap.  X.   i  Forsothe  aftir  tlies  thingis 
the  Lord  Jhesu  ordeynede  and  othere 


ye  hym  not,  for  he  that  is  nott  agaynst 
you,  is  with  you 


5 1  And  it  folowed,  when  the  time  was 
com  that  he  shulde  be  receaved  vp,  that 
he  detei-mined  hyni  silfe,  to  goo  to  Jeru- 
salem ; 

52  And  sent  messengers  before  hym. 
And  they  went  and  entred  into  a  citie 
of  the  Samaritans,  to  make  redy  for 
hym. 

53  And  they  Avolde  nott  receave  hym, 
because  his  face  was  as  though  he  wolde 
goo  to  Jerusalem. 

54  When  hys  disciples,  James  and  Jhon, 
sawe  that,  they  sayde,  Lorde,  wilt  thou 
that  Ave  commaunde,  that  fyre  come 
doune  from  lieven,  and  consume  them, 
even  as  Helias  did  1 

55  Jesus  turned  about  and  rebuked 
them,  sayinge.  Ye  Avote  nott,  Avhat  maner 
sprete  ye  are  off ; 

56  The  Sonne  of  man  ys  not  come  to 
destroye  mennes  lives,  but  to  saA'e  them. 
And  they  Avent  to  an  other  toune. 

57  Hit  chaunsed,  as  they  Avent  on  their 
iorney,  a  certayne  man  sayd  A'nto  hym, 
I  Avyll  folowe  the,  Avhither  soever  thou 
goo. 

58  Jesus  sayd  A'lito  him.  Foxes  have 
holes,  and  bryddes  of  the  ayer  have 
nestes,  but  the  sonne  of  man  hath  nott 
Avhere  on  to  laye  hys  heed. 

59  And  he  sayde  A^nto  a  nother,  Folowe 
me.  And  the  same  sayde,  Lorde,  suffre 
me  f}Tst  to  goo,  and  bury  my  father. 

60  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  Lett  the  deed 
liury  the  deed  ;  but  goo  thou,  and  preache 
the  kyngdome  off  God. 

61  And  another  sayde,  I  Avyll  foloAve 
the,  Lorde ;  but  lett  nie  fyrst  goo  bid 
them  fare  Avcle  Avhich  are  at  home  at 
my  housse. 

62  Jesus  sayd  vnto  him,  No  man  that 
putteth  hys  honde  to  the  ploAve,  and 
loketh  backe,  is  apte  to  the  kingdom 
of  God. 


Chap.  X.     i  After  that   the  Lorde 
apoynted  other  seveutie  also,  and  sent 
z  2 


340 


GOTHIC,  360. 


jali  insandida  ins  twans  whanzuli  faiira 
andwairjjya  seinamnia  in  all  baiirge  yah 
stade,  jjadei  munaida  is  gaggan. 

2  Qajmli  ])an  du  im,  Asans  managa,  ij> 
"waurstwyans  fawai ;  bidyi'p  nu  fraiiyan 
asanuis,  ei  ussatyai  Avaurstwyaiis  in  ]>o 
asau  seiua. 

3  Gaggi]',  sal  !  ik  insandya  izwis  swe 
laml)a  in  midumai  wuli'e. 

4  Ni  bairai]?  pugg,  iiih  matibalg,  nih 
gaskohi,  ni  mannunhun  bi  wig  golyaij?. 

5  In  jiane  gardei  inngaggaij),  fruniist 
<lijjai[5,  Ga-\vaii-|)i  fnimma  garda. 

6  Yah  yabai  siyai  yainar  sunus  ga- 
■\vaiv))yis,  gawheilai]?  sik  ana  imnia  ga- 
wair[)i  izwar ;  i]?  yabai  ni,  du  izwis 
gawandyai, 

7  luuh  Jjan  Jjamma  garda  Avisaij), 
matyandans  yah  driggkandans  ]>o  at  ini ; 
wair|-)s  auk  ist  waurstwya  mizdon.s  sein- 
aizos.     Ni  farai]?  us  garda  in  gard. 

8  Yah  in  j^oei  baurge  gaggaij^,  yah 
audnimaina  izwis,  matyaij)  jjata  faur- 
lagido  izwis  ; 

9  Yah  lekino]>  Jjans  in  izai  siukans. 
Yah  q]]n])  du  im,  Atnewhida  ana  izwis 
))iudnngardi  Gu})s. 

10  I|)  in  |)oei  baiirge  inngaggai}),  yah 
ni  andniniaina  izwis,  usgaggandans  ana 
fauradaurya  izos,  qi|'ai|5, 

1 1  Yah  stub3'u  j^ana  gahaftnandan 
uusis  us  juzai  baurg  izwarai  ana  fotuns 
unsarans  afhrisyani  izwis  ;  swejjauh  );ata 
witeij),  jnitei  atnewhida  sik  ana  izwis 
jnudangavdi  Gu}?s. 

12  Qi|)a  izwis,  |'atei  Saudaumyam  in 
yainamma  daga  sutizo  Avair})!};  \>au  j^izai 
baurg  yainai. 

1 3  Wai  j)us,  Kaurazein ;  wai  ]>us, 
Baijisaidan ;  unte  i[)  in  Twrai  yah  Sei- 
donai  waurjieina  niahteis,  Jjozei  waurj^un 
in  izwis,  airis  jau  in  sakkum  yah  azgon 
sitandeius,  gaidreigodedeina. 

14  Swejjauh  Twrai  yah  )Scidonai  sutizo 
wairj'ijj  in  daga  stauos  j^au  izwis. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

and  sende  hig  twam  beforan  his  ansyne 
on  selce  ceastre  and  stcwe,  de  he  to 
cumenne  wres. 

2  And  cwve]>  to  him,  Her  is  mycel  rip, 
and  feawa  wyrhtena  :  bid<laj)  c!a?s  ripes 
hlaford,  Osdt  he  sende  wyrhtc.n  to  his 
ripe. 

3  Faraji,  nu !  nu  ic  eow  sende  swa 
swa  lamb  betweox  wulfas. 

4  Ne  here  ge  sacc,  ne  codd,  ne  gescy, 
ne  iiuune  man  be  wege  ne  greta}). 

5  On  swa  hwylc  hils  swa  ge  in-ga|>, 
cwcda])  serest.  Sib  si  disse  hiw-raedenne. 

6  And  gyf  dar  beojj  sybbe  beam,  reste 
dar  eower  sib  ;  gif  hit  elles  sy,  heo  sy 
to  eow  gecyrred. 

7  Wunigajj  on  dam  ylcan  hiise,  and 
eta|>  and  drincaj?  da  jiing  de  hig  habba]? ; 
s6|)lice  se  wyrhta  is  his  mode  wyrde. 
Ne  fare  ge  fram  huse  to  huse. 

8  Ac  on  sw;1  hwylce  ceastre  swa  ge 
in-ga)5,  and  hig  eow  onfojj,  eta])  dast  eow 
toforan  aset  ys ; 

9  And  gehselal)  da  untruman  de  on 
dam  hiise  synd.  And  secga})  him,  Godes 
rice  to  eow  genealsec)). 

10  On  swa  hwylce  ceastre  swa  ge  in- 
ga]>,  and  hig  ne  onfo])  eow,  gajj  on  hyra 
strteta,  and  cweda]), 

1 1  Dset  dust  d.Tt  of  eoAvre  ceastre  on 
lirum  futum  clifode  we  drigeaj)  on  eow; 
witaj)  deah,  da^t  Godes  rice  genealsecj). 


12  Ic  eow  secge,  ua^t  Sodom-warum 
on  dam  drege  h'\\>  forgifenlicre  donnc 
da3re  ceastre. 

13  Wa  de,  Corozaim  ;  wa  de,  Beth 
saida ;  fordam  gif  on  Tyro  and  o; 
Sydone  gewordene  wseron  da  megcnu 
de  on  eow  gedcne  synd,  gefyrn  hig  o\ 
hseran  and  on  axan,  hreowsunge  dydon. 

14  Deah  hwfedcre  Tii-n  and  Sydone  o; 
dam  dcege  by}>  forgyfeulicre  donne  eoAv. 


X.  2-14.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

scucnty  and  twc^uc,  ami  sentc  liciu  by 
twcyne  and  twcyue  bifore  his  face  in  to 
cuery  citee  and  place,  uliiJir  be  was  to 
coniynge. 

2  And  be  scide  to  liem,  Sothli  mycbe 
ripe  corn  is,  but  fewe  workmen  ;  tber- 
fore  preie  50  the  lord  of  the  ripe  corn, 
that  be  sende  workmen  in  to  bis  rype 
corn. 

3  Go  5e,  lo  !  I  sonde  50U  as  lambrcn  a 
monc^  wolucs. 

4  Xyle  50  bcre  a  sacbel,  nether  scrip, 
nether  scboou,  and  greete  5e  no  man  l)y 
the  weye. 

5  And  in  to  what  euere  hous  5e  schulen 
eutre,  first  seye  je,  Pees  to  this  hous. 

6  And  if  a  sone  of  pees  schal  be  there, 
5oure  pees  schal  reste  on  him ;  if  uou, 
it  scbul  turne  a5en  to  50U. 

7  Forsotbe  dwellc  5e  in  the  same  hous, 
ctynge  and  drynkinge  tho  thingis  that 
ben  at  hem ;  forsotbe  a  workman  is 
worthi  his  byre.  Xyle  36  passe  fro  hous 
in  to  hous. 

8  And  in  to  what  euere  citee  56  schulen 
entre,  and  thei  schulen  receyue  50U,  ete 
5e  tho  thingis  that  ben  put  to  50U  ; 

9  And  beele  ^e  the  syke  men  that  ben 
tber  ynne.  And  seye  je  to  hem,  The 
kyngdom  of  God  schal  ne!5e  in  to  30U. 

JO  In  to  what  euer  citee  5e  schulen 
entre,  and  thei  schulen  not  receyue  50U, 
56  goynge  out  in  to  the  streetis  thereof, 
seie, 

1 1  Also  we  WTpen  of  in  to  50U  tlie 
poudere  that  cleuyde  to  vs  of  joure 
citee ;  nethelees  wite  50  this  thing,  for 
the  rewme  of  God  schal  come  ny5. 

12  Forsotb  I  seie  to  :ou,  for  to  Sodom 
it  schal  be  esyere^  than  to  that  citee  in 
thilke  day. 

1 3  Woo  to  thee,  Corosaym  ;  woo  to 
thee,  Betbsayda  ;  for  if  in  Tyre  and 
Sydon  the  vertues  hadden  ben  don, 
whiche  ben  don  in  thee,  sum  tyme  thei 
sittinge  in  beer  and  aische,  schulden 
liaue  don  i)enauuce. 

14  Xetbcles  to  Tyre  and  Sydon  it  schal 
be  csycr  iu  the  doui  than  to  50U. 


TYXDALE,  1526.  341 

1  them  two  and  two  before  bis  face  into 
every  citic  and  place,  whither  be  bim 
silfe  wolde  come. 

2  And  sayde  vnto  them.  The  harvest  is 
grcate,  but  the  laborers  are  feawe  ;  praye 
therfore  the  lorde  of  the  harvest,  to  send 
forth  hys  laborers  into  bys  bcrvcst. 

3  Goo  youre  waycs,  beholde  I  I  sende 
you  forthc  as  landjcs  amonge  wolves. 

4  Bcare  noo  wallet,  nether  scryppe,  nor 
shues,  and  salute  noo  man  by  the  waye. 

5  In  whatsoever  housse  ye  enter  in, 
fyrst  saye,  Peace  be  to  this  housse. 

6  And  yf  the  sonne  of  peace  be  theare, 
youre  peace  shall  rest  apou  bym ;  yf 
nott,  yt  shall  returne  to  you  agayne. 

7  And  in  the  same  housse  tary  still, 
eatynge  and  drinkynge  suche  as  they 
have ;  for  the  laborer  is  worthy  off"  hys 
rewaixle.    Go  not  from  housse  to  housse- 

8  And  in  to  whatsoever  citie  ye  enter, 
yf  they  receave  you,  eate  whatsoever  is 
set  before  you ; 

9  And  heale  the  sicke  that  are  theare. 
And  saye  vnto  them,  The  kyngdom  of 
God  is  come  neye  apon  you. 

10  But  into  Avhatsoever  citie  ye  shall 
enter,  yf  they  receave  you  not,  goo  youre 
wayes  out  into  the  stretes  of  the  same, 
and  saye, 

1 1  Even  the  very  dust  which  clcaveth 
on  vs  of  youre  citie  we  wype  of  agaynsfc 
you ;  nott  with  stondynge  marke  this, 
that  the  kyngdom  of  God  was  come 
neye  apon  you. 

1 2  Ye  and  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  it  shalbe 
easier  in  that  daye  for  Sodom  then  for 
that  citie. 

13  Wo  be  to  the,  Chorozin  ;  wo  be  to 
the,  Bcthsaida ;  for  if  the  miracles  bad 
bene  done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  which  have 
bene  done  in  you,  they  had  a  greate 
■\vhyle  agone  repented,  sittyng  in  beere 
and  asshes. 

14  Xevertbclesse  it  shalbe  easier  for 
Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  iudgnient  tbea 
for  you. 


342 


GOTHIC,  360. 


15  Yah  ]>u,  Kafarnaum,  ))U  und  liimin 
usliauhido,  und  lialya  gadrausyaza. 

16  Saei  hausei)j  I'zwis,  mis  hanseij? ; 
yah  saei  uf briki])  izwis,  mis  ufbriki}) ;  i]j 
saei  ufbriki]?  mis,  ufbriki))  ]>amma  sand- 
yandin  mik. 

17  Gawandidedun  Jjan  sik  J)ai  sibun- 
tehund  mij?  fahedai,  qit)andaus,  Frauya, 
yah  unhuljjons  ufhausyand  imsis  in 
jiamin  ]?einamma. 

18  Qa|>  Jjan  du  im,  Gasawli  Satanan, 
swe  lauhmunya,  driusandan  us  himiua. 

19  )Sai  !  atgaf  i'zwis  waldufni  trudan 
ufaro  waurme,  yah  skam-pyono,  yah  ana 
allai  mahtai  fiyandis,  yah  waihte  aino- 
hun  izwis  ni  gaskaj^yi]?. 

20  Swe}?auh  J^amma  ni  fagino]),  ei  ^lai 
ahmans  izwis  ufhausyand ;  ij)  fagiuod, 
in  })ammei  namna  izwara  ganielida  sind 
in  himinam. 

21  Inuh  ])izai  wheilai  swegnida  ahmin 
lesus,  yah  qa|j,  Andhaita  jjus,  atta, 
Frauya  himinis  yah  airj)0s,  unte  aftalht 
]>o  faura  snutraim  yah  frodaim,  yah  and- 
hulides  Jjo  niuklahaim.  Yai,  atta,  unte 
swa  war])  galeikai]/  in  andwair})ya  Jjein- 
amma.  Yah  gawandijjs  du  siponyam 
seinaim  qaf), 

22  All  mis  atgiban  ist  fram  attin 
meinamma,  yah  ni  whashun  kann,  whas 
ist  sunus,  alya  atta ;  yah  whas  ist  atta, 
alya  sunus,  yah  Jjammei  will  sunus 
andhulyan. 

23  Yah  gawandijjs  du  siponyam  sein- 
aim, sundro  qa|>,  Audaga  augoua,  |)oei 
saiwhand  jjoei  yus  saiwhijj. 

24  Qijja  auk  izwis,  J^atei  managai 
praufeteis  yah  jjiudanos  wildedun  saiwh- 
an,  J)atei  yus  saiwhi[?,  yah  ni  ga- 
sewhun  ;  yah  hausyan,  jmtei  yus  ga- 
hausei]?,  yah  ni  hausidedun. 

25  Yah  sai !  witodafasteis  sums  usto]?, 
fraisands  ina,  yah  qi|;ands,  Laisari,  wha 
tauyands  libainais  aiweinons  arbya  wair- 
jjal 

26  paruh  qa|>  du  imma,  In  witoda  wha 
tjameli])  ist  ]  whaiwa  ussiggwis  1 

27  1\)  is  andhafyands  qa];,  Friyos 
Frauyan  Gu])  J>einana  us  allamma  hair- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

15  And  du,  Cafarnaum,  od  heofon  up- 
ahafen,  du  byst  od  helle  besenced. 

1 6  j\Ie  gehyr)?,  se  de  eow  gehyr]) ;  and 
me  oferhoga]),  se  de  eow  oferhogajj ;  se 
de  me  oferhogajj,  he  oferhogajj  done  de 
me  sende. 

17  Da  gecyrdon  da  twa  and  hund- 
seofentig  mid  gefean,  and  cwredon,  Drih- 
ten,  deofol-seocnessa  us  synd  on  dinum 
naman  under-Jjeodde. 

18  Da  ssede  he  him,  Ic  geseah  Satanan, 
swa  swa  lig-rsesc,  of  heofone  feallende. 

19  And  nu  !  ic  sealde  eow  anweald  to 
tredenne  ofer  nseddran,  and  snacan,  and 
ofer  selc  feondes  maegen,  and  nan  ]jing 
eow  ne  dera}). 

20  Deah  hwsedere  ne  blissige  ge,  on 
dam  de  eow  synd  gastas  under-]jeodde  ; 
geblissiajj,  dset  eower  naman  synd  on 
heofonum  awritene. 

21  On  dsere  tide  he  on  Halgum  Gaste 
geblissode,  and  cwoe}>,  Ic  andette  de, 
ffeder,  Drihten  heofones  and  eorjjan, 
fordam  de  du  das  jjing  wisum  and 
gleawum  behyddest,  and  lytlingum  a- 
WTuge.  .  .  .  fordam  hit  beforan  de 
swa  gelicode 

22  Ealle  |)ing  me  synd  fram  minum 
feeder  gesealde,  and  nan  man  nat,  hwylc 
is  se  sunu,  biiton  se  fueder ;  ne  hwylc 
is  se  fseder,  biiton  se  sunu,  and  se  de  se 
sunu  hit  awreon  wyle  J 

23  Da  cwsejj  he,  to  his  leoi'ning- 
cnihtum  bewend,  Eadige  synd  da  eag~ 
an,  de  geseo})  da  Jjing  de  ge  geseo)j. 

24  Sojjlice  ic  eow  secge,  d?et  manega 
witegan  and  cyningas  woldon  geseon 
dfet  ge  geseo}j,  and  hig  hit  ne  gesawon  ; 
and  woldon  gehyran  dtet  ge  gehyra]), 
and  hig  hit  ne  gehyrdon. 

25  Da  liras  sum  ?e-gleaAV  man,  and 
fandode  his,  and  cwsejj,  Lareow,  hwset 
do  ic  dset  ic  ece  lif  hsebbe  1 

26  Da  cwce})  he  to  him,  Hwpet  is  ge- 
writen  on  dsere  se  ?  hu  rsetst  du  ? 

27  Da  andswarode  he,  Lufa  Drihten 
dinne  God  of  ealre  dinre  heortan,  and 


X.  1 5--^ 7-]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 5  And  thou,  Cafarnaum,  crt  cnhaunsid 
til  to  hcuene ;  thou  schalt  be  drenchid 
til  in  to  helle. 

16  He  that  hecritli  50U,  hccrith  nic ; 
and  he  that  dispisitli  ;on,  dispisith  nic  ; 
forsothe  he  that  ilispisith  nie,  dispisith 
him  that  seute  nio. 

17  Foi'soth  two  and  seucnty  discipUs 
turncdyn  a^eiu  Avith  ioye,  seyin<;e,  Lord, 
also  fondis  ben  sujet  to  vs  in  thi  name. 

18  And  lie  scith  to  hem,  I  sy3  Sathanas 
fallinge  doun  fro  hcuene,  as  leit. 

T  9  And  loo !  I  haue  50uun  to  50U  power 
of  defoulinge'''  on  serpents,  and  scor- 
piouns,  and  on  al  the  vertu  of  the  enemy, 
and  no  thing  schal  anoye  50U. 

20  Xetheles  nyle  56  haue  ioye  in  this 
thing,  for  fendis  ben  sujet  to  30U ;  but 
ioye  5ee,  that  ;oure  names  ben  writun 
in  heueucs. 

21  In  thilke  our  he  gladide  in  the 
Hooly  Goost,  and  seide,  I  knowleche  to 
thee,  fadir.  Lord  of  heuene  and  erthe, 
■which  hast  hid  thes  thingis  fro  wyse 
men  and  prudent,  and  hast  schewid  hem 
to  litle.  5I16,  fadii',  for  so  it  pleside 
bifoi'e  tliee 

22  Alle  thingis  ben  50uun  to  me  of  my 
fadir,  and  no  man  woot,  who  is  the  sone, 
no  but  the  fadir ;  and  who  is  the  fadir, 
no  but  the  sone,  and  to  whom  the  sone 
wolde  schewe. 

23  And  he  turned  to  his  disciplis,  seide, 
Blcssid  hen  the  y5eu,  whiche  seen  tho 
thingis  that  30  seen. 

24  Sothli  I  seie  to  30U,  for  many  pro- 
phetis  and  kyngis  wolden  se  tho  thingis, 
whiche  3e  seen,  and  thei  sy3en  not ;  and 
heere  tho  thingis,  that  50  heere,  and  thei 
hcrden  not. 

25  And  lo  I  a  wyse  man  of  the  lawe 
roos,  temptinge  him,  and  seyinge,  Maistir, 
what  thing  doynge  schal  I  welde  euer- 
lastinge  Ijf? 

26  And  he  seide  to  him,  "What  is  writun 
in  the  lawe  1  hou  redist  thou  ? 

27  lie  answeriiige  seide,  Thou  schalt 
loue  the  Lord  thi  God  of  al  thyn  herte, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


343 


1,^  And  thou,  Capernaum,  which  art 
exalted  to  hcven,  shalt  be  thrust  doune 
to  hell. 

16  Wliosoever  heareth  you,  hearoth 
me ;  and  whosoever  despiscth  you,  dc- 
spiscth  me ;  and  he  that  despescth  me, 
despiseth  hym  that  sent  me. 

17  The  seventie  returned  agayne  Avith 
ioye,  sayinge,  Lorde,  even  the  very 
devyls  are  sulxlucd  to  vs  thorowe  thy 
name. 

18  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  I  sawc 
Sathan,  as  it  had  bene  lightenyng,  faulc 
doune  from  heven. 

19  Beholde  !  I  geve  vnto  you  power 
to  treade  on  serpentes,  and  scorj^ions, 
and  apon  all  maner  power  of  the  enemy, 
and  nothynge  shall  hurte  you. 

20  Neverthelesse  in  thys  reioyse  nott, 
that  the  spretes  are  vnder  youre  power  ; 
butt  reioyse,  be  cause  youre  names  are 
written  in  heven. 

21  That  same  time  reioysed  Jesus  in 
the  Sprete,  and  sayde,  I  prayse  the, 
father,  Loixle  of  heven  and  erth,  be  cause 
thou  hast  hyd  these  thynges  from  the 
wyse  and  prudent,  and  hast  opened  them 
to  the  folisshe.  Even  soo,  father,  for 
soo  pleased  it  the 

22  All  thynges  are  geven  me  off  my 
father,  and  noo  man  knoweth,  who  the 
Sonne  is,  butt  the  father  ;  nether  who 
the  father  is,  save  the  sonne,  and  he  to 
Avhom  the  sonne  wyll  shewe  hym. 

23  And  he  turned  to  his  disciples,  and 
sayde  secretly,  Happy  are  the  eyes, 
which  se  that  ye  se. 

24  For  I  tell  you,  that  many  prophetes 
and  kynges  have  desired  to  se  thoose 
thynges,  which  yc  se,  and  have  nott 
sene  them  ;  and  to  heare  those  thynges, 
Avhych  ye  heare,  and  have  nott  heardc 
them. 

25  And  markc  !  a  certayne  lawere 
stode  vp,  and  tempted  hym,  sayinge, 
Master,  Avhat  shall  I  do  to  inheret  etci-- 
nall  lyfe  ? 

26  He  sayd  A-nto  him,  "What  ys  Avrittcn 
in  the  hnve  ?  hoAve  redest  thou  ? 

27  And  he  ansAvered  and  sayde.  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  Lorde  God  wyth  all  thy 


344 


GOTHIC,  360. 


tin  Jjeinamma,  yah  us  allai  saiwalai 
Jjeinai,  yah  us  allai  mahtai  })einai,  yah 
us  allai  gahugdai  )/einai ;  yah  newhuud- 
yan  |)einana  swe  |)uk  silban. 

28  panuh  qa]5  du  imma,  Raihtaba  and- 
hoft ;  J>ata  tawei,  yah  libais. 

29  1])  is  wilyauds  uswaurhtana  sik 
domyan,  qa|j  du  lesua,  An  whas  ist 
mis  newhundya  1 

30  Andhafyauds  )jan  lesus,  qa|),  Manna 
galai)?  af  lairusalem  in  laireikon,  yah 
in  wuidedyans  frarann,  Jjaiei  yah  biraub- 
odedun  ina,  yah  banyos  analag      .     .     . 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke 

of  ealre  dinre  saAvle,  and  of  eallum 
clinum  militum,  and  of  eallum  ctinum 
mjegene ;  and  ctinne  nehstan  swii  tie 
sylfne. 

28  Da  cwsej'  he,  Rihte  Ctu  andswarod- 
est ;  do  duet,  donne  lyfast  du. 

29  Da  cwse])  he  to  dam  Hajlende,  and 
wolde  hine  sylfne  gerihtwisian,  And 
hwylc  is  min  nehsta  ? 

30  Da  cwa')j  se  Hselend  hine,  up- 
beseonde,  Sum  man  ferde  fram  Hieiu- 
salem  to  Hiericho,  and  becom  on  da" 
sceajjan,  da  hine  bereafodon,  and  tint- 
regodon  hine,  and  forieton  hine  sam- 
cucene. 

31  Da  gebyrode  hit,  da;t  sum  sacei'd 
ferde  on  dam  ylcan  Avege,  and,  da  he 
dtet  geseah,  he  hine  forbeah. 

32  And  eall-swa  diacon,  da  he  wjbs 
wid  da  stowe,  and  diet  geseah,  he  hyne 
eac  forbeah. 

33  Da  ferde  sum  Samaritanisc  man 
Avid  hine  ;  da  he  hine  geseah,  da  AA'ear|> 
he  mid  mild-heortnesse  ofer  hine  a- 
styred. 

34  Da  genealsehte  he,  and  Avra]>  his 
wunda,  and  on-ageat  ele  and  win.  And 
hine  on  hys  nyten  sette,  and  gelitdde 
on  hys  Isece-hus,  and  hine  lacnode. 

35  And  brohte  odrum  dijege  twegen 
penegas,  and  sealde  dam  Isece,  and  dus 
cwpejj,  Begym  hys ;  and  swa  hwjet  swa 
dii  mare  to-gedest,  donne  ic  cume,  ic 
hit  forgylde  de. 

36  Hwylc  dara  Jjreora  ])ync])  de  dtet  sy 
dees  niEeg,  de  on  da  scea])an  befcoll  1 

37  Da  cwsej)  he,  Se  de  him  mild- 
heortnesse  on  dyde.  Da  owoejj  se  HebI- 
end,  Ga,  and  do  eall-swa.''' 

38  S5]>lice  hit  w£es  geworden,  da  hig 
ferdon,  se  Htulend  code  on  sum  castel ; 
and  sum  wif,  on  naman  Martha,  onfeusr 
hyne  on  hyre  hiis. 

39  And  dffire  SAVUster  ^\^es,  Maria,  seo 
eac  sset  Avid  daes  Hselendes  fet,  and  his 
Avord  aehvrde. 


40  S6])lice  Martha  geornlice  him  |3en- 


X.  28-40.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

and  of  al  thi  soiile,^  ami  of  alio  tin 
iny5tis,  and  of  al  tin  mynde ;  and  thi 
ucijeborc  as  tin  silf. 

28  And  Jhosn  seidc  to  liini,  Thou  hast 
answerid  ii5tly  ;  do  thou  this  thing,  and 
thou  schalt  lyue. 

29  Forsothe  he  willini;c  to  iustifye  him 
silf,  seide  to  Jhcsu,  And  who  is  my 
iici5eboie  ] 

30  Sothli  Jhesu  bilioldiucje,  seidc,  Sum 
man  cam  doun  fro  Jerusalem  in  to  Je- 
rico,  and  folde  ainong-  thouues,  whiche 
also  robhiden  him,  and,  Avuundis  ])Utt 
in,  wenteu  awey,  the  man  lefte  half 
quyk. 

31  Forsothe  it  byfcl,  that  sum  prcst 
cam  doun  in  the  same  weyc,  and,  him 
seyn,  passide  forth. 

32  Also  forsoth  and  a  dckcne,  whanne 
lie  was  bisydis  the  place,  and  sy5  him, 
passide  forth. 

33  Foi'soth  sum  man  Samai'itan,  mak- 
ynge  iourney,  cam  bisydis  the  weye ; 
and  he  seynge  him,  was  stirid  by  mercy. 

34  And  he  comyngc  ny5,  bond  to  gidere 
his  woundis,  heeldynge  yu  oyle  and 
wyn.  And  he  puttinge  on  his  hors, 
ledde  in  to  a  stable,  and  dide  the  cure 
of  him. 

35  And  another  day  he  brou5te  forth 
twey  pens,  and  5af  to  the  kepere  of  the 
stable,  and  seide,  Haue  thou  the  cure 
of  him  ;  and  what  euere  thing  thou 
schalt  5yue  ouer,  I  schal  5elde  to  thee, 
whanne  I  schal  come  a5en. 

36  Who  of  thes  thre  seincth  to  thee  to 
haue  be  nci5ebore  to  liini,  that  felde  a 
mong  the  thcucs  ] 

37  And  he  seide,  He  that  dide  mercy 
on  him.  And  Jhcsu  seith  to  him,  Go 
thou,  and  do  thou  in  lyk  manere. 

38  Forsoth  it  was  don,  wJiiie  tliei 
wenten,  and  he  entride  in  to  sum  castel ; 
and  sum  womman,  -Martha  bi  name, 
receyuede  him  in  to  hir  hous. 

39  And  to  this  Martha  was  a  sister, 
!Marie  bi  name,  which  also  sittinge  by 
sydis  the  feet  of  the  Lord,  herde  the 
word  of  him. 

40  Forsothe    Martha    bisyede   aboutc 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


3-!  5 


hert,  and  wyth  all  thy  sonic,  and  witli 
nil  tliy  strengthc,  and  with  all  thy 
m}nde  ;  and  thy  ucghbour  as  thy  sylfe, 

28  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Thou  hasfc 
answered  right ;  this  do,  and  thou  shalt 
live. 

29  He  willyngc  to  iustific  hym  silfe, 
sayde  vnto  Jesus,  Who  ys  then  my 
ncghbour  ? 

30  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde,  A  cer- 
tayne  man  descended  from  Jerusalem 
into  Jericho,  and  fell  into  the  hondes  off 
theves,  whych  robbed  hym  oil"  his  ray- 
ment,  and  wondcd  hym,  and  departed, 
levynge  hym  halfe  deed. 

31  And  yt  chaunsed,  that  there  cam  a 
certayne  preste  that  same  waye,  and 
sawe  hym,  and  passed  by. 

32  And  lyke  w3-se  a  levite,  when  he 
was  come  neye  to  the  place,  Avent  and 
loked  on  hym,  and  passed  by. 

33  Then  a  certayne  Samaritane,  as  he 
iornyed,  cam  neye  vnto  hym  ;  and  be- 
helde  hym,  and  had  compassion  on  hym. 

34  And  cam  to  hym,  and  bounde  vppe 
hys  wondes,  and  poured  in  wyne  and 
oyle.  And  layed  him  on  his  beaste,  and 
brought  hym  to  a  commen  hostry,  and 
drest  hym. 

35  And  on  the  morowe  when  he  de- 
parted he  toke  out  two  pence,  and  gave 
them  to  the  host,  and  said  vnto  him, 
Take  cure  of  him  ;  and  whatsoever  thou 
spendest  above  this,  when  I  come  agayne, 
I  will  recompence  the. 

36  Which  nowc  off  these  thre  thynkest 
thou  was  ncghbour  vnto  him,  that  fell 
into  the  theves  hondes  1 

37  And  he  answered,  He  that  shewed 
mercy  on  hym.  Then  sayd  Jesus  vnto 
hym.  Goo,  and  do  thou  lyke  wyse. 

38  Hyt  fortuned,  as  he  went,  that  he 
entred  into  a  certayne  tonne ;  and  a 
certayne  woman,  named  Martha,  receaved 
hym  into  her  housse. 

39  And  this  woman  had  a  sister,  called 
!Mari,  which  sate  at  Jesus  fete,  and  herde 
Jesus  pi'cachynge. 

40  Martha  was  combrcd  about  moche 


346 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

ode.  Da  stod  lieo,  and  cwse}',  Drihten, 
nis  de  nan  cam,  dret  min  swuster  let 
me  Eenlypige  J^enian  1  sege  liyre,  dset  heo 
fylste  me. 

41  Da  cw£e|)  se  Hselend,  Martha,  Mar- 
tha, geovnfuU  du  cart,  and  embe  fela 
J)inga  gedrefed ; 

42  Gewislice  an  ))ing  is  nead-behefc. 
Maria  geceas  done  selestan  dsel,  se  hyre 
ne  byjj  afyrred. 


Chap.  XL  i  S6)>lice  wses  geworden, 
da  he  yfses  on  sumere  st5we  hine  ge- 
biddende,  da  da  he  geswac,  him  to 
cw£e]j  an  his  leorning-cnihta,  Drihten,. 
leer  ns  us  gebiddan,  swa  lohannes  his 
leorning-cnihtas  Iserde. 

2  Da  cwrej)  he  to  him,  Cweda])  dus^ 
donne  ge  eow  gebidda)?,  U're  feeder,  du 
de  ou  heofone  eart,  si  din  nama  ge- 
halgod.  To-cume  din  rice.  Geweorde 
din  willa  on  heofone,  and  on  eorjjan. 

3  Syle  us  to-dseg  lirne  dseghwamlican 
hiaf. 

4  And  forgyf  us  ure  gyltas,  swa  we 
forgyfa|>  selcum  dara  de  wid  us  agylt. 
And  ne  Issd  du  us  on  costnunge,  ac  alys 
us  fram  yfele. 

5  Da  c\v0e]j  he  to  him,''^H\vylc  eower 
hsef})  sumne  freond,  and  gae))  to  midre 
nihte  to  him,  and  cwyj)  to  him,  La  freond, 
lyen  me  ]>rf  hhlfas  ; 

6  Fordam  min  freond  com  of  Avege  to 
me,  and  ic  nsebbe  hwset  ic  him  toforan 
lecge. 

7  And  he  donne  him  dus  andswarige, 
Ne  beo  du  me  gram  ;  nu  min  duru  is 
belocen,  and  mine  cnihtas  synd  on  reste 
mid  me ;  ne  mseg  ic  arisan  nu,  and 
syllan  de. 

8  Gyf  he  donne  })m'h-\vuna)?  cnuciende, 
ic  eow  secge,  gyf  he  [ne]  arist  and  him 
syljj  donne,  fordam  de  he  his  freond  ys, 
deah  hwfedere  for  hys  onhrope  he  arist, 
and  syl[)  him  his  neode. 

9  And  ic  eow  secge,  bidda]?,  and  eow 
byj;  geseahl;  secafi,  and  gefinda}?;  cnuc- 
'iu\>,  and  eow  hy\>  untyned. 


X.  4 1. -XL  9.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

moche  seruyoe.  Which  stood,  and  seide, 
Lord,  is  it  not  of  charge  to  thoc,  that  my 
sistir  Icfte  me  aloone,  for  to  mynystrc  1 
tliorfoi-e  seye  to  hir,  that  she  helpo  me. 

41  And  the  Lord  answeringe  seide  to 
hir,  Martlia,  ^Martha,  thou  ert  hysi,  and 
art  troublid  anentis  ful  manye  thingis  ; 

42  Forsotli  o  thing  is  necessarie.  Marie 
hath  chose  the  beste  ]mrt,  which  schal 
not  be  take  a  wey  fro  liir. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


347 


Chap.  XL  i  And  it  was  don,  wlianne 
be  was  proiynge  in  sum  place,  as  he 
ceesside,  oon  of  his  disciplis  seide  to 
him,  Lord,  teche  vs  to  preye,  as  and 
John  tau5te  his  disciplis. 

2  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Whanne  50 
preyen,  seye  56,  Fadir,  ....  halewid. 
be  thi  name.     Thi  kyngdom  come  to  .   . 


3  yyae  to  vs  to  day  cure  eche  dayes 
breed. 

4  And  for5yue  to  vs  oure  synnes,  as 
and  we  for5yuen  to  ecli  owynge  to  vs. 
And  leed  not  vs  in  to  temptacioun.  .  .  . 

5  And  he  seith  to  hem,  "Who  of  50U 
schal  haue  a  frend,  and  schal  go  to  him 
at  myduy5t,  and  schal  seie  to  him, 
Frend,  leene  to  me  thre  loouys ; 

6  For  my  frend  cometh  to  me  of  the 
weye,  and  I  haue  not  what  I  schal  sette 
bifore  him. 

7  And  he  withjmne  forth  answeringe 
seye,  Nyle  thou  be  noyful  to  me  ;  the 
dore  is  now  sehit,  and  my  children  beth 
Avith  me  in  the  cowche ;  I  may  nojt 
ryse,  and  5}'ue  to  thee. 

8  And  if  he  schal  contynuc  knockynge, 
I  seye  to  5011,  thou3  he  schal  not  5yue 
to  hym,  for  he  is  a  frend,  netheles  for 
his  vnrcstefulnesse  he  schal  rise,  and  5yue 
to  hym,  how  manye  he  hath  nedeful. 

9  And  I  seie  to  30U,  axe  ^e,  and  it 
sclial  be  50uun  to  ;ou  ;  seke  je,  and  3e 
schulen  fyndc  ;  knocke  je,  and  it  schal 
be  openyd  to  30U. 


servyngc.  And  stodo,  and  saydc,  ^Master, 
doest  thou  not  care,  that  my  sister  liath 
lecft  me  to  minister  alone  1  bid  hei' 
thorfore,  that  she  holpe  me. 

4 1  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
her,  ^Martha,  ]\Lartha,  thou  arte  busied, 
and  troublest  thy  silfe  about  many 
thyngcs ; 

42  Vercly  one  ys  nedfull.  ^Nfary  hath 
chosen  her  a  good  pai-te,  which  shall  not 
be  taken  awaye  from  her. 


Chap.  XL  i  And  it  fortuned,  as  he 
was  prayinge  in  a  certayne  place,  when 
he  ceased,  won  of  his  disciples  sayd  vnto 
him,  INLister,  teache  vs  to  praye,  as  Jhon 
taught  his  disciples. 

2  And  he  sayd  vnto  them.  When  ye 
praye,  saye,  Oure  father  which  arte  in 
heven,  halowed  be  thy  name.  Lett  thy 
kyngdom  come.  Thy  will  be  fulfillet, 
even  in  erth  as  it  is  in  heven. 

3  Oure  dayly  breed  geve  vs  this  daye. 

4  And  forgeve  vs  oure  synnes,  for  even' 
we  forgeve  every  man  that  traspaseth 
vs.  And  ledde  vs  not  into  temptacion, 
butt  deliver  vs  from  cvyll.  Amen. 

5  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Which  of 
you  shall  have  a  frende,  and  shall  goo 
to  hym  att  mydnyght,  and  saye  vnto 
h)Tn,  Frende,  lende  me  foure  loves  ; 

6  For  a  frende  of  myne  is  come  out  oif 
the  waye  to  me,  and  I  have  nothynge  ta 
sett  before  him. 

7  And  he  with  in  shall  andswer  and 
saye.  Trouble  me  nott ;  nowe  is  the 
dore  shett,  and  my  servaunttcs  are  with 
me  in  the  chamber  ;  I  cannot  ryse,  and 
geve  them  to  the. 

8  I  saye  vnto  you,  though  he  woll 
not  aryse  and  geve  hym,  be  cause  he  is 
his  frende,  yet  because  of  hys  impor- 
tunite  he  woll  ryse,  and  geve  him,  as 
many  as  he  nedeth. 

9  And  I  saye  vnto  you,  axe,  and  yt 
shalbe  gevcn  you  ;  seke,  and  ye  shall 
fyndc  ;  knocke.  and  it  shalbe  opened 
vnto  you. 


.348 


OOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

10  iE'lc  dara  cle  l)itt,  onfeli]; ;  and  se 
de  sec{',  lie  fiat ;  and  cnuciendum  by}) 
untyned. 

1 1  Hwylc  eowei'  bitt  bis  feeder  bblfes, 
segst  ctu  sylj)  be  bim  stiln  ?  odde  gif  be 
byt  fisces,  syljj  be  bim  nseddran  for 
fisce? 

12  Odde  gif  be  bit  seg,  segst  du  r;(jc)> 
be  bim  scoi-jjionem  1  diet  is  an  Avyrm- 
cynn. 

13  Witodbce  gif  ge,  donne  de  synd 
yfele,  cunnon  syllan  gode  sylene  eowrum 
bearnum,  swa  mycele  ma  eower  feeder  of 
beofone  syljj  g5dne  gast  dam  de  byne 
biddal).+ 

14  Da  waes  se  Heelend  lit-adrifende 
Slime  deofol-seocnesse,  and  seo  wa3s 
dumb.  And  da  be  ut-adraf  da  deofel- 
seocnesse,  da  spnec  se  dumba ;  and 
da  masnigeo  Avundredon. 

15  Sume  cwsedon,  On  Belzebub,  deofla 
ealdre,  be  ut-adrifj)  da  deofol-seocuessa. 

x6  And  sume  bis  fandodon  and  gyrn- 
don  of  beofone  tacnes  of  bim. 

17  Da  be  geseab  byra  ge^iancas,  be 
cwfejj,  .^'Ic  I'ice  on  byt  sylf  todeeled, 
byjj  toworpen,  and  dset  bus  ofer  dait 
bus  feal}). 

18  Gyf  Satanas  is  todseled  on  bine 
sylfne,  bu  stent  bis  rice  ?  Fordam  de 
ge  secga]),  d;et  ic  on  Belzebub  deofol- 
seocnessa  ut-adrife. 

19  Gif  ic  on  Belzebub  deofla  ut-ildrife, 
on  Invam  ilt-adrifa})  eower  beam?  For- 
dam  big  beo]?  eowere  denian. 

20  Gewislice  gif  ic  on  Godes  fingre 
deofla  ut-adrife,  eallunga  Godes  rice  on 
eow  becym}). 

21  Donne  se  stranga  geweepnod  bis 
cafertun  gebealt,  donne  beojj  on  sibbe 
da  jnng  de  be  ab. 

2  2  Gyf  donne  strengva  ofer  bine  cymjj 
and  bine  ofer-wiu[),  ealle  bis  wpGpnu,  de 
be  on-truwode,  be  bim  ilfyr}),  and  todselj) 
bis  bere-reaf. 

23  Se  de  nis  mid  me,  se  is  ongean  me  ; 
and  se  de  ne  gaderaj)  mid  me,  se  bit 
tostret. 

24  Donne  se  uuclsena  gast  gsej)  of  dam 
men,   be  gee]?   ]'urh    umvtx^terige  stowa, 


XI.  IO-24.]   WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

10  Forsotli  cell  man  tliat  nxith,  takitli ; 
and  lie  that  sckitli,  fynditli  ;  and  to  a 
man  kiiockynge,  it  selial  bo  o]>e;!yd. 

11  Tlierforo  who  of  5011  axitli  tlie  fadir 
breed,  Avher  he  selial  5yue  to  him  a  stoon  1 
ethei-  if  he  axith  fysch,  wher  lie  schal 
5yue  to  him  a  serpent  for  the  fysch  1 

12  Ethir  if  he  selial  axe  an  ey,  whethir 
he  schal  drcssc  to  him  a  scorpioun] 

13  Tlierforo  if  ^c,  •\vhannc  ^e  ben  ynele, 
Icunnc  ;;yue  to  ^ourc  children  goodc 
thingis  ^oumi,  hou  raochc  more  5oure 
fadir  of  henene  schal  5yue  a  good  spirit 
to  men  axynge  him. 

14  And  Jhesu  was  castinge  out  a  fend, 
and  he  was  donmbe.  And  wliannc  he 
hadde  cast  out  the  fend,  the  doumb  man 
spak  j  and  the  cumpanyes  wondrideu. 

15  Forsoth  summe  of  hem  seiden,  In 
Belsolnib,  prince  of  deuelis,  he  castith 
out  deuelis. 

1 6  And  othcre  temptinge  axiden  of  him 
a  tokene  fro  heuene. 

17  Forsoth  he,  as  he  sy5  the  thou5tis 
of  hem,  seido  to  hem,  Euery  rewme  de- 
partide  a5en3  it  silf,  schal  be  desolat, 
and  an  lious  schal  falle  on  an  lious. 

18  Forsoth  and  if  Sathanas  is  departid 
a5ens  him  silf,  how  schal  his  rewme 
stonde  ?  For  36  seyn,  that  I  caste  out 
fendis  in  Belsebub. 

19  Forsoth  if  I  in  Belsebub  caste  out 
fendis,  in  whom  5oure  sones  casten  out  ? 
Therfore  thei  schuleu  be  50ure  domes- 
men. 

20  Forsoth  if  I  caste  out  fendis  in  the 
fyngir^  of  God,  sothli  the  rewme  of  God 
is  com  en  in  to  50U. 

21  "NVhaune  a  strong  armed  man  kcpith 
liis  liows,  alle  thingis  that  he  weldith 
ben  in  ]iees. 

22  Sothli  if  a  sti'ongere  comynge  aboue 
ouercome  him,  lie  schal  take  a  wey  alio 
his  armcris,  in  Avhiche  he  ti'istide,  and 
schal  dele  abrood  his  spuylis- 

23  He  that  is  not  with  me,  is  a3ens 
rac ;  and  he  that  gedrith  not  to  gidere 
with  me,  scaterith  a  brood. 

24  Whanne  an  vnclene  spirit  hath  gon 
out  of  a  man,  he  waudrith  by  drye  jilacis, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


34{> 


10  For  every  one  that  axeth,  receavcth  ; 
and  he  that  sekoth,  fyndeth  ;  and  to  him 
that  knockcth,  shall  it  be  openned. 

1 1  Yf  the  Sonne  axe  breed  off  eny  off 
you  wliich  ys  hys  father,  wyll  he  proffer 
liym  a  stone  ?  or  yff  he  axe  fisshe,  wyll 
ho  geve  liym  a  serpent  1 

I  2  Or  yf  he  axe  an  cgge,  wyll  he  proffer 
him  a  scorpion  1 

13  Yf  ye  then,  which  are  evyll,  know 
howe  to  geve  good  giftes  vnto  youre 
chyldren,  howe  moche  more  shall  youre 
father  celcstiall  geve  a  goode  spretc  to 
them  that  desire  it  of  hym. 

14  And  he  was  a  castynge  out  a 
dcvyll,  whyche  was  dom.  And  it  folowed 
•when  the  dcvyll  was  gone  out,  the  dom 
spake  j  and  the  people  -wondred. 

15  Some  off  them  sayde,  He  casteth 
out  devyls  by  the  power  of  Belzebub, 
the  chefe  of  the  devyls. 

16  And  other  tempted  hym  sekynge  of 
hym  a  signe  from  heven. 

17  He  knewe  their  thoughtes,  and 
sayde  vnto  them,  Every  kyngdom  at 
debate  Avith  in  it  silfe,  shall>c  desolate, 
and  won  housse  shall  fall  apon  another. 

18  Soo  if  Satan  be  at  variaunce  with 
in  hym  silve,  hoAve  shall  his  kyngdom 
endure  ?  Be  cause  ye  sayc,  that  I  cast 
out  devy'ls  by  the  power  off  Belzebub. 

1 9  Y'^f  I  by  the  power  of  Belzebub  caste 
oute  devyles,  by  whose  power  do  youre 
chyldren  cast  them  out  ?  Therfore  shall 
they  be  youre  iudges. 

20  Butt  if  I  Avith  the  finger  off  God 
cast  out  devyls,  noo  doute  the  kyngdom 
of  God  is  come  apon  you. 

2 1  AVhcn  a  stronge  man  armed  Avatcli- 
eth  his  housse,  that  he  jjossesseth  is  in 
peace. 

22  But  Avhen  a  stronger  then  he  conicth 
apon  hym  and  overcommeth  hym,  he 
taketh  from  him  his  harnes,  Avherin  he 
trusted,  and  devideth  his  gooddcs. 

23  He  that  is  not  Avith  mc,  is  agaynst 
me  ;  and  he  that  gadereth  nott  Avith  me, 
scatteich. 

24  When  the  vnclene  sprete  is  gone 
out  of  a  man,  he  AA'alkcth  through  Avatcr- 


,350 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

reste  secende ;  and  nane  ne  gemet, 
ctonne  cwy])  he,  Ic  geweude  eft  to  niiu- 
um  liuse,  de  ic  of-eode. 

25  And  dsenne  he  cymj),  he  hit  gemet 
ajuitig  mid  besmum  afeorniod. 

26  Donne  gee})  he,  and  nim])  seofcn 
odre  gastas  wyrsan  donne  he,  and  in- 
ga}),  and  dar  eardia]>.  Donne  synd  dajs 
mannes  endas  wyrsan  dam  Berrum, 

27  S6|)lice  wses  geworden,  da  he  d;s 
ssede,  sum  wif  ....  him  to  cwa3|7, 
Eadig  is  se  innojj  de  de  bser,  and  da 
breost  de  du  suce. 

28  Da  cwsej)  he,  Eadige  synd  da,  de 
Godes  word  gehyra)?,  and  dset  geheakla}). 

29  Da  hyra  manega  togtedere  comon, 
he  cwsejj  to  him,  Deos  ciieorys  is  man- 
full  cneorys ;  heo  sec)?  tticen,  and  hyre 
ne  bij)  nan  geseald,  biiton  lonan  tacen. 


30  Swa  swa  lona  wses  tacen  Niniuet- 
um,  swa  bi])  mannes  sunu  tacen  disse 
cneorisse. 

3  r  Sul^-dseles  cwen  arist  on  dome  mid 
disse  cneorysse  mannum,  and  genydera]) 
hig  ;  fordam  de  heo  com  of  eorJ)an 
endura,  to  gehyranue  Salomones  wis- 
dom, and  efne  !  des  is  mara  donne 
Salomon. 

32  Niniuetisce  men  arisajj  on  d5me 
mid  disse  cneorysse,  and  genydeiia]? 
hig  ;  foi'dam  de  hig  dsed-bote  dydon  vet 
lonam  bodunge,  and  des  is  mara  donne 
lona. 

33  Ne  on-sel))  nan  man  his  leoht-fa?t, 
and  sett  on  diglum,  ne  under  bydene, 
ac  ofer  candel-stsef,  difit  da  de  in-gaj?, 
leoht  geseon. 

34  Din  cage  is  dines  lichaman  leoht- 
fast ;  gif  din  cage  bij>  hluttor,  doniie 
bi))  call  din  lichama  beorht  ;  gif  hit  by]j 
deorc,  call  din  lichama  by]?  ))ystre. 

35  Warna,  djBt  diet  leoht  de  de  on  is, 
ne  syn  })ystru. 

36  Gyf  din  lichama  call  bij'  beorht, 
and  nseff)  nanne  dsel  j'ystra,  donne  by}) 


:SI.  25-36.]  WYCLIITE,  13S9. 

sekinge  reste ;  and  he  fyiulyufje  not, 
seith,  I  sehivl  turnc  ajcii  in  to  myn  lious, 
wher  of  I  cam  out. 

25  And  whiinne  lie  schal  come,  he 
fyudith  it  cleusid  with  bcesmcs,  and 
ouinod. 

26  Thanne  lie  gotli,  and  takitli  with 
him  souene  othere  spiritis  wcrso  than 
liim  silf,  and  thoi  gon  yn,  dwellen  there. 
And  the  lastc  tliingis  of  that  man  ben 
inaad  worse  than  the  formere. 

27  Forsoth  it  was  don,  whanne  he 
seide  tlics  thingis,  sum  wonnnan  of  the 
cumpany  reysingc  hir  vois,  seide,  Blessid 
he  tlie  wombe  that  bar  thee,  and  blessid 
be  the  teetis  whiche  thou  hast  sokun. 

28  And  he  seide,  Ra there  blessid  ben 
thei,  that  heereu  Goddis  word,  and 
kepen  it. 

29  Forsothe  the  cumpanye  comynge  to 
giderc,  he  bigan  to  seye.  This  genera- 
cioun  is  a  Aveyward  generacioun  ;  it 
sekith  a  tokene,  and  a  tokene  sclial  not 
be  50uun  to  it,  no  but  the  tokene  of 
Joonas,  the  pvophete. 

30  For  whi  as  Joonas  was  a  tokene  to 
men  of  Nynyue,  so  mannis  sone  schal 
be  to  this  generacioun. 

31  Tlie  queene  of  the  south  schal  ryse 
in  dom  with  men  of  this  generacioun, 
and  schal  condempne  hem ;  for  sche 
cam  fro  the  endis  of  the  erthe,  to  heere 
the  wysdom  of  Salomon,  and  lo  !  here 
is  more  than  Salomon, 

32  !Meu  ot  Xynyue  schulen  ryse  in 
dom  with  this  generacioun,  and  schulen 
condempne  it ;  for  thei  diden  penaunce 
at  the  prechingc  of  Joonas,  and  lo  !  here 
is  more  than  Joonas. 

33  No  man  li5tneth  a  lanterne,  and 
puttith  in  hidlis,  other  vndir  a  boyschel, 
but  on  a  candel  sticke,  that  thei  that 
gon  yn,  se  li5t. 

34  The  lanterne  of  thi  body  is  thin 
y^e  ;  if  thin  y5e  schal  be  syinple,  al  thi 
body  schal  be  li5tful ;  forsoth  if  it  schal 
he  weyward,  also  thi  body  schal  be 
derkful. 

35  Tlierfore  se  thou,  lest  the  li3t  which 
is  in  thee,  be  derknessis. 

36  Therfore  if  al  thi  body  schal  be  li3t- 
ful,  not  hau)-nge  ony  part  of  derknessis, 


TYNDALE,  1526.  351 

lessc  places,  sekynge  recst ;  and  when  he 
fyndetii  none,  he  sayeth,  I  will  returne  a- 
gayne  vnto  my  houssc,  whence  I  cam  out. 

25  And  when  he  commeth,  he  fyndeth 
it  swept,  and  garnisshcd. 

26  Then  gocth  he,  and  taketh  seven 
other  sjirctcs  with  hym  worssc  then 
hym  silfe,  and  they  enter  in,  and  dwell 
thei-e.  And  the  eiide  oil"  that  man  is 
worsse  then  the  bogynnyngc. 

27  Hit  fortuned,  as  he  thus  spake,  a 
ccrtayne  woman  of  the  company  lyfte  vp 
her  voyce,  and  sade  vnto  hym,  Happy 
is  the  wombe  that  bare  the,  and  the 
pappes  which  gave  the  sucke. 

28  Butt  he  sayde,  Happy  are  they, 
that  heare  the  worde  off  God,  and  kepe 
it. 

29  When  the  people  wer  gadered  thicke 
to  geder,  he  began  to  saye.  This  is  an 
evyll  nacion  ;  they  seke  a  signe,  and 
there  shall  noo  signe  be  geven  them, 
but  the  signe  off  Jonas,  the  prophet. 

30  For  as  Jonas  was  a  signe  to  the 
Ninivites,  so  ghall  the  sonne  off  man  be 
to  this  nacion. 

3 1  The  quene  off  the  southe  shall  ryse 
at  the  iudgement  with  the  men  of  this 
genei'acion,  and  condempne  them ;  for 
she  cam  from  the  ende  of  the  worlde,  to 
heare  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  be- 
holde !  a  greater  then  Solomon  is  here. 

32  The  men  off  Ninivite  shall  ryse  at 
the  iudgement  with  this  generacion, 
and  shall  condempne  them  ;  for  they  re- 
pented at  the  preachynge  of  Jonas,  and 
bcholde  !  a  greater  then  Jonas  is  here. 

33  Noo  man  lighteth  a  candell,  and 
putteth  it  in  a  preve  place,  nether  vnder 
a  busshel,  butt  on  a  candelsticke,  that 
they  that  come  in,  maye  se  light. 

34  The  light  off  thy  body  is  tliyne  eye  ; 
therfore  when  thyn  eye  is  single,  then  is 
all  thy  body  full  off  light ;  butt  if  thyne 
eye  be  evyll,  then  shall  all  thy  body  be 
full  off  darknes. 

35  Take  hede  therfore,  thatt  the  light 
whiche  is  in  the,  be  nott  darknes. 

36  For  if  all  thy  body  shalbe  light, 
havynge  noo  parte  darkc,  then  shall  all 


m2 


GOTHIC.    360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

he  call  beorht,  and  de  on  lylit  swa  dpet 
leoht-fset  does  llg-rsesces.''' 

37  •  .  •  Da  bfed  hine  sum  Fariseisc 
man,  dfet  he  ttte  mid  him.  And  he 
in-eode,  and  sfet. 

38  Da  ongan  se  Fai'iseisca  on  him 
smeagan,  and  cwedan,  hwi  he  gejjwogeu 
DBere  ser  his  gereorde. 

39  Dii  cwoe})  Drihten  to  him,  Nu  ge 
Farisei  dset  ute  is  caUces  and  disces 
geclcensiajj ;  dcet  eow  innan  is,  dset  is 
full  reaflaces  and  unrihtwisnesse. 

40  La  dysegan,  hii  ne  wovhte  d^et  d?et 
inne  is,  se  de  worhte  d?et  ute  is  1 

41  Deah  hwoedere  dast  to  lafe  is,  sylla}) 
selmessan,  donne  beo])  eow  ealle  J>ing 
claene. 

42  Ac  wa  eow,  Fariseum,  ge  de  teodiaj) 
mintau,  and  rudan,  and  telce  wyrte,  and 
ge  forbugaj?  dom  and  Godes  lufe.  Das 
))ing  eoAV  gebyrede  to  donne,  and  da 
|)ing  ne  foi-lsetan. 

43  Wa  eow,  Fariseum,  ge  de  lufia})  da 
fovman  heah-setl  on  gesamnungum,  and 

.  gretinga  on  strsetum. 

44  Wa  eow, fordam  de  ge 

synd  swylce  da  byrgena,  de  man  innan  ■ 
ne  sceawa}),  and  da  men  nyton  de  him 
on-ufan  ga]). 

45  Da  andswarode  him  sum  ee-gleaw, 
Liireow,  teonan  dii  Avyrcst  us,  mid  disse 
sage. 

46  Da  cwje])  he,  Wii  eow  se-gleawum, 
foi'dam  d'e  ge  sj'ma})  men  mid  dam 
byi'denum  de  hig  aberan  ne  magon, 
and  ge  ne  ahrinaf)  da  seamas  mid  eow- 
runi  anum  fingre. 

47  Wa  eow,  ge  de  timbi'ia);  witegena 
byrgena  j  eower  fsederas  hig  ofslogon. 

48  Eallunga  ge  cydajj,  and  ge  ]3afia]> 
eower  fa^dcra  weorcum  ;  fordam  big 
ofslogon  hig,  and  ge  timbriaj?  hira  byr- 
gena. 

49  Fordam  cw?e]?  Godes  wisdom,  Ic 
sende  to  him  witegan,  and  apostolas, 
and  hig  ofsleaJ>  hig  and  ehta}', 


XL  37-49]    WYCLIFFE,i389. 

it  schal  be  al  H5tful,  and  as  a  lantcrne  of 
bri5tiicsse  it  schal  5}iie  li^t  to  thoe. 

37  And  whannc  ho  spak,  sum  Pharisee 
praiede,  that  he  schuKlc  ete  at  hym. 
And  lie  gon  ya,  saat  to  the  mete. 

38  Sothli  the  Pharisee  bigan  to  seie, 
gessynge  with  ynne  him  silf,  whi  ho  was 
not  waischuu  byforc  the  mete. 

39  And  the  Lord  seith  to  him,  Now  50 
Farisees  clensen  that  thing  that  is  with 
outenfurth  of  the  kujipe  and  plater ; 
but  that  thing  of  50U  that  is  with  ynne, 
is  ful  of  raueyn  and  wickidnesse. 

40  Foolis,  whcr  he  that  made  that 
thing  that  is  with  oute  forth,  made  not 
also  that  thing  that  is  with  }Tine  1 

41  Netheles  that  thing  that  is  ouer,''' 
5yue  56  almes,  and  lo  !  alle  thingis  ben 
clene  to  50U. 

42  But  woo  to  50U,  Pharisees,  that 
tythen  mynte,  and  ruwe,  and  al  wort,^ 
and  passen  dom  and  the  charite  of  God. 
Forsoth  it  bihofte  to  do  thes  thingis, 
and  not  for  to  leeue  hem. 

43  "Woo  to  50U,  Pharisees,  that  louen 
the  firste  chaicris  in  synagogis,  and  salu- 
taciouns  in  cheping. 

44  Woo  to  50U, that  ben  as 

sepulcris,  whiche  apperyn  not,  and  men 
walkynge  aboue  ^viteu  not. 

45  Forsoth  oon  of  the  wyse  men  of 
lawc  f.nsweringe,  seide  to  him,  Maistir, 
thou  seyingc  thes  thingis,  doist  dispit 
also  to  vs. 

46  He  seide.  And  woo  to  50U,  wyse 
men  of  lawe,  for  56  chargen  men  with 
birthins  whiche  thei  moun  not  here,  and 
50  50U  silf  with  5oure  o  fynger  touchen 
not  the  heuynessis. 

47  Woo  to  50U,  that  bilden  biriclis  of 
prophetis ;  forsoth  30ure  fadris  slowen 
hem. 

48  Treuly  30  witnessen,  that  30  con- 
senten  to  the  werkis  of  50ure  fadris  ;  for 
sothli  thei  slowcn  hem,  but  50  bilden 
her  sepulcris. 

49  Tlierfore  and  the  wysdom  of  God 
seide,  I  schal  sende  to  hem  prophetis, 
and  apostlis,  and  of  hem  thei  schuleu 
slee  and  pursue, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


353 


be  full  off  light,  even  as  when  a  candell 
docth  light  the  witli  his  briglitnes. 

37  And  as  he  spake,  a  certaync  Pharisc 
besought  hym  to  dyne  with  hym.  And 
Jesus  went  in,  and  sate  doune  to  meate. 

38  When  the  Pharise  sawe  that,  he 
marveylled,  that  he  had  nott  wesschcd 
before  dynner. 

39  And  the  Lorde  sayde  to  hym.  No  we 
do  ye  O  Pharises  make  clene  the  out- 
syde  of  the  cuppe  and  of  the  platter ; 
but  youre  inwarde  pai-ties  arc  full  of 
raveninge  and  wickednes. 

40  Ye  foles,  did  not  he  that  made  that 
which  is  with  out,  make  that  which  is 
Avithin  alsoo  1 

41  Neverthelesse  ye  geve  of  that  that 
ye  have,  and  beholde  !  all  is  clene  to 
you. 

42  But  wo  be  to  you,  Pharises,  for  ye 
tythe  the  mynt,  and  rewe,  and  all  man- 
ner ei'bes,  and  passe  over  iudgment  and 
the  love  of  God.  These  ought  ye  to 
have  done,  and  nott  to  have  left  the 
other  ondone. 

43  Wo  be  to  you,  Pharises,  for  ye  love 
the  vppormost  seates  in  the  sinagoges, 
and  gretynges  in  the  markettes. 

44  Wo  be  to  you,  scribes  and  Pharises, 
ypocrites,  for  ye  are  as  graves,  which 
apere  not,  and  men  that  walke  over 
them  are  nott  ware  of  them. 

45  Then  answered  one  of  the  lawears, 
and  sayd  vnto  hym.  Master,  thus  say- 
inge,  thou  puttest  vs  to  rebuke  also. 

46  Then  he  sayde.  Wo  be  to  you  also, 
ye  laweras-,  for  ye  lade  men  with  bm*- 
thens  greveous  to  be  borne,  and  ye  youre 
selves  touche  nott  the  packes  with  one 
of  youre  fingers. 

47  Wo  be  to  you,  that  bildc  the  scpul- 
cres  off  the  proplietcs ;  for  youre  fathers 
kilcd  them. 

48  Truely  ye  beare  witnes,  that  ye 
alowe  the  dedes  of  youre  fathers  ;  for 
they  killed  them,  and  ye  bildc  their 
sepulcres. 

49  Therfore  sayde  the  wisdom  off  God, 
I  will  send  them  proplutcs,  and  apostles, 
and  off  them  they  shall  sice  and  perse- 
cute, 

A  a 


W4t 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

50  Doet  ealra  wifcegena  blod  sy  ges5ht, 
de  wses  agoten  of  middan-geardes  frum- 
an,  fram  disse  cneorysse  ; 

51  Fram  Abeles  bl5de  od  Zacharian 
blod,  se  forwear])  betweox  dam  altare 
and  dam  temple.  Ic  eow  secge  swa, 
bi]j  ges5ht  fram  disse  cneorysse. 

52  Wa  eow,  se-gleawum,  fordam  de  ge 
setbrudon  dses  in-gebydes  caege ;  ge  in 
ne  eodon,  and  ge  forbudon  da  de  in- 
eodon. 

53  Da  be  bim  dis  to  cwse}),  da  on- 
gunnon  da  Farisei  and  da  se-gleawan 
befilice  bim  agen  standan,  and  bis  muj> 
dyttan, 

54  And  embe  bine  syrwan,  secende 
sum  Jjing  of  bis  mu}ie,  dset  big  bine 
wregdon. 


Chap.  XII.  i  Llycelum  weredum 
bim  embe  standendum,  dset  big  bine 
treedon,  da  cwsej)  he  to  bis  leorning- 
cnihtum,  Warniaj)  wid  Farisea  lare,  dset 
is  licetung. 

2  So))Hce  nis  nan  Jjing  ofer-beled,  de 
ne  beo  un-beled ;  ne  bebydd,  dset  ne  sy 
witen. 

3  Fordam  de  dset  ge  secgaf>  on  ]>jst- 
rum,  beo)5  on  leobte  ssede ;  and  dset  ge 
on  earum  sprsecum  on  bedd-cofiim,  bijj 
on  brofum  bodod. 


4  Ic  secge  eow,  minum  freondum,  ne 
beo  ge  bregede  fram  dam  de  done 
lichaman  ofsleaj),  and  nabbajj  syddan 
bwset  big  ma  don. 

5  Ic  eow  setywe,  bwsene  ge  ondrsedon  ; 
adrssdajj  done,  de  anweald  bsefjj,  syddan 
be  ofslyb|>,  on  belle  asendau.  Dus  ic 
eow  secge,  adrseda]?  done. 

6  Ne  becypajj  big  fif  spearwan  to 
belflinge  ;  and  an  nis  of  dam  ofergyten 
beforan  Gode  ? 

7  Ac  ealle  eowres  beafdes  loccas  synd 
getealde.     Ne  adraede  ge  eow  ;  ge  synd 


XL  50.-XIL  7.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

50  That  the  blood  of  alle  prophetis, 
that  was  schecl  out  fro  the  makyiig  of 
the  world,  be  sou5t  of  this  generaciouu  ; 

51  Fro  the  blood  of  Abel  til  to  the 
blood  of  Zachavie,  which  perischide  by- 
twix  the  autcr  and  the  hous.  So  I  seie 
to  50U,  it  schal  be  soujt  of  this  genera- 
cioiin. 

52  "Woo  to  50U,  wyse  men  of  lawe,  for 
5e  han  take  awcy  the  keye  of  kunnynge  ; 
50  50U  silf  eutriden  not,  and  50  liau  for- 
boden  hem  that  entriden. 

53  Sothli  whanne  he  spak  thes  thingis 
to  hem.  Pharisees  and  wyse  men  of  lawe 
bigunnen  greuously  to  ajenstonden,  and 
opprcsse  his  mouth  of  many  thingis, 

54  Aspiynge  him,  and  sekinge  to  take 
sum  thing  of  his  mouth,  that  thei 
schulden  accuse  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


355 


Chap.  XII.  i  Sotheli  manye  cum- 
panyes  stondinge  aboute,  so  that  thei 
troden  ech  othir,  he  bigan  to  seie  to  his 
disciplis.  Be  5e  war  of  the  sourdowj  of 
Pharisees,  which  is  ypocrisye. 

2  Forsoth  no  thing  is  hilid,  which  schal 
not  be  schewid ;  nether  hid,  that  schal 
not  be  wist. 

3  Forwhi  tho  thingis  that  56  han  seyd 
in  derknessis,  schuleu  be  seid  in  li3t ; 
and  this  that  50  han  spoken  in  eere  in 
the  cowchis,  schal  be  prechid  in  rooues. 


4  Forsothe  I  seie  to  50U,  my  frendis, 
be  5e  not  a  feerd  of  hem  that  slen  the 
body,  and  aftir  thes  thingis  han  no  more 
what  thei  schulen  don. 

5  Sothli  I  schal  schcwe  to  50U,  whom 
^e  schulen  drcde  ;  drede  ^e  him,  which 
aftir  that  he  hath  slayn,  hath  power  to 
sLude  in  to  helle.  So  I  seie  to  50U, 
drcde  5e  hym. 

6  Wher  fine  sparrowis  ben  not  seeld 
f(jr  tweyne  halpens  ;  and  oon  of  hem  is 
not  in  forjcting  biforc  God  1 

7  But  and  alle  the  heeris  of  joure  heed 
ben  noumbrid.    Therfore  nyle  ^g  drede  ; 


50  That  the  bloud  off  all  the  prophettes, 
which  was  sliced  from  the  bcgynnynge 
off  the  worlde,  maye  be  requyred  off  this 
gcneracion ; 

5  r  From  the  bloud  of  Abel  vnto  the 
bloud  off  Zacary,  whichc  pcrisshed  bi- 
twene  the  aulter  and  the  temple.  Verely 
I  saye  vnto  you,  it  shalbe  requyred  of 
this  nacion. 

52  Wo  be  to  you,  lawears,  for  ye  have 
taken  awaye  the  kaye  of  knowledge  ;  ye 
entred  not  in  youreselves,  and  them  that 
came  in  ye  forbade. 

53  When  he  thus  spake  vnto  them,  the 
lawears  and  the  Pharises  began  to  wexe 
busy  about  hym,  and  to  stoop  his  mougth 
with  many  questions, 

54  Layinge  wayte  for  hym,  and  sech- 
ynge  to  catche  some  thyng  of  his  mought, 
wherby  they  myght  accuse  hym. 


Chap.  XII.  i  As  there  gadered  to- 
gedther  an  innumerable  multitude  off 
people,  in  so  moche  that  they  trood  won 
another,  he  began  to  saye  vnto  his  dis- 
ciples, FjTst  of  all  beware  of  the  levea 
off  the  Pharises,  which  is  ypocrysy. 

2  For  there  is  nothynge  covered,  that 
shall  not  be  vncovered ;  nether  hid, 
that  shall  not  be  knowen. 

3'Wherfore  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken 
in  darknes,  that  same  shalbe  hearde  in 
light ;  and  that  which  ye  have  spoken 
in  the  eare  even  in  secret  places,  shalbe 
pi-eached  even  on  the  toppe  of  the 
housses. 

4  I  saye  vnto  you,  my  frendes,  feare 
ye  not  them  that  kyll  the  body,  and 
after  that  have  nothynge  that  he  can 
moare  do. 

5  I  will  shewe  you,  whom  ye  shall 
feare ;  feare  hym,  which  after  he  hath 
kylled,  hath  power  to  cast  in  to  hell. 
Ye  I  saye  vnto  you,  hym  feare. 

6  Are  nott  five  sparowes  bought  for 
two  farthynges ;  and  none  off  them  is 
forgotten  of  God  1 

7  Ye  the  very  heers  of  youre  heed  are 
nombred.    Feare  nott  therfore ;  ye  are 

A  a  2 


356 


GOTHIC,  360 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Lukk 
bete,raii  manegum  spearwum. 

8  S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  swa  hwylc  swa 
me  andet  beforan  niannum,  done  mari- 
nes sunu  andet  beforan  Godes  englum. 

9  Se  de  me  wid-ssecj?  beforan  man- 
num,  se  byj>  wid-sacen  beforan  Godes 
englum. 

TO  And  Eelc  de  seg]>  senig  word  agen 
mannes  sunu,  dam  bij>  forgyfen ;  dam 
de  wider-saca])  ongean  Haligne  Gast, 
ne  bi])  dam  forgyfen.^ 

11  Donne  big  l^da]>  eow  on  gesam- 
nunga,  and  to  dugode-ealdrum,  and  to 
anwealdum,  ne  beo  ge  embe-))encende, 
hu  odde  bwfet  ge  sprecon,  odde  and- 
swarion. 

1 2  Halig  Gast  eow  leer])  on  dsere  tide, 
da  ]jing  de  eoAV  sprecan  gebyi'aj). 

13  Da  cwae})  sum  of  dam  menegum, 
Lareow,  sege  minum  breder,  dset  he 
dsele  uncer  sebta  wid  me. 

1 4  Da  cwse)}  he,  La !  man,  hwa  sette 
me  deman,  odde  dselend,  ofer  inc  ? 

15  Da  cwsejj  be,  Gyma]?,  and  warniaj> 
wid  Eelce  gytsunge ;  fordam  de  nys 
nanes  mannes  hf  on  gytsunge  of  dam 
de  he  ah. 

16  Da  saede  he  him  sum  bigspel, 
Sumes  weliges  mannes  secer  brohte  forjj 
g5de  wsestmas. 

17  Da  ))ohte  he  on  him  sylfum,  and 
cwsej),  Hwset  do  ic,  foidam  ic  nsebbe 
hwyder  ic  mine  wsestmas  gadrige  1 

18  Da  cwse]?  be,  Dus  ic  do;  ic  toweorpe 
mine  bernu,  and  ic  wyrce  maran,  and  ie 
gaderige  dyder  call  dset  me  gewexen 
ys,  and  mine  g5d. 

19  And  ic  secge  minre  sawle,  Eala 
stiwel,  du  hfefst  mycele  god  asette  to 
manegum  gearum ;  gerest  de,  et,  and 
drinc,  and  gewista. 

20  Da  cwajf)  God  to  him.  La  dysega, 
on    disse   nihte  big  feccaj^   dine   sawle 


XII.  8-20.]    WYCLIFFE,J389- 

50  beu  of  moi'C  priys  than  many  spa- 
rowis. 

8  Treuli  I  seie  to  50U,  cell  man  which 
euer  schal  knowlechc  me  byfore  men, 
and  manuis  sone  schal  kuowleelic  him 
bifore  the  aiiugclis  of  God. 

9  Forsoth  he  that  schal  deuye  me  bifor 
men,  schal  be  denyed  bifore  the  aungelis 
of  God. 

10  And  ech  man  that  seith  a  word 
a3ens  the  sone  of  man,  it  schal  be  for- 
50uun  to  him  ;  sothli  it  schal  not  be 
forjouuu  to  him,  that  blasfcmeth  a5ens 
the  Hooly  Gost. 

1 1  Forsoth  whannc  thci  schulen  leede 
50U  in  to  synagogis,  and  to  magestatis, 
and  to  potestatis,  nyle  56  be  bisy,  how 
ether  what  50  schulen  auswere,  ether 
what  ;e  schulen  seye. 

1 2  Forsoth  the  Hooly  Gost  schal  teche 
50U  iu  that  our,  what  it  bihoueth  30U  to 
seye. 

13  Forsoth  sum  man  of  the  cumpany 
seith  to  him,  Maistir,  seie  to  my  bro- 
ther, that  he  departe  with  me  the 
eritage. 

1 4  And  he  seyde  to  him,  A  !  man,  who 
ordeynede  me  domesman,  ether  departer, 
on  50U  ] 

15  And  he  seyde  to  hem,  Se  56,  and 
be  56  war  of  al  auarice  ;  for  the  lyf  of  a 
man  is  not  in  the  haboundanse  of  tho 
thingis  whiche  he  weldith. 

16  Sothli  he  seide  to  hem  a  liknesse, 
seiynge,  The  feeld  of  sum  riche  man 
Drou3te  forth  plenteuous  fruytis. 

1 7  And  he  thou5te  with  ynne  him  silf, 
seyinge,  What  schal  I  do,  for  I  haue 
not  whidir  I  schal  gedere  my  fruytis  ? 

18  And  he  seith,  I  schal  do  this  thing ; 
I  schal  distrye  my  bernis,  and  I  schal 
make  gi'cttere,  and  thidir  I  schal  gedere 
alle  thingis  that  growen  to  me,  and  alle 
my  goodis. 

1 9  And  I  schal  seye  to  my  soule,  Soule, 
tliou  hast  many  goodis  kept  in  to  ful 

iiye  5eeris ;   reste  thou,  ete,  di-ynke, 
ami  etc  tliou  plenteuously. 

20  Sothli  God  seide  to  him,  Fool,  iu 
this  ny5t  thei  schulen  axe  of  thee  thi 


TYNDALE,  1526.  357 

moare  oflf  value  then  many  sparowcs. 

8  I  saye  vnto  you,  whosoever  con- 
fesscth  me  before  men,  even  hym  shall 
the  Sonne  off  man  confesse  also  before 
tho  angels  of  God. 

9  And  he  that  denycth  me  before  men, 
shalbe  denyed  before  the  angels  oft' 
God. 

10  And  whosoever  speakcth  a  worde 
agaynste  the  sonne  of  man,  itt  shalbe 
forgeven  hym ;  butt  vnto  hym  thatt 
blasphemeth  the  Holy  Goost,  it  shall 
not  be  forgeven. 

1 1  When  they  brynge  you  into  their 
sinagogcs,  and  vnto  their  rulers,  and 
officiers,  take  noo  thought,  how  or  what 
thyngc  ye  shall  auswere,  or  what  ye 
shall  speake. 

12  For  the  Holy  Goost  shall  teache 
you  in  the  same  houre,  what  ye  ought 
to  saye. 

13  Won  off  the  company  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Master,  bid  my  brother  devide 
the  enherytaunce  with  me. 

14  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Man  !  who 
made  me  a  iudge,  or  a  devider,  over 
youl 

15  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Take 
hede,  and  beware  off  coveteousnes ;  for 
no  mannes  life  stondeth  in  the  habound- 
auncc  of  the  thynges  which  he  pos- 
sesseth. 

1 6  And  he  put  forth  a  similitude  vnto 
them,  sayinge.  The  londes  of  a  certayne 
man  brought  forth  frutes  plcnteously. 

17  And  he  thought  in  hym  silfe, 
sayinge,  Whatt  shall  I  do,  because 
I  have  noo  roume  where  to  bestowe 
my  fi-utes  1 

18  And  he  sayde,  This  will  I  do  ;  I 
wall  destroye  my  barnes,  and  bilde 
greater,  and  ther  in  will  I  gadder  all 
my  fnietes,  and  all  my  goodes. 

1 9  And  I  will  saye  to  my  soule,  Soule, 
thou  haste  moch  goodes  laydc  vp  in 
stoore  for  many  yeares ;  take  thyno 
ease,  eate,  drynkc,  and  be  mery. 

20  But  God  sayde  vnto  hym,  Thou 
fole,  this  nyght  will  they  fetche  awaye 


358 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

fram  de.     Hwses  beo]j  da  J)ing,  de  du 
gegearwodest  ? 

21  Swa  is  se  de  him  sylfiim  stiynjj, 
and  nis  welig  mid  Gode. 

22  Da  cwse]>  he  to  his  leorniug-cniht- 
um,  Fordam  ic  eow  secge,  ne  beo  ge 
ymbe-hydige  eowre  sawle,  hwset  ge  eton, 
ne  eowrum  lichaman,  hwset  ge  sciy- 
don. 

23  Seo  sawel  ys  ma  donne  se  lichama 
and  se  lichama  ma  donne  dset  reaf. 

24  Besceawia}j  da  hrefnas,  dset  hig  ne 
sawajj,  ne  ne  ripa]?,  nabba})  hig  heddern, 
ne  bern,  ac  God  hig  fett.  Dses  de  ma 
ge  synd  hyra  selran  1 

25  Hwylc  eower  mseg  j^encende  ican 
ane  elne  to  his  anlicnesse  1 

26  Gyf  ge  dset  Isesse  ne  magon,  hwi 
synd  ge  be  odrum  })ingum  ymbe- 
hydige  t 

27  Sceawiajj  da  lilian,  hu  hi  wexa]) ; 
hi  ne  swincajj,  ne  ne  spinna]).  Sojjlice 
ic  eow  secge,  dset  Salomon  on  eallum 
his  wuldre  nses  gescrydd  swa  dissa  an. 

28  Gyf  God  scrytt  dset  hig,  de  is  to- 
dseg  on  secere,  and  to-morgen  forscrinc}) ; 
swa  mycele  ma  God  scryt  eow  ge- 
hwsedes  geleafan  ? 

29  And  nelle  ge  secean,  hwset  ge  eton^ 
odde  drincon ;  and  ne  beo  ge  up- 
ahafene. 

30  Ealle  das  jjing  ]>eoda  seceaj?;  eower 
feeder  wat,  dset  ge  discs  bcjjurfon. 


31  Deah  hwsedere  secea]?  Godes  rice, 
and  ealle  das  jjing  eow  beo])  ge-ihte. 

32  Ne  ondrsed  du  de,  la  lytle  heordy 
fordam  eowrum  fseder  gelicode  eow  rice 
syllan. 

33  Sylla])  dset  ge  agon,  and  sylla|> 
aelmessan.  Wyrceajj  seodas  da  de  ne 
forealdigeab,  ungeteorodne  gold-hord 
on  heofenum,  dyder  ]?eof  ne  genealsecj?, 
ne  mo|)))e  ne  gewem]?. 

34  Dar  eower  gold-hord  is,  dar  by]> 
eower  heorte.'*' 


XII.  21-34.]  ^VYCLIFFE,  1389. 

soule.  Forsothe  whos  schulen  tlio  thingis 
be,  whiclie  thou  hast  maad  rcdy  ? 

21  So  is  he  that  tresourith  to  him  silf, 
and  is  not  ryche  in  God. 

22  And  he  seide  to  his  disciplis,  Ther- 
fore  I  seie  to  50U,  nyle  50  be  bisy  to 
5oure  lyf,  what  ^e  schulen  ete,  nethir  to 
pure  body,  with  what  50  schulen  be 
clothid. 

23  The  lyf  is  more  than  mete,  and  the 
body  more  than  clothing. 

24  Biholde  50  crowis,  for  thei  sowen 
not,  nether  repen,  to  whiche  is  no  celer, 
nether  beerne,  and  God  fedith  hem. 
How  myche  more  ^e  ben  of  more  prys 
than  thei. 

25  Forsothe  who  of  50U  bythenkynge 
may  adde  0  cubite  to  his  stature  1 

26  Therfore  if  50  mown  not  this  that 
is  the  leeste,  what  ben  56  bisy  of  others 
thingis  1 

27  Biholde  ^e  lilies  of  the  feeld,  how 
thei  wexen ;  thei  trauelen  not,  neither 
spynnen.  Sothly  I  seye  to  50U,  for 
nether  Salomon  in  al  his  glorie  was 
clothid  as  oon  of  these. 

28  Forsothe  if  God  clothith  thus  the 
hey,  which  to  day  is  in  the  feeld,  and  to 
morwe  is  sent  in  to  a  furneys  ;  how 
moche  more  50U  of  litel  feith"? 

29  And  nyle  je  seke,  what  50  schulen 
ete,  ethir  what  5e  schulen  drynke ;  and 
nyle  je  be  reysid  in  to  an  hi3. 

30  Forsoth  folkis  of  the  world  seken 
alle  thes  thingis  ;  sothli  joure  fadir 
woot,  for  56  neden  thes  thingis. 

3 1  Nethelees  seke  5e  first  the  kyngdom 
of  God,  and  alle  thes  thingis  schulen  be 
cast  to  50U. 

32  Nyle  56,  litil  floe,  drede,  for  it 
pleside  to  ;oure  fadir  to  jyue  to  50U  a 
kyngdom. 

33  Sille  30  the  thingis  that  je  welden, 
and  5yue  5e  almes.  Make  je  to  50U 
sachels  that  wexen  not  olde,  tresour  not 
failinge  in  heuenes,  whidur  a  theef  neyj- 
eth  not.  neyther  mow5te  distryeth. 

34  Forsothe  where  thi  tresour  ia,  there 
also  thin  herte  schal  be. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  359 

thy  soule  agayne  from  the.  Then  whose 
shall  thoose  thynges  be,  which  thou  hast 
provided  ? 

2 1  So  is  itt  with  hym  thatt  gaddreth 
ryehes,  and  is  not  ryche  in  God. 

22  And  he  spake  vnto  his  disciples, 
Therfore  I  saye  vnto  you,  take  no 
tought  for  youre  lyfe,  what  yc  shall 
eate,  nether  for  youre  body,  what  ye 
shall  putt  on. 

23  The  lyfe  is  moore  then  meate,  and 
the  body  is  moore  then  rayment. 

24  Marcke  wcle  the  ravens,  for  they 
nether  sowe,  nor  repe,  which  nether 
have  stoore  housse,  ner  barne,  and  yet 
God  fedeth  them.  Howe  moche  are  ye 
better  then  the  foules  1 

25  "Which  of  you  ^vith  takynge  tought 
can  adde  to  his  stature  won  cubytt  1 

26  Yf  ye  then  be  nott  able  to  do  that 
thynge  which  is  least,  why  take  ye 
thought  for  the  remnaunt  ? 

27  Consydere  the  lylies,  howe  they 
gi'owe ;  they  laboure  nott,  they  spyn 
not.  And  I  saye  vnto  you,  Solomon  in 
all  his  royalte  was  nott  clothed  lyke 
vnto  one  of  these. 

28  Yf  God  then  soo  cloth  the  grasse, 
which  is  to  daye  in  the  feldes,  and  to 
morowe  shalbe  cast  into  the  fornace ; 
howe  moche  moore  wyll  he  clothe  you, 
o  ye  endued  with  litell  faith  1 

29  And  axe  nott,  what  ye  shall  eate, 
or  what  ye  shall  diynke  j  nether  clyme 
ye  vp  an  bye. 

30  For  all  suche  thynges  the  hethen 
people  of  the  worlde  seke  for ;  youre 
father  knoweth,  that  ye  have  nede  off 
suche  thynges. 

31  ^Yherfore  seke  ye  after  the  kjmg- 
dome  off  heven,  and  all  these  thynges 
shalbe  ministi'cd  vnto  you. 

32  Feare  not,  litell  floocke,  for  it  is 
youre  fathers  pleasure  to  geve  you  a 
kyngdom. 

33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  geve  almes. 
And  make  you  baggcs  which  wexe  noot 
olde,  and  treasure  that  fayleth  nott  in 
heven,  where  noo  thefe  commeth,  nether 
moth  con-upteth. 

34  For  where  youre  treasure  ys,  there 
will  youre  hertes  be  also. 


tm 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

35  Sin  eower  lendenu  begyrde,  and 
leoht-fatu  byrnende ; 

36  And  beo  gelice  dam  mannum  de 
hyra  hlafordes  abida]),  hwsenne  he  sy 
fram  gyftum  gecyi'red,  claet  big  him 
s5na  ontynon,  donne  he  cym]),  and 
cnuca)?. 

37  Eadige  synd  da  ])eowas,  de  se 
hlaford  wajccende  gemet,  donne  he 
cym)).  S6j)lice  ic  cow  secge,  doet  he 
begyrt  bine,  and  de\>  dset  big  sitta|>, 
and  gangende  him  Jjeua)?. 

38  And  gif  he  cjm.]>  on  dsere  asfteran 
wseccan,  odde  on  dsere  })riddan,  and  dus 
gemet,  eadige  synd  da  jjeowas. 

39  Wita}),  dset  gif  se  hiredes  ealdor 
wiste,  hwsenne  se  J^eof  cuman  wolde, 
witodlice  he  wacode,  and  ne  ge|)afode 
dset  man  his  bus  under-dulfe. 


40  And  beo  ge  w^re,  fordam  de  man- 
nes  sunu  cymjj,  dsere  tide  de  ge  ne 
wena)). 

41  Da  cwse])  Petrus,  Dribten,  segst  dii 
dis  bigspell  to  us,  bwteder  de  to  eal- 
lum? 

42  Da  cwsejj  Dribten,  Hwa,  wenst  du, 
dset  ys  getrywe  and  gleaw  dibtnere, 
dsene  se  hlaford  geset  ofer  his  hired, 
dset  he  him  hwaetes  gemet  on  timan 
sylle  ? 

43  Eadig  is  se  ]?eow,  de  bis  hlaford 
gemet  dus  d5ndne,  donne  he  cym|>. 

44  Sojjlice  ic  secge  eow,  dset  he  gesett 
bine  ofer  eall  dset  be  ub. 

45  Gyf  donne  se  Jjcow  cvry]>  on  hys 
beortan,  Min  hlaford  ufera]>  hys  cyme ; 
and  agynjj  beatan  da  cnibtas,  and  da 
J)in€na,  and  etan,  and  drincan,  and  beon 
ofer-druncen, 

46  Donne  cym])  dses  Jjeowan  hlaford, 
on  dam  dsege  de  he  ne  wen]>,  and  dsere 
tide  de  he  nat ;  and  todselj)  bine,  and 
sett  bis  dsel  mid  dam  ungetreowum. 

47  SojjHce  done  ]>eo\v  de  his  hlafordes 
willan   wiste,    and   ne   dyde   sefter    bis 


511.35-47]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

35  Be  5oure  leendcs  gird  by  fore,  and 
lanternes  bremiyuge  iu  5oure  hondis  ; 

36  And  be  50  lyk  to  men  abydinge  licr 
lord,  whanne  be  scbal  turne  a3eu  fro 
weddingis,  that  whanne  be  scbal  come, 
and  knocke,  anoon  tbei  opeue  to  him. 

37  Blessid  ben  tho  seruauntis,  wbiche 
whanne  the  Lord  scbal  conic,  be  scbal 
fynde  wakpige.  Treuli  I  scie  to  50U, 
that  he  schai  bifore  girde  him,  and  be 
scbal  make  hem  to  sitte  at  the  mete, 
and  be  passinge  scbal  mpiystre  to  hem. 

38  And  if  be  scbal  come  in  the  secunde 
wakjnig,  and  yf  be  scbal  come  in  the 
thridde  wakynge,  and  scbal  fynde  so, 
tho  seruauntis  ben  blessid. 

39  Forsoth  wite  je  this  thing,  for  if  an 
hoscbondc  man  wiste,  in  what  our  the 
theef  wolde  come,  sotbli  be  schulde 
wake,  and  not  suffre  bis  bous  to  be 
mynyd. 

40  And  be  56  redy,  for  in  what  our  30 
gessen  not,  mannis  sone  scbal  come. 

4  r  Forsothe  Petre  seith  to  bim,  Lord, 
seist  thou  this  parable  to  vs,  ether  to 
alle  1 

42  Sotbli  the  Lord  seide,  "Who,  gessist 
thou,  is  a  feitbful  disjiender,  and  pru- 
dent, Avbom  the  lord  ordeynede  on  bis 
mejTie,  that  be  53016  to  hem  in  tyme  a 
mesure  of  whete  ? 

43  Blessid  is  that  seruaunt,  whom 
whanne  the  lord  scbal  come,  he  scbal 
fynde  do}Tige  so. 

44  Verili  I  seie  to  50U,  for  on  alle 
tbingis  which  be  welditb,  be  scbal  or- 
dejTie  him. 

45  That  if  tbilke  seruaunt  scbal  seye 
in  liis  berte,  My  lord  makith  tariynge  to 
come ;  and  bigynne  to  smyte  children, 
and  bandmaydens,  and  ete,  and  drynke, 
and  be  fillid  oner  mesure, 

46  The  lord  of  that  seruaunt  scbal 
come,  in  the  day  that  be  bopitb  not, 
and  our  that  be  wot  not ;  and  schal 
departe  bim,  and  scbal  putte  his  part 
with  vnfeitbful  men, 

47  Forsothe  tbilke  seruaunt  that  knew 
the  wille  of  bis  lord,  and  made  not  him 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


361 


35  Lett  youre  loynes  be  gerdde  about, 
and  youre  lightes  brennynge  ; 

.36  And  ye  youre  selves  lyke  vnto  men 
that  watche  for  their  miuster,  when  he 
woU  returne  from  a  weddyngc,  that  as 
sone  as  be  comractb,  and  knocketh,  they 
maye  open  vnto  hym. 

37  Happy  arc  thoose  servauntes,  which 
their  Lorde  when  be  commeth,  shall 
fynde  wakynge.  Vercly  I  saye  vnto  you, 
be  will  gerdde  hym  silfe  about,  and  make 
them  sitt  doune  to  mcate,  and  walkc  by 
them  and  minister  vnto  them. 

38  And  yf  he  come  in  the  seconde 
watche,  ye  yf  be  come  in  the  tbjTd 
watche,  and  shall  fynde  them  soo,  happy 
are  thoose  servauntes. 

39  This  shall  ye  vnderstonde,  that  yff 
the  good  man  of  the  housse  bad  knowen, 
what  houre  the  tbefe  wolde  have  com- 
men,  be  wolde  suerly  have  watched, 
and  not  have  suffered  bis  housse  to  have 
bene  broken  vppe. 

40  Be  ye  prepared  therfore,  for  the 
Sonne  of  man  will  come  att  an  houre, 
when  ye  thynke  not. 

41  Then  Peter  sayd  vnto  him,  Master, 
tellest  thou  this  similitude  vnto  vs,  or 
to  all  men? 

42  And  the  Lorde  said.  Who  is  a  faith- 
full  stewarde,  and  a  discrete,  whom  bis 
lorde  shall  make  ruler  over  bis  hous- 
bolde,  to  geve  them  their  dueti  of  meate 
at  due  season  1 

43  Happy  is  that  servaunt,  whom  his 
master,  when  he  cometh,  shall  finde  soo 
doinge. 

44  Of  a  trueth  I  saye  vuto  you,  that 
be  will  make  bim  rueler  over  all  that 
be  bathe. 

45  But  and  if  the  evyll  servaunt  shall 
saye  in  bis  bcrt,  My  master  wyll  differre 
bis  commynge ;  and  shall  begyn  to 
smyte  the  servauntes,  and  maydens,  and 
to  eate,  and  drynke,  and  to  be  dronken, 

46  The  lorde  off  that  servaunt  wyll 
come,  in  a  daye  when  be  thynketh  nott, 
and  att  an  houre  when  be  is  not  ware  j 
and  wyll  devyde  hym,  and  will  geve 
him  bis  i-ewarde  with  the  onbelevers. 

47  The  servaunt  that  knowe  bis  masters 
wyll,  and  prepared  nott  him  silfe,  nether 


302 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

hlafordes  willan^  he  bi])  witnod  man- 
8gum  witum. 

48  Done  jjeow  3e  liis  willan  nyste,  and 

deah    dyde, he    bij>    witnod 

feawum  witum.  ^E'lcum  de  mycel  ge- 
seald  is,  him  man  mycel  to  sec)> ;  and 
set  dam  de  hig  micel  befseston,  hig 
mycel  bidda]?. 

49  Fyr  ic  sende  on  eor])an,  and  hwaet 
wylle  ic,  buton  dset  hit  bserne  1 

50  Ic  hsebbe  on  fulluhte  beon  gefullod, 
and  hu  beo  ic  ge{)read,  od  hyt  sy  ge- 
fylled  1 

51  Wene  ge,  fordam  de  ic  com  sybbe 
on  eorjjan  sendan  ?  Ne,  secge  ic  eow, 
ac  todal. 

52  Heonon-forJ)  beojj  fife  on  anum 
huse  todselede ;  \>ry  on  twegen,  and 
twegen  on  ]>Yf  beo^  todcelede ; 

53  Feeder  on  sunu,  and  sunu  on  his 
feeder ;  moder  on  dohter,  and  dohter  on 
hyre  moder ;  swegr  on  hyre  snore,  and 
snoru  on  hyre  swegre. 


54  And  he  cwee]?  to  dam  folce,  Donne 
ge  geseo)>  da  lyfte  cumende  on  west- 
dsele,  sona  ge  cwedaj?,  Storm  cymjj ; 
and  hit  swa  by]>. 

55  And  donne  ge  geseo]>  sudan  blawan, 
ge  secgajj,  Deet  ...  is  toweard ;  and 
hit  byj). 

56  La  liceteras,  cunne  ge  afandian 
heofones  ansyne  and  eor])an,  humeta  na 
afandige  ge  das  tide  ? 

57  Hvn  ne  deme  ge  of  eow-sylfum 
dset  riht  is  1 

58  Donne  du  gsest  on  wege  mid  dinum 
wider-winnan  to  hwylcum  ealdre,  do 
dset  du  beo  fram  him  alysed ;  de-laes 
he  de  sylle  dam  deman,  and  se  dema 
dam  bydele,  and  se  bydel  de  sende  on 
cv/ertern. 

59  Ic  secge  de,  Ne  gsest  du  danone, 


XII.  48-59-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

rcdy,  and  dide  not  vp  his  willc,  sclial  be 
bctun  with  many  wound  is. 

48  Sothli  he  that  knew  not,  and  dide 
worthi  thingis  of  woundis,  schal  be  bcten 
with  fewe.  Forsoth  to  cch  man  to 
whom  moche  is  ';ouun,  mochc  schal  be 
axid  of  hym ;  and  thci  schulcn  axe 
more  of  him,  to  whom  thei  bitoken 
moche. 

49  I  cam  to  sende  fier  in  to  ertbe,  and 
what  wole  I,  no  but  that  it  be  kyndelid  1 

50  Sothli  I  haue  to  be  baptisid  with 
baptym,  and  hou  am  I  constrcyned,  til 
it  be  perfytli  don  1 

51  Gessen  56,  for  I  cam  to  jyue  pees 
in  to  erthe?  Nay,  I  seye  to  30U,  but 
dcpartjTJge. 

52  Forsoth  fro  this  tyme  ther  schulen 
be  fjTie  departid  in  oon  hous ;  thre 
schulen  be  departid  a3ens  tweyne,  and 
tweyne  schulen  be  departid  a5ens  thre  ; 

53  The  fadir  a5ens  the  sone,  and  the 
sone  a5ens  his  fadir  ;  the  modir  a3ens 
the  dou3tir,  and  the  dou5tir  a3ens  the 
modir  ;  the  hosebondis  modir  a3ens  the 
sones  wyf,  and  the  sones  wyf  a3ens  hir 
hosebondis  modir. 

54  Forsoth  he  seid  and  to  the  cum- 
panyes,  Whanne  3e  schulen  se  a  cloude 
rysinge  fro  the  sunne  goynge  doun, 
anon  50  seyn,  Reyn  cometh ;  and  so  it 
is  don. 

■        55  And  whanne  36  seen  the  south  blow- 
"     ynge,  30  seyen,  For  heete  schal  be  ;  and 
so  it  is  don. 

56  Ypocritis,  3e  ban  knowe  to  proue 
the  face  of  heuene  and  of  erthe,  but  hou 
prouen  36  not  this  tyme  1 

57  Forsothe  whi  and  of  30U  silf  deme 
3e  not  this  thing  that  is  iust  1 

58  Forsothe  whanne  thou  goist  with 
thin  aduersarie  to  the  prince  in  theweye, 
3yue  thou  bisynesse  to  be  delyuered  fro 
him ;  lest  perauenture  he  drawe  thee 
to  the  domesman,  and  the  domesman 
bitake  thee  to  the  wrongful  axere,  and 
the  Avrongful  axere  sende  thee  in  to 
prisoun. 

59  I  seie  to  thee,  Thou  schalt  not  go 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


363 


did  accordynge  to  his  will,  shalbe  beten 
with  many  strypcs. 

48  Butt  he  that  knewc  nott,  and  hath 
committed  thynges  worthy  of  strypes^ 
shalbe  beaten  with  feawe  strypes.  For 
vnto  whom  moche  ys  geven,  off  hym 
shalbe  moche  requyi-ed ;  and  to  whom 
men  moche  commytt,  the  moare  of  hym 
will  they  axe. 

49  I  cam  to  sende  fyre  on  erth,  and 
what  ys  my  desyre,  but  that  yt  were  all 
redy  kyndled  1 

50  Nott  Avith  stondinge  I  muste  be 
baptised  with  a  baptim,  and  how  am 
I  payned,  till  it  be  ended  1 

51  Suppose  ye,  that  I  am  come  to 
sende  peace  on  erth  ?  I  tell  you,  naye, 
but  rather  debate. 

52  For  hence  forthe  there  shalbe  five 
in  won  housse  devided ;  thre  agaynst 
two,  and  two  agaynst  thre  ; 

53  The  father  shalbe  devided  agaynst 
the  Sonne,  and  the  sonne  agaynst  the 
father  ;  the  mother  agaynst  the  doughter, 
and  the  doughter  agaynst  the  mother  ; 
the  motherelawe  agaynst  the  doughtere- 
lawe,  and  the  doughterelawe  against  the 
motherelawe. 

54  Then  sayde  he  to  the  people.  When 
ye  se  a  cloude  ryse  out  off  the  west, 
stray ght  waye  ye  saye,  We  shall  have  a 
shewer  ;  and  soo  it  is. 

55  And  when  ye  se  the  south  wynde 
blow,  ye  saye,  We  shall  have  heet ;  and 
it  commeth  to  passe. 

56  Ypocrytes,  ye  can  skyll  of  the  fassion 
of  the  erth  and  of  the  skye,  but  what  is 
the  cause  that  ye  cannot  skyll  of  this 
tyme? 

57  Ye  and  why  iudge  ye  nott  off  youre 
selves  that  which  is  rightewcs  1 

58  Whill  thou  goest  with  thyne  advcr- 
saiy  to  the  rueler  as  thou  arte  in  the 
waye,  geve  diligence  that  thou  mayst  be 
delivered  from  hym  ;  least  he  brynge 
the  to  the  iudge,  and  the  iudge  deliver 
the  to  the  ioylar,  and  the  ioylar  cast  the 
in  to  preson. 

59  I   tell    the,   Thou    departeat    not 


364 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

Eer   du    agylde   done   ytemestan   feorjj- 
ling. 


Chap.  XIII.  i  Dar  wgeron  sume  on 
dsere  tide,  of  Galileum  him  cydende, 
dsera  blod  Pilatus  mengde  mid  heora 
oflFrungum. 

2  Da  cwoejj  he  him  audswarigende, 
Wene  ge,  wEeron  da  Galileiscan  synfuUe 
to-foran  eallum  Galileiscum,  fordam  de 
hig  swylc  poledon  ? 

3  Ne,  secge  ic,  na;  ac  ealle  ge  gelice 
forweordaj),  buton  ge  d3ed-b5te  don. 

4  Swa  da  ehtatyne,  ofer  da  feoll  se 
stypel  on  Syloa,  and  hig  ofsloh,  wene 
ge,  dset  hig  wseron  scyldige  ofer  ealle 
menu  de  on  Hierusalem  Avunedon  1 

5  Ne,  secge  ic  ;  ac  swa  ge  forweorda]?, 
buton  ge  dsed-bote  don.''' 

6  Da  ssede  he  him  dis  bigspel.  Sum 
man  haefde  an  fic-treoAV  geplantod  on 
his  win-gearde,  da  com  he  and  s5hte 
his  wsestmas  on  him,  da  ne  funde  he 
nanne. 

7  Da  cwaej)  he  to  dam  hyrde,  Nu  synd 
jjreo  gear,  syddan  ic  com  wsestm  secende 
on  dissum  fic-treowe,  and  ic  ne  funde ; 
forceorf  hine,  hwi  ofjjricjj  he  dset  land  1 

8  Da  cwfe}j  he,  Hlaford,  Iset  hine  gyt 
dis  gear,  od  ic  hine  bedelfe,  and  ic  hine 
beweorpe  mid  meoxe  ; 

9  And  witodlice  he  wsestmas  bring)?, 
gif  hit  elles  hwa^t  byjj  ceorf  hine  syd- 
dan. 

10  Da  wses  he  reste-dagum  on  heora 
gesamnunge  Iserende. 

11  Da  wees  dar  sum  wif  seo  hsefde 
untrumnesse  gast  ehtatyne  gear,  and 
heo  wees  abogen,  ne  heo  eallunga  ne 
milite  up-beseon. 

12  Da  se  Hselend  hig  geseah,  he 
clypode  hig  to  him,  and  saede  byre, 
Wif,  du  eart  forlseten  of  dinre  un- 
<^"umnesse. 


XIII.  I-I2.J  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

thcnnis,  til  thou  jelde  also  the  last  fer- 
thinjr. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


365 


Chap.  XIII.  i  Forsotho  sum  men 
iiei5eileu  in  that  tyme,  tollingc  to  him 
of  Galilees,  -whos  blood  Pihvt  myngedc 
with  the  sacrificis  of  hem. 

2  And  he  answeringe  scide  to  hem, 
AVcncn  50,  that  thes  men  of  Galilee 
Avcrcn  sjTineris  byfore  alio  Galileis,  for 
thei  suifriden  suche  thingis  ] 

3  !N"ay,  I  seye  to  50U ;  but  alle  50 
schulen  pei'ische  in  lyk  manere,  no  but 
5e  schulen  haue  penauuce. 

4  And  as  tho  ten  and  ei3te,  on  which 
the  tour  of  Siloa  felde  doun,  and  slouj 
hem,  gessen  ^e,  for  and  thei  weren  det- 
tours  more  than  alle  men  dwcUinge  in 
Jerusalem  ? 

5  Nay,  I  sei  to  50U ;  but  also  50  alle 
schulen  perische,  if  50  schulen  not  do 
pcnaunce. 

6  Forsothe  he  seide  this  lyknesse.  Sum 
man  hadde  a  fyge  tree  plauntid  in  his 
vyner,  and  he  cam  sekynge  fruyt  in  it, 
and  fond  not. 

7  Sothli  he  seide  to  the  tilier  of  the 
v}'ner.  Loo  !  thre  5eeris  ben,  sithen  I 
come  sekinge  fruyt  in  this  fyge  tree, 
and  I  fond  not ;  therfore  kitt  it  doun, 
whcrto  occupicth  it,  5he,  the  erthe  ? 

8  And  he  answeringe  seide  to  him, 
Lord,  suffre  also  this  5eer,  til  the  while 
I  delue  aboute  it,  and  sende  toordis  ; 

9  And  if  it  schal  make  fruyt,  ellis  in 
t}ine  to  comynge  thou  schalt  kitte  it 
doun. 

10  Forsothe  he  was  techinge  in  the 
synagogc  of  hem  in  sabotis. 

1 1  And  loo  !  a  womman  that  hadde  a 
si)irit  of  sykenesse  ten  and  eijte  3eeris, 
and  was  bowid  doun,  nether  in  ony  ma- 
nere my3te  looke  vpward. 

12  Whom  wlianne  Jhesu  hadde  seyn, 
he  clcpidc  to  hym,  and  seide  to  hir, 
^V^omman,  thou  ert  left  of  thi  sykenesse. 


thence,  tyll  thou  have  made  goode  the 
vtmosc  farthyngc. 


Chap.  XITI.  i  There  were  present 
at  the  same  season,  that  shewed  hym  of 
the  Galileans,  whose  blonde  Pilate  meng- 
Icd  with  their  awne  sacrifice. 

2  And  Jesus  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  Suppose  ye,  that  these  Galileans 
were  greater  synners  then  all  other 
Galileans,  be  cause  they  sufFred  suche 
punysshment  1 

3  I  tell  you,  naye ;  but  except  ye  re- 
pent, ye  shall  all  in  lyke  wysc  perysshe. 

4  Or  thynke  ye,  that  those  xviij.  apon 
whom  the  toure  in  Siloe  fell,  and  slewe 
tliem,  were  synners  above  all  men  that 
dwell  in  Jherusalem  ? 

5  I  tell  you,  naye  ;  butt  excepte  ye 
repent,  ye  all  shall  lyke  wyse  perisshe. 

6  He  put  forthe  this  similitude.  A 
certayne  man  had  a  fygge  tree  in  his 
vyneyarde,  and  he  cam  and  sought  frute 
theron,  and  fouude  none. 

7  Then  sayde  he  to  the  dresser  of  his 
vyneyarde,  Beholde  !  this  thre  yeare, 
have  I  come  and  sought  frute  in  this 
fygge  tree,  and  fynde  none  ;  cut  it 
douue,  why  eombreth  hit  the  grounde  1 

8  And  he  answered  and  sayde  vnto 
him,  Lorde,  lett  it  alone  this  yeare  also, 
till  I  digge  rounde  aboute  it,  and  donge 
it; 

9  To  se  whether  it  will  beare  frute,  yt 
not  then  after  that  cut  hym  douue. 

10  He  taught  in  won  of  their  sina- 
gogges  on  the  saboth  dayes. 

1 1  And  beholde  !  there  was  a  woman 
which  had  a  sprete  off  infirmitie  .xviij. 
ycares,  and  was  bowed  to  gether,  and 
coulde  nott  well  lifte  vp  her  silfe. 

1 2  When  Jesus  sawe  her,  he  called  her 
to  hym,  and  sayde  to  her,  Woman,  thou 
arte  delivered  from  thy  disease-. 


366 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

13  And  his  hand  hyre  on  sette,  da 
wses  heo  sona  up-arsered,  and  heo  God 
wuldrode. 

1 4  Da  gebealh  se  dugude-ealdor  hine, 
fordam  de  se  Hselend  on  reste-dsege 
hselde,  and  ssede  dam  meuegum,  Syx 
dagas  synd,  on  dam  gebyi-a]j  dset  man 
wyrce ;  cuma]?  on  dam,  and  beojj  ge- 
hselede,  and  na  on  reste-dtege. 

15  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  and 
cwsejj.  La  liceteras,  ne  untigj)  eower  £elc 
on  reste-dsege  his  oxan,  odde  assan, 
fram  dsere  binne,  and  Iset  to  wsetere  1 

16  Das  Abrahames  dohtor,  de  Satanas 
geband,  nu !  ehtatyne  gear,  ne  ge- 
byrede  hyre  beon  unbunden  of  dissum 
beude  on  reste-dsege  1 

17  Da  he  dis  ssede,  da  sceamod  ealle 
his  wider-winnan.  And  eall  folc  ge- 
blissode  on  eallum,  dam  de  wuldorfullice 
fram  him  gewurdon. 

18  S6))lice  he  cwse}),  Hwam  is  Godes 
rice  gelic'?  and  hwam  wene  ic  dset  hit 
beo  gelic  ? 

19  Hit  ys  gelic  senepes  corne,  dset  se 
man  onfeng,  and  seow  on  his  wyrt-tun ; 
and  hit  weox,  and  wear])  mycel  treow, 
and  heofenes  fugelas  reston  on  his 
bogum. 

20  And  eft  he  cwse)),  Hwam  wene  ic 
daet  Godes  rice  si  gelic  ? 

21  Hit  is  gelic  dam  beorman,  de  dset 
wif  onfeng,  and  behydde  on  dam  melewe 
Jjreo  gemetu,  od  hit  wear)>  eall  ahafen. 

22  Da  ferde  he  J^urh  ceastra  and 
castelu,  to  Hierusalem  and  dar  Iserde. 

23  Da  cwsej)  sum  man  to  him,  Drihten, 
feawa  synd,  de  synd  gehcelede  1  Da 
cwsej)  he  to  him, 

24  E'fstaJ)  daet  ge  gangon  jjurh  dset 
nearwe  geat ;  fordam  ic  seege  eow, 
inanega  secajj  dset  hig  in-gan,  and  hi 
ne  magon. 

25  Donne  se  hiredes  ealdor  in-gse]), 
and  his  duru  beclyst,  ge  standa]?  dser 
lite,  and  da  duru  cnucia]>,  and  cweda]j, 
Drihten,  atyn  us.     Donne  cwyj)  he  to 


XIII.  13-25-]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

13  And  he  puttide  to  hir  the  hoondis, 
and  a  non  she  was  reysid,  and  glorifiede 
God. 

14  Sothli  the  prince  of  synagoge  an- 
sweringe,  hauynge  dcdeyn  for  Jhesu 
hadde  hcelid  in  the  saboth,  scide  to  the 
cuiupauy,  Sixe  dayes  ben,  in  whiche  it 
bihoueth  to  wirche  ;  therfore  come  in 
thes,  and  be  50  hcelid,  and  not  in  the 
dayes  of  saboth. 

15  Forsothc  the  Lord  answeringc  to 
him  seide,  Ypocrite,  Avher  ech  of  50U 
vntyeth  not  in  the  saboth  his  oxe,  ethir 
asse,  fx'o  the  stable,  and  ledith  for  to 
watre  1 

1 6  Bihoftc  it  not  this  dou3tre  of  Abra- 
ham, whom  Sathanas  hath  bounden,  loo ! 
ten  and  ei5te  jeeris,  to  be  \Tibounden  of 
this  bond  in  the  day  of  saboth  1 

17  And  whanne  he  seide  thes  thingis, 
alle  his  aduersaries  wei-en  aschamyd. 
And  al  the  peple  ioyede  in  al  thingis, 
that  weren  don  gloriously  of  him. 

18  Thei-fore  he  seide,  To  what  thing  is 
the  rewme  of  God  lyk  1  and  to  what 
thing  schal  I  gesse  it  to  be  lyk  1 

19  It  is  lyk  to  a  corn  of  seneuey,  which 
takun,  a  man  sente  in  to  his  5erd ;  and 
it  wax,  and  was  maad  in  to  a  greet  tree, 
and  fowelis  of  the  eyr  restiden  in  the 
braunchis  therof. 

20  And  eftsone  he  sayd.  To  what  thing 
schal  I  gesse  the  kyngdom  of  God 
lyk? 

21  It  is  lyk  to  sourdow5,  which  takun, 
a  womman  hidith  in  thre  mcsuris  of 
mele,  til  al  were  sourdowid. 

22  And  he  wente  by  citees  and  castels, 
techinge  and  makinge  iurney  in  to  Jeru- 
salem. 

23  Sothli  sum  man  seide  to  him,  Lord, 
if  there  ben  fewe,  that  ben  sauyd  1  Sothli 
he  seide  to  hem, 

24  Stryue  ■^e  for  to  entre  by  the  streit 
gate  ;  for  I  seye  to  50U,  many  men  seken 
for  to  entre,  and  thei  schulen  not  mowe. 

25  Forsothe  whanne  the  hosebonde 
man  hath  entrid,  and  closid  the  dore, 
;e  schulen  bigj'nne  to  stonde  with  oute 
forth,   and  kuocke    the   dore,   seyingc, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


367 


13  And  he  layde  his  hondcs  on  her, 
and  immediatly  she  was  made  strayght, 
and  glorified  God. 

14  TIic  ruler  off  the  sinagoge  answered, 
with  indignacion  be  cause  that  Jesus 
had  healed  on  the  saboth  daye,  and 
sayde  vnto  the  people,  There  are  sixe 
dayes  in  the  woke,  in  which  men  ought 
to  workc  ;  in  them  come,  and  be  healed, 
and  nott  on  the  saboth  daye. 

15  Then  answered  hym  the  Lorde  and 
sayd,  Ypocryte,  doth  not  cache  one  of 
you  on  the  saboth  daye  loose  his  oxe, 
or  his  asse,  from  the  stall,  and  leade 
hym  to  the  water? 

16  And  shulde  not  this  doughter  of 
Abraham  be  loosed  from  this  bonde  on 
the  saboth  daye,  whom  Sathan  hath 
bounde,  loo  !  xviij.  yeares  ? 

17  And  when  he  thus  sayde,  all  hi8 
adversaris  were  ashamed.  And  all  the 
people  reioysed  on  all  the  excellent 
dedes,  that  were  done  by  hym. 

18  Then  sayde  he,  What  is  the  kyng- 
dom of  God  lyke  ?  or  where  to  shall  I 
compare  it  ? 

1 9  It  is  lyke  a  grayne  of  mustai-d  seede, 
which  a  man  toke,  and  sowed  in  his 
garden ;  and  it  grewe,  and  wexed  a. 
greate  tree,  and  the  foules  off  the  ayer 
bilt  in  the  braunches  of  it. 

20  And  agayne  he  sayde,  Where  vnto 
shall  I  lyken  the  kyngdom  of  God  ? 

21  It  is  lyke  leven,  which  a  woman 
toke,  and  hidde  in  thre  busshels  of  floure, 
till  all  was  thorow  levended. 

22  And  he  went  thorowe  cities  and 
tonnes,  teachynge  and  toke  his  iorney 
towardes  Jerusalem. 

23  Then  sayde  won  vnto  hym,  Lorde, 
are  there  feawe,  that  shalbe  saved  ?  And 
he  sayde  vnto  them, 

24  Strj've  with  youreselves  to  enter  in 
at  the  strayte  gate ;  for  many,  I  saye 
vnto  you,  will  seke  to  enter  in,  and  shall 
nott  be  able. 

25  When  the  good  man  of  the  housse  is 
risen  vp,  and  hatlie  slictt  fast  the  dore, 
and  ye  begyn  to  stonde  with  out,  and 
to  knocke  at  the  dore,  saynge,  Lorde, 


368 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

eow,  Ne  can  ic  eow,  nat  ic  hwanon  ge 
synd. 

26  Donne  ongynne  ge  cweclan,  We 
geton  and  druncon  beforan  Cle,  and  on 
urum  stratum  du  Iserdest. 

27  Donne  segj)  he  eow,  Ne  cann  ic 
liwanon  ge  synd ;  gewita]j  fram  me, 
ealle  unriht-wyrlitan, 

28  Dar  bi})  wop  and  tojja  grystlung, 
donne  ge  geseojj  Abraham,  and  Isaac, 
and  lacob,  and  ealle  witegan  on  Godes 
rice ;  and  ge  beo]>  ut-adrifene. 

29  And  hig  cuma])  fram  east-dsele  and 
west-dsele,  and  norjj-dtele  ....  and 
sittajj  on  Godes  I'ice. 

30  And  efne !  synd  ytemeste,  da  de 
beojj  fyrmeste ;  and  synd  fjTmeste,  da' 
de  beo])  ytemeste. 

31  On  dam  dfege  him  genealsehton 
sume  Faiisei,  and  him  seedon,  "Far,  and 
ga  heonon,  fordam  de  Herodes  de  wyle 
ofslean. 

32  And  da  cwse]?  he  to  him,  GaJ),  and 
secga})  dam  foxe,  Deofol-seocnessa  ic  ut^ 
adrife,  and  ic  hsela  gefremme,  to-deeg 
and  to-morgen,  and  Jjriddan  dsege  ic 
beo  fornumen. 

33  Deah  hwaedere  me  gebyre)>  to-dseg, 
and  to-morgen,  and  dy  asfteran  daege, 
gan ;  fordam  de  ne  gebyre}>  dset  se 
witega  forweorde  butan  Hierusalem. 

34  Eala  Hierusalem,  ^Hierusalem,  du 
de  da  witegan  ofslyhst,  and  hsenst  da 
de  to  de  asende  synd,  hu  oft  ic  wolde 
dine  beam  gegaderian,  swa  se  fugel  de]r 
his  nest  under  his  fiderum,  and  du 
noldest. 

35  Nu !  bi]j  eower  bus  eow  fprlseten. 
S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  deet  ge  me  ne 
geseo|j,  serdam  de  cume  se,  donne  ge 
cweda);,  Gebletsod  sy,  se  de  com  on 
Drihtnes  naman. 


Chap.  XIV.  '•'i  Da  wses  geworden, 
da  he  code  on  sumes  Farisea  ealdres 
hiis,  on  veste-dsege,  dtet  he  hlaf  sete,  and 
hig  begymdon  hine. 


XIII.  26.-XIV.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Lord,  opyne  to  as.  Ami  lie  answcringe 
sclial  seye  to  50U,  I  kiiowe  not  5011,  of 
whennis  50  ben. 

26  Thaune  56  sclmlen  bifjynne  to  seye, 
"We  luin  ete  and  drunke  bifore  thee,  and 
in  oure  streetis  thou  hast  taujt. 

27  And  he  sclial  seye  to  50U,  I  knowe 
not  50U,  of  whennis  5e  ben  ;  go  50  awey 
fro  me,  alle  worcheris  of  wickidnesse. 

28  Ther  sclial  be  wepinge  and  betinge 
to'gidere  of  teeth,  Avhanne  50  schuleii  se 
Abraham,  and  Ysaac,  and  Jacob,  and 
alle  proplietis  in  the  kyngdom  of  God  ; 
sothli  50U  to  be  put  out. 

29  And  thei  schulen  come  fro  the  eest 
and  west,  and  fro  the  north  and  south, 
and  sitte  at  the  mete  in  the  rewme  of 
God. 

30  "And  loo!  thei  that  weren  firste, 
ben  the  laste  ;  and  thei  that  weren  the 
last,  ben-  the  fii-ste. 

31  In  that  day  summe  of  Pharisees 
camen  ny3,  seyinge  to  him,  Go  out,  and 
go  henuis,  for  Eroude  wole  slee  thee. 

32  And  he  seith  to  bem,  Go  5e,  and 
seye  50  *to  that  fox,  Loo !  I  caste  out 
fendis,  and  I  make  perfitly  heelthis,  to 
day  and  to  morwe,  and  the  thridde  day 
I  am  endid. 

33  Netheles  it  bihoueth  me  to  day, 
and  to  morwe,  and  the  day  suynge,  to 
walke ;  for  it  fallith  not  a  prophete  to 
perische  out  of  Jerusalem. 

34  Jerasalem,  Jerusalem,  that  sleest 
proplietis,  and  stoonest  hem  that  ben 
sent  to  thee,  hou  ofte  wolde  I  gedere  to 
gidcre  thi  soncs,  as  a  brid  his  nest  vnder 
penues,  and  thou  noldist. 

35  Loo  !  50ure  hous  schal  be  left  to 
50U  desert.  Sothli  I  seie  to  30U,  for  30 
schulen  nut  se  me,  til  it  come,  whanne 
56  schulen  seye,  Blessid  is  he,  that 
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


3C/J 


Chap,  XIV.      i    And   it   was    don, 
i  whanne  he  had  entrid  in  to  the  hous  of 
sum  prince  of  Pharisees,  in  the  saboth, 
to  ete  breed,  and  thei  aspieden  him. 


lorde,  open  vnto  vs.  And  he  shall  an- 
swer and  saye  vnto  you,  I  kuowc  nott 
whence  ye  are. 

26  Then  shall  ye  bcgyn  to  saye.  Wo 
have  eaten  and  droiikcn  in  thy  presence, 
and  thou  hast  naught  in  oure  stretcs. 

27  And  he  shall  saye,  I  tell  you  I  wott 
nott  whence  ye  arc ;  departe  from  me, 
all  ye  workers  off  iniquytie. 

28  There  shalbe  wepyngc  and  gnassh- 
ynge  of  teth,  when  ye  shall  se  Abraham, 
and  Ysaac,  and  Jacol),  and  all  the  pro- 
phctes  in  the  kyngdom  of  God  ;  and 
youre  selves  thrust  onto  a  dores. 

29  And  they  shall  conic  from  the  eest 
and  from  the  wecst,  and  from  the  northe 
and  from  the  southe,  and  shall  reest  in 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

30  And  beholde  !  there  are  last,  which 
shalbe  fyrst ;  and  there  are  fyrst,  Avhich 
shalbe  last. 

31  The  same  daye  there  cam  certaine 
of  the  Pharises,  and  sayd  vnto  him, 
Gett  the  out  of  the  waye,  and  departe 
hence,  for  Herode  will  kyll  the. 

32  And  he  sayd  vnto  them.  Goo  ye, 
and  tell  that  foxe,  Beholde  I  I  cast  oute 
devils,  and  heale  the  people,  to  daye  and 
to  morowe,  and  the  thyrd  daye  I  make 
an  ende. 

33  Neverthelesse  I  must  walke,  to  daye, 
and  to  morowe,  and  the  daye  folowinge  ; 
for  it  cannott  be  that  a  prophet  perisshe 
eny  other  where  save  att  Jerusalem. 

34  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  which  kill- 
est  prophetes,  and  stonest  them  that  are 
sent  to  the,  howe  often  wolde  I  have 
gadei'ed  thy  children  to  gedder,  as  the 
hen  her  nest  vudcr  her  wynges,  and 
thou  Avoldest  nott. 

35  Beholde  !  youre  habitacion  shalbe 
left  vnto  you  desolate.  For  I  tell  you, 
ye  shall  not  se  me,  vntill  the  time  come, 
that  ye  shall  saye,  Blessed  ys  he,  that 
commeth  in  the  name  off  the  Lorde. 


Chap.  XIY.    i  And  it  chaunsed,  that 
he  went  into  the  housse  of  won  off  the 
chcfc  rharises  to  eatc  breed,  on  a  saboth 
daye,  and  they  watched  hym. 
B  b 


37« 


GOTHIC,  360. 


.     .     , na  aftumistaa 

liaban  sta|j. 

10  Ak  jjan  haitaizau,  atgaggands,  an- 
akumbei  ana  })amma  aftumistin  stada,  ei 
hi\ie  qiraai,  saei  baihait  |;uk,  qijjai  du 
J>us,  Friyond,  usgagg  bauliis.  panub 
sist  ])us  baubi])a  faura  j)aim  mij;anakumb- 
yaudam  Jms. 

11  Unte  wbazub  saei  baubei|>  sik  silba, 
gabnaiwyada  ;  yab  saei  bnaiwei}>  sik 
silban,  usbaubyada. 

12  Qa]5u]j-]iau  yab  J)amma  baitandin 
sik,  pan  Avaurkyais  undaurnimat,  aijjjjau 
uabtamat,  ni  baitais  fi-iyouds  ))einaus, 
nib  broj^runs  Jjeinans,  nib  nij^yans  jsein- 
ans,  nib  garaznans  gabeigaus  ;  ibai  aufto 
yab  eis  aftra  baitaina  J)uk,  yab  wairj)i]> 
Jjus  usguldan. 

13  Ak  |)an  "waurkyais  daubt,  bait  un- 
ledans,  gamaidans,  baltans,  blindans, 

1 4  Yab  audags  waii-Jjis  ;  unte  eis  ni 
liaband  usgildan  )nis,  usgildada  auk  J)us 
an  ustassai  ])ize  uswaurbtane. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

2  Da  wses  dar  sum  wseter-seoc  man 
beforan  bim. 

3  Da  cwtejj  se  Heelend  to  dam  se-gleaw- 
um  and  Fariseum,  Is  bit  alyfed  dset  man 
on  reste-dagum  bsele  1 

4  Da  suwodon  big.  Da  nam  be  bine 
and  gebselde,  and  forlet  byne. 

5  Da  cw8e])  be  to  bim,  andswariende, 
Hwylces  eowres  assa  odde  oxa  befeal)> 
on  senne  pytt,  and  ne  tib]>  be  byne  brsed- 
Hce  up  on  reste-dsege  1 

6  Da  ne  mibton  big  ageu  dis  bim  ge- 
andwyrdan. 

7  Da  ssede  be  sum  bigspel  be  dam  in- 
gelajjedou,  gymende  bu  big  da  fyrmestan 
setl  gecuron,  and  dus  cwsejj, 

8  Donne  dii  byst  to  gyftum  gelajjod, 
ne  site  du  on  dam  fyrmestan  setle  ;  de- 
Ises  wenunga  sum  \veor|)fub'a  sig  in- 
gelajjod  fram  bim, 

9  And  donne  cume  se  de  de  in-ge- 
lajjode,  and  secge  de,  Rym  dysum  men 
setl,  and  dii  donne  mid  sceame  nyme 
dset  ytemeste  setl. 

10  Ac  donne  dii  geclypod  byst,  ga, 
and  site  on  dam  ytemestan  setle,  dset  se 
de  de  in-gela]3ode,  donne  be  cymj),  cwede 
to  de,  La  freond,  site  ufer.  Donne  byjj 
de  weorjnuynt  beforan  mid-sittendum. 


11  Fordam  ?elc  de  bine  up-abefjj,  bij» 
genyderod ;  and  se  de  bine  nydera]),  se 
bijj  up-abafen. 

12  Da  cwEeJ)  be  to  dam,  de  bine  in-ge- 
lajjode,  Donne  du  dest  wiste,  odde  feorme, 
ne  clypa  du  dine  frynd,  ne  dine  ge-- 
brodru,  ne  dine  ciidan,  ne  dine  welegan 
nebbebm-as ;  de-lses  bi  de  agen  la])ion, 
and  du  bsebbe  edlean. 


13  Ac  donne  dii  gebeorscype  do,  clypa 
fiearfan,  and  wanbale,  and  bealte,  and 
blinde, 

1 4  Donne  bist  du  eadig ;  fordam  de 
bi  nabba]?,  bwanon  big  bit  de  forgyldon, 
so]?lice  bit  byj)  de  forgolden  on  ribtAvisra 
seriste. 


I 


XrV.  2-14.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

2  And  loo  !  sum  man  syk  in  ydropesic 
was  biforc  him. 

3  And  Jhosu  answcringc  scidc  to  the 
^vyse  men  of  huve,  and  to  Pharysccs, 
seiyinge,  Where  it  is  Iccful  for  to  hcele 
in  the  sabotis  ? 

4  And  thci  liccklcn  pecs.  Foi'sothe 
Jhesii  heelide  him  tukuu  to,  and  lei'te. 

5  And  he  answeringe  to  hem,  seyde, 
Whos  asse  ether  oxe  of  50ure  schal  falle 
in  to  a  pitt,  and  not  a  non  he  schal 
drawe  out  liim  on  the  day  of  sabot  1 

6  And  thei  my3ten  not  answere  to  him 
to  thos  thingis. 

7  Forsothe  he  seyde  also  a  parable  to 
men  bodun  to  a  feeste,  biholdinge  how 
thei  chesiden  the  firste  scetis,  seyinge 
to  hem, 

8  "Whanne  thou  schalt  be  bedun  to  wed- 
diugis,  sitte  thou  not  at  the  mete  in  the 
firste  place  ;  lest  perauenture  a  worschip- 
fuUere  than  thou  be  bedun  of  him, 

9  And  he  comynge  that  clepide  thee 
and  him,  seye  to  thee,  3}"^^  place  to 
this,  and  thanue  thou  schalt  bigynne 
with  schame  to  holde  the  laste  place. 

10  But  whanne  thou  schalt  be  bedun 
to  feeste,  go,  and  sitte  douu  in  the  laste 
place,  that  whanne  he  schal  come,  that 
bad  thee  to  feeste,  he  seye  to  thee, 
Frend,  sti^e  hijere.  Thanue  glorie  schal 
l^e  to  thee  bifore  men  syttinge  to  gidere 
lit  the  mete. 

1 1  For  ech  that  enhauusith  him  silf, 
schal  be  maad  I0W3  ;  and  he  that  mekith 
liim  silf,  schal  be  hi3ed. 

1 2  Forsoth  he  seide  also  to  him,  that 
liadde  bedun  him  to  the  feeste,  Whanne 
tliou  makist  a  mete,  ether  souper,  uyle 
thou  clepe  thi  frendis,  nether  thi  bri- 
tlieren,  nethir  cosyns,  ncthir  nei5eboris, 
nether  riche  men  ;  lest  perauenture  and 
thei  bidde  thee  a5en  to  feeste,  and  3eld- 
iiige  a5en  be  maad  to  thee. 

13  But  whanne  thou  makist  a  feeste, 
oltpe  pore  men,  feble  men,  crokid,  and 
blynde, 

1 4  And  thou  schalt  be  blessid  ;  for 
thei  han  not,  wher  of  to  5elde  to  thee, 
forsoth  it  schal  be  3oldun  to  thee  in  the 
risyng  a3en  of  iustc  men. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  371 

2  And  beholde !  there  was  a  man  be- 
fore hym  which  had  the  dropsy. 

3  And  Jesus  aiiswcrcd  and  spake  vnto 
the  lawoars,  and  Tharises,  sayinge,  Is  hit 
laufull  to  heale  on  the  saboth  daye? 

4  And  they  heldc  their  peace.  He 
toke  the  man  and  healed  him,  and  lett 
hyax  goo. 

5  And  answered  them  sayinge,  Whiche 
of  you  shall  have  an  asse  or  an  oxe  fallen 
into  a  pitt,  and  will  nott  straight  waye 
pull  him  out  on  the  saboth  daye  1 

6  And  they  coulde  not  answer  hym 
agayne  to  that. 

7  He  putt  forthe  a  similitude  to  the 
gestes,  when  he  marked  howe  they 
preased  to  the  hyest  roumes,  and  sayd 
vnto  them, 

8  When  thou  arte  bidden  to  a  wedd- 
ynge  of  eny  man,  sitt  nott  doune  in  the 
hyest  rourae ;  lest  a  more  honorable 
man  then  thou  be  bidden  of  hym, 

9  And  he  that  badde  bothe  hym  and 
the  come,  and  saye  to  the,  Geve  this 
man  roume,  and  thou  then  begyn  with 
shame  to  take  the  lowest  roume. 

10  But  rather  when  thou  arte  bidden, 
goo,  and  sit  in  the  lowest  roume,  that 
when  he  that  bade  the  commeth,  he 
maye  saye  vnto  the,  Frende,  sitt  vp 
hyer.  Then  shalt  thou  have  preyase  in 
the  presence  of  them  that  sitt  at  meate 
with  the. 

1 1  For  whosoever  exalteth  hym  silfe, 
shalbe  brought  lowe ;  and  he  that  hum- 
bleth  him  silfe,  shalbe  exalted. 

12  Then  sayde  he  also  to  him,  that 
bade  him  to  diner.  When  thou  makest 
a  diner,  or  a  supper,  call  not  thy  frendes, 
nor  thy  brethren,  nether  thy  kinsmen, 
nor  yet  riche  neghbours  ;  lest  they  bidde 
the  agayne,  and  make  the  rec^mpence. 


13  Butt  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call 
the  povrc,  the  maymed,  the  lame,  and 
the  blinde, 

14  And  thou  shalt  be  happy  ;  for  they 
cannot  recompence  the,  butt  thou  shalfc 
be  recompensed  at  the  rcsurrcccion  of 
the  iuste  men. 

E  b  2 


372 


GOTHIC,  360. 


15  Gahausyands  ]>au.  sums  plzei  an- 
akumbyandane  Jjata,  qa]?  du  imma,  Aud- 
ags,  saei  matyij)  hlaif  in  Jpiudangardyai 
Gujjs. 

16  paruli  qa))  imma  Frauya,  Manna 
sums  gawaurhta  nahtamat  mikilana,  yali 
Laihait  managans. 

1 7  Yah  insandida  skalk  seinana  wheilai 
naktamatis,  qijjan  ))aim  haitanam,  gagg- 
ib,  unte  yu  nianwu  ist  allata. 

J  8  Yali  dugunnun  suns  faurqijian  allai. 
Sa  frumista  qa]?,  Land  baulita,  yah  }iarf 
galeijjan,  yah  saiwhan  ]jata ;  bidya  ]>uk, 
Labai  mik  faurqij)anana. 

19  Yah  anj)ar  qa}?,  Yuka  auhsne  us- 
bauhta  fimf,  yah  gagga  kausyan  Jjans ; 
bidya  Ipvik,  habai  mik  faui-qijjanana. 

20  Yah  sums  qa]?,  Qen  liugaida;  yah 
dujje  ni  mag  qiman, 

2 1  Yah  qimands  sa  skalks,  gataih  frau- 
yin  seinamma  j^ata.  panuh  Jjwairhs  sa 
gardawahlands,  qajj  du  skalka  seinamma, 
IJsgagg  sprauto  in  gatwons  yah  staigos 
baurgs,  yah  unledans,  yah  gamaidans, 
yah  blindans,  yah  haltans  attiuh  hidre. 


22  Yah  qa]>  sa  skalks,  Frauya,  warlj, 
5\ve  anabaust,  yah  nauh  stads  ist. 

23  Yah  qa|)  sa  frauya  du  ])amma  skalka, 
Usgagg  and  wigans  yah  fajjos,  yah  naujjei 
jnnatgaggan,  ei  usfulnai  gards  meins. 

24  Qi})a  allis  izwis,  Jjatei  ni  ainshun 
manne  yainaize  }>ize  faura  haitanane, 
kauseijj  ])is  nahtamatis  meinis. 

25  Mijjiddyedun  ]>&n  imma  hiuhmans 
jnanagai  ;  yah  gaAvandyands  sik,  qa}> 
tlu  im, 

26  Yabai  whas  gaggij?  du  mis,  yah  ni 
fiyai|j  attan  seinana,  yah  aij^ein,  yah  qen, 
yah  barna,  yah  brojjruns,  yah  swistruns, 
nauhujj-jjan  seina  silbins  saiwala,  ni  mag 
meins  siponeis  wisau. 

27  Yah  saei  ni  bairi|>  galgan  seinana, 
yah  gaggai  afar  mis,  ni  mag  wisan  meins 
siponeis. 

28  Izwara  whaa  raihtis  wilyands  kelikn 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

1 5  Da  dis  gehyrde  sum  of  dam  sittend- 
um,  da  cw8e)j  he,  Eadig  is  se,  de  hlaf 
yt  on  Godes  rice.+ 

16  Da  SEede  he  him.  Sum  man  worhte 
mycele  feorme,  and  manega  gelajjode. 

17  Da  sende  he  his  }>eowan  to  dsere 
feorme  timan,  dset  he  ssede  dam  gela|5- 
edum,  dset  hig  comon,  fordam  de  ealle 
J;ing  gearwe  wseron. 

18  Da  ongunnon  hig  ealle  higbeladian^ 
Se  forma  him  seede,  Ic  bohte  eenne  tun, 
ic  bsebbe  neode  dset  ic  fare,  and  bine 
geseo ;  ic  bidde  de,  daet  du  me  be- 
ladige. 

19  Da  cwsej)  se  oder,  Ic  bohte  an  ge- 
tyme  oxena,  mi  wille  ic  faran  and  fand- 
ian  hyra  ;  nu  bidde  ic  de,  belada  me. 

20  Da  cwsej?  sum,  Ic  Isedde  wif  ham ;. 
fordam  ic  ne  mseg  cuman. 

21  Da  cyrde  se  J^eowa,  and  cydde  his 
hlaforde  dset.  Da  cwse|j  se  hlaford  mid 
yi're  to  dam  peowan,  Ga  hrade  on  da 
strata  and  on  wic  disse  ceastre,  and 
l^earfan,  and  wanhale,  and  blinde,  and 
healte  Ised  hider  in. 


22  Da  cw8e|j  se  ])eowa,  Hlaford,  hit  js- 
gedon,  SAva  du  bude,  and  nu  gyt  her  is 
semtig  stow. 

23  Da  cwsejj  se  hlaford  da  gyt  to  dam 
))eowan,  Ga  geond  das  wegas  and  hegas, 
and  nyd  hig  daet  hig  gan  in,  dast  miu 
hiis  si  gefylled. 

24  SoJ?lice  ic  eow  secge,  dset  nan  dsera 
manna  de  geclypode  synd,  ne  onbyrigeajj 
minve  feorme.''' 

25  S6))lice  mid  him  ferde  mycel  msen- 
ego  ;  da  cw?e\>  he,  to  him  bewend, 

26  Gyf  hwa  to  me  cjm]>,  and  ne  hata}> 
his  fseder,  and  moder,  and  wif,  and 
beam,  and  brodru,  and  swustra,  and 
donne  gyt  his  sawle,  ne  mseg  he  beon 
min  leorning-cniht. 

27  And  se  de  ne  byi'l'  hys  cwylminge, 
and  cym|5  sefter  me,  ne  mseg  he  beon 
min  leorning-cniht. 

28  Hwylc  eower  wyle  timbrian  anne 


J    XIY.  i-i-2S.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

15  Whanne  sum  man  of  sittinge  at  the 
xuete  had  lionl  thcs  thintrs,  he  scide  to 
hym,  Blessid  if  he,  that  sclial  cte  breed 
in  the  rcwme  of  God. 

16  And  he  seide  to  him,  Sum  mau 
rnaade  a  greet  souper,  and  clepide 
manye. 

17  And  he  sente  his  seruaunt  in  the 
our  of  souper,  to  seye  to  men  bcdun  to 
feeste,  that  thei  scliuldeu  come,  for  now 
ulle  thingis  ben  redy. 

18  And  alle  bigunncn  to  gidere  to  ex- 
cuse. The  firste  seide,  I  haue  bou5t  a 
toun,  and  I  haue  nede  to  go  out,  and  to 
se  it  j  I  preie  thee,  haue  me  excusid. 

19  And  the  tothir  seide,  I  haue  boujt 
fyue  jokis  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to  proue 
Lem ;  I  preie  thee,  haue  me  excusid. 

20  And  an  othir  seide,  I  haue  weddid 
a  wyf ;  and  therfore  I  may  not  come. 

21  And  the  sei'uaunt  turnyd  a3en, 
toolde  thes  tliingis  to  the  lord.  Thanne 
the  hosebonde  man  -v^Toth,  seide  to  his 
seruaunt,  Go  out  soone  in  to  grete 
stretis  and  smale  streetis  of  the  citee, 
and   brynge   in   hidur   pore   men,    and 

'     feble,  and  blynde,  and  crokid. 

22  And  the  seiTjaunt  seith,  Lord,  it  is 
don,  as  thou  hast  comaundid,  and  jit 
place  is. 

23  And  the  lord  seith  to  the  seruaunt. 
Go  thou  into  weyes  and  heggis,  and 
coustreyne  for  to  eutre,  that  myn  hous 
be  fillid. 

24  Forsothe  I  seie  to  ;ou,  for  noone 
of  tho  men  that  ben  clepid,  schal  taaste 
my  souper. 

25  Sothli  many  cumpanyes  wenten 
with  him  ;  and  he  turned,  seide  to  hem, 

26  If  ony  cometh  to  me,   and  hatith 
not  his  fiidir,  and  modir,  and  wyf,  sones, 
and  britlieren,  and  dou5tris,  jit  forsotly' 
and  his  l}'f,  he  may  not  be  my  disciple.    ' 

27  And  he  that  bcrith  not  his  cross, 
and  Cometh  aftir  me,  may  not  be  my 
disciple, 

28  Forsoth   who   of   50U    willinge   to 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


373 


15  When  won  of  them  that  sate  at 
meate  also  herde  that,  he  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Happy  is  he,  that  eateth  breed  in 
the  kyngdome  of  God. 

16  Then  sayd  he  to  hym,  A  certayne 
man  ordened  a  greate  supper,  and  bade 
many. 

17  And  sent  his  servaunt  att  supper 
time,  to  saye  to  them  that  wcr  bidden, 
come,  for  all  thynges  arc  redy. 

18  And  they  all  atonce  began  to  make 
excuse.  The  fyrst  sayd  vnto  him,  I 
have  bought  a  ferme,  and  I  must  nedes 
goo,  and  se  it ;  I  praye  the,  have  me 
excused. 

19  And  another  sayd,  I  have  bought 
fy\'e  yooke  of  oxen,  and  I  must  goo 
to  prove  them ;  I  praye  the,  have  me 
excused. 

20  The  thp'de  sayd,  I  have  maried  a 
wyfe  ;  and  therfore  I  cannot  come. 

21  And  the  servaunt  went  agayne,  and 
brought  his  master  worde  there  of. 
Then  was  the  good  man  of  the  housse 
displeased,  and  sayd  to  his  servaunt, 
Goo  out  quickly  into  the  stretes  and 
quarters  of  the  citie,  and  brynge  ia 
bidder  the  povre,  and  the  maymed,  and 
the  halt,  and  the  blinde. 

22  And  the  sex-vaunt  sayd,  Lorde,  it  is 
done,  as  thou  commaundest,  and  yet 
there  is  roume. 

23  And  the  lorde  sayd  to  the  servaunt. 
Go  out  into  the  hie  wayes  and  hedges, 
and  compell  them  to  come  in,  that  my 
housse  maye  be  filled. 

24  For  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  none  of 
those  men  which  were  bidden,  shall  tast 
of  my  supper. 

25  There  went  a  greate  company  with 
him ;  and  he  turned,  and  saide  vnto 
them, 

26  Yf  a  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not 
his  father,  and  mother,  and  wyfe,  and 
children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  more 
over  and  his  awne  life,  he  cannot  be 
my  disciple. 

27  And  whosoever  beare  nott  hys 
crosse,  and  come  after  me,  cannot  be 
ray  disciple. 

28  Which  of  you  is  he  that  is  desposed 


374 


GOTHIC,  360. 


timbryan,  niu  frumist  gasltands  rahneij) 
manwijjo,  babaiu  du  ustiubau  ] 

29  Ibai  aufto  bij^e  gasatldedi  grundu- 
Tvaddyu,  yah  ni  mabtedi  ustiuban,  allai 
]>ai  gasaiwhandans,  duginnaina  bilaikan 
ina, 

30  Qijjandans,  patei  sa  manna  dustod- 
ida  timbryan,  yah  ni  mabta  ustiuhan. 

3 1  Ai|^J)au  whas  jjiudans  gaggands  stigq- 
an  wijjra  an})araua  J)iudan  du  '•'wiganna, 
niu  gasitands  faurjiis  })ankei)',  siaiu  maht- 
eigs  mi|j  taihun  jjusundyom  gamotyan 
|)amma  mij?  twaini  tigum  Jjusundyo  gagg- 
andin  ana  sik  ? 

32  Ei])au  yabai  nist  mahteigs,  nauh- 
]januh  fairra  imma  wisandin,  insandyands 
airu,  bidyijj  gawair))yis. 

33  Swab  nu  wharjdzuh  izwara,  saei 
ni  afqij)i])  allamma  aigina  seiuamma,  ni 
mag  wisan  meins  siponeis. 

34  God  salt ;  i]>  yabai  salt  baud  wairjji]?, 
wbe  gasupoda  1 

35  Nih  du  airj^ai,  ni  du  maihstau  fagr 
'ist,  ut  uswairpand  imma.  Saei  babai 
ausona  gahausyandona,  gahausyai. 


Chap.  XV.  i  Wesunujj-I^an  imma 
newhyandans  sik  allai  motaryos  yah  fra- 
Tvaui'htai  hausyan  imma. 

2  Yah  birodideduu  Fareisaieis  j'ah  bok- 
aryos,  qij^andans,  patei  sa  frawaurhtans 
andnimi)),  yah  mijjmatyi})  im. 

3  Qa})  jjan  du  im  jjo  gayukon,  qi);ands, 

4  Whas  manna  izwara  aigands  taihun- 
tehund  lambe,  yah  fraliusands  ainamma 
jjize,  niu  bilei);i})  ]>o  niuntehund  yah 
niun  ana  au})idai,  yah  goggi]?  afai'  })amma 
fralusanin,  unte  bigitijj  bata  1 

5  Yah  bigitands,  uslagyij)  ana  amsans 
seinans  faginonds ; 

6  Yah  qimands  in  garda  gala]5o}3  fri- 
yonds  yah  garaznans,  qi);ands  du  im, 
Fagino}>  m\]>  mis,  J^ammei  bigat  lamb 
jnein,  }'ata  fralusano. 

7  Qi];a  izwis,  patei  swa  faheds  wairpi]? 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

stypel,  hu  ne  sytt  he  serest  and  telej)  da 
andfengas  de  him  behefe  synd,  hwseder 
he  hsebbe  bine  to  full-fremmenne  1 

29  De-lses  syddan  he  dsene  ginind-weall 
leg}),  and  ne  mseg  bine  full-fremman,  ealle 
de  hit  geseoj),  agynnon  bine  tselan, 

30  And  cwedan,  Hwset  des  man  agan 
timbrian,  and  ne  mihte  hit  ge-endian. 

31  Odde  gyf  hwylc  cyning  wyle  favan 
and  feohtan  agen  odei'ne  cyning,  hu  ne 
sit  he  ser  and  Jjenc)?,  hwseder  he  mjfige 
mid  tyu  Jjusendum  cuman  agen  done 
de  him  agen  cjm\)  mid  twentigum  J)U- 
sendum  ? 

32  And  gif  he  donne  wid  bine  gefeoht- 
an  ne  mseg,  ...  he  sent  seryndracan, 
and  bitt  sibbe. 

33  WitodHce  swa  is  selc  of  eow,  de  ne 
wid-S£ec})  eallum  J)ingum  de  he  ah,  ne 
mseg  he  beon  min  leorning-cniht. 

34  God  ys  sealt  ;  gif  hit  awyi']),  on 
dam  de  hit  gesylt  bijj  1 

35  Nis  hit  nyt  ne  on  eor))an,  ne  on 
myxene,  ac  hyt  bij)  ut-aworpen.  Gehyre^ 
se  de  earan  haebbe  to  gehyrenne. 


Chap.  XV.  '•'i  S5|)l]ce  him  genea- 
Icehton  mtinfulle  and  synfulle,  dset  big 
his  word  gehyrdon. 

2  Da  murcnedon  da  Farisei  and  da 
boceras,  and  cwsedon,  Des  onfeh]?  syn- 
fulle, and  mid  him  ytt. 

3  Da  cwiej>  he  dis  bigspel  to  dam, 

4  Hwylc  man  is  of  eow  de  hsef})  bund 
sceapa,  and  gif  he  forlyst  an  of  dam,  hu 
ne  forlget  he  donne  nigon  and  bund 
nigontig  on  dam  westene,  and  gsej) .  to 
dam  de  forwear]?,  od  he  hit  fint  ? 

5  And  donne  he  hit  fint,  he  hit  set  on 
his  exla  geblissiende ; 

6  And  donne  he  bam  cym|),  he  to- 
somne  clypa))  hys  frynd  and  his  nehhe- 
buras,  and  cwy)),  Blissia|)  mid  me,  fordam 
ic  fuude  min  sceap,  de  forwear)?. 

7  Ic  secge  eow,  dset  swa  by])  on  heofone 


XIV.  29.-XY.  7-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

byUle  a  tour,  wlicr  he  sittingc  coiintith 
not  first  the  spensis  tliat  bcu  uedful,  if 
he  haue  to  per  forme  1 

29  Lest  aftir  he  hath  sett  the  fouiule- 
ment,  and  niy5te  not  performe,  alle  that 
seen,  bigynue  to  scorne  him, 

30  Seyinge,  For  this  man  bigan  to 
bikle,  and  niy5te  not  ende. 

3  r  Ether  what  kyng  to  goynge  to 
make  batel  a5ens  another  kyng,  wher 
he  sittinge  bythenkith  not  first,  if  he 
may  with  ten  thousynd  go  a5cns  him 
that  eomcth  to  him  with  twenty  thou- 
synd ? 

32  ElHs  him  5it  doinge  a  fer,  he  scnd- 
inge  a  messanger,  preieth  tho  thingis 
that  ben  of  pees. 

33  So  therfore  ech  of  50U,  that  re- 
nouncith  not  alle  thingis  whiche  he 
weeldith,  may  not  be  my  disciple. 

34  Salt  is  good  thing ;  forsoth  if  S£ilt 
schal  vanysche,  in  what  thing  schal  it 
be  saueridl 

35  Nether  in  erthe,  nether  in  the 
dunghil  it  is  profitable,  but  it  schal  be 
sent  out.  He  that  hath  eeris  of  heer- 
inge,  heere. 


TYNDALE,  1.126. 


37:. 


Chap.  XY.  i  Forsothe  pupplicans 
and  synful  men  weren  neijinge  to  him, 
that  thei  schulden  heere  him. 

2  And  Farisecs  and  scribis  grucchiden, 
seyinge,  For  this  man  receyueth  synful 
men,  and  ctith  with  hem. 

3  And  he  seith  to  hem  this  parable, 
seiynge, 

4  What  man  of  50U  that  hath  an  hun- 
drid  scheep,  and  if  he  hath  lost  oon  of 
hem,  wher  he  leeuith  not  nynty  and 
nyne  in  desert,  and  goth  to  it  that 
perischide,  til  he  fynde  it? 

5  And  whanne  he  hath  founden  it,  he 
ioyinge  puttith  on  his  shuldris  ; 

6  And  he  comynge  hoom  clepith  to 
gidere  his  frendis  and  nei5ebors,  seyinge 
to  hem,  Thauke  je  me,  for  I  haue 
founden  my  scheep,  which  haddc  per- 
ischid. 

7  Sothly  I  seye  to  50U,  so  ioye  schal 


to  bilde  a  toure,  and  sitteth  not  douno 
before  and  counteth  the  cost,  whether 
he  have  sufficient  to  performe  it  1 

29  Lest  after  he  hatlic  layde  the  foun- 
dacion,  and  is  nott  able  to  performe  it, 
all  that  beholdc  it,  bcgyn  to  moocke 
hym,  ^ 

30  Sayinge,  This  man  began  to  bildc, 
and  was  not  able  to  make  an  ende. 

3 1  What  kynge  goeth  to  make  bataylc 
agaynst  anotlicr  kynge,  and  sitteth  not 
doune  fyrst  and  casteth  in  his  mynde, 
wether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousandc 
to  mete  him  that  cometli  agaynst  hym 
with  twenty  thousand  ? 

32  Or  els  wliill  the  other  is  yett  a 
gi-eate  waye  off,  he  will  sende  embasseat- 
ours,  and  desyre  peace. 

33  Soo  lyke  wyse  none  of  you,  that 
forsaketh  nott  all  that  he  hathe,  can  be 
my  disciple. 

34  Salt  is  good ;  but  if  salt  be  corupte, 
what  shall  be  seasoned  there  Avith  ? 

35  It  is  nether  good  for  the  londe,  noi 
yet  for  the  donge  hill,  men  cast  it  out 
at  the  dores.  He  that  hath  eares  to 
heare,  let  him  heare. 


Chap.  XY.  i  Then  resorted  vnto 
him  all  the  publicans  and  synners,  for 
to  heare  him. 

2  And  the  Pharises  and  scribes  grudged, 
sainge.  He  receaveth  to  his  company 
synners,  and  eateth  with  them. 

3  Then  put  he  forthe  this  similitude  to 
tliem,  sayinge, 

4  What  man  of  you  havynge  an  hun- 
dred shepe,  if  he  loose  one  of  them, 
doth  not  leve  nynty  and  nyne  in  tho 
wildernes,  and  goo  after  hym  which  is. 
loost,  vntill  he  fynde  hym  1 

5  And  when  he  hath  founde  hym,  he 
putteth  hym  on  his  shulders  with  ioye  ; 

6  And  as  sone  as  he  commeth  home  he 
calleth  to  gedder  his  lovers  and  negh- 
bours,  sayinge  vnto  them,  Reioyse  with 
me,  for  I  have  founde  my  shepe,  whicli 
was  loost. 

7  I  say  vnto  you,  that  lyke  wyse  ioye 


376  GOTHIC,  360. 

'in  himina  in  ainis  frawaurhtis  idreigond- 
ins,  })au  in  niuntehundis  yah  niune  ga- 
raihtaize,  Jjaiei  ni  Jjaurbun  idreigos. 

8  Ai))])au  suma  qino  drakmans  haband- 
ei  taihun,  yabai  fraliusijj  drakmin  ain- 
amma,  niu  taudeij)  lukarn,  yah  usbaug- 
ei[>  razn,  yah  sokeij?  glaggwaba,  unte 
bigiti|j  ? 

9  Yah  bigitandei,  gahaitijj  friyondyos 
yah  garaznons,  qijjandei,  Faginoj?  mi|> 
mis,  unte  bigat  drakmein,  jjarnmei  fra- 
laus. 

10  Swa  qijja  izwis,  faheds  wair)n)>  in 
and\vair})ya  aggele  Gujjs  in  ainis  idreig- 
ondins  frawaurhtis. 

1 1  QaJ)u}5-])an,  Manne  sums  aihta  twans 
sununs ; 

12  Yah  qa|)  sa  yuhiza  ize  du  attin, 
Atta,  gif  mis,  sel  nndrinnai  mik,  dail 
aiginis.     Yah  disdailida  im  swes  sein. 


13  Yah  afar  ni  managans  dagans,  brahta 
samana  allata  sa  yuhiza  sunus,  yah  aflai}) 
in  land  fairra  wisando ;  yah  yainar 
distahida  bata  swes  seinata  libands  us- 
stiuriba. 

14  Bi])e  |ian  frawas  allamma,  war]) 
huhrus  abrs  and  gawi  yainata,  yah  is 
dugann  alajjarba  wairjjan. 

15  Yah  gaggands,  gahaftida  sik  sum- 
amma  baurgyane  yainis  gauyis.  Yah 
insandida  ina  haijjyos  seinaizos,  haldan 
sweina, 

16  Yah  gairnida  sad  itan  haurne  J)oei 
matidedun  sweina,  yah  manna  imma  ni 
gaf. 

17  Qimands  ]>an  in  sis,  qa]j,  Whan  filu 
asnye  attins  meinis,  ufarassau  haband 
hlaibe  ;  i|)  ik  huhrau  fraqistna. 

18  Usstandands,  gagga  du  attin  mein- 
amma,  yali  qij^a  du  imma,  Atta,  fra- 
waurhta  mis  in  himin,  yah  in  andwairjjya 
Jjeinamma ; 

19  Yu  }5anasei))S  ni  im  wairjis  ei  hait- 
aidau  sunus  jjeins,  gatawei  mik  swe 
ainana  asnye  J)einaize. 

20  Yah  usstandands  qam  at  attin  sein- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

blis  be  anum  synfullum  de  dsed-bote 
de\>,  ma  donne  ofer  nigon  and  nigontig- 
um  rihtwisra,  de  dsed-bote  ne  be|)urfon. 

8  Odde  hwilc  wif  h8ef{)  tyn  scyllingas, 
gif  heo  forlyst  senne  scyUing,  hu  ne  on- 
eelj)  heo  byre  leoht-faet,  and  awent  byre 
hiis,  and  sec])  geornhce,  od  heo  bine 
fint? 

9  And  donne  heo  bine  fint,  heo  clypa]) 
byre  frynd  and  nehhebyryna,  and  cwy^, 
Blyssiaj)  mid  me,  fordam  ic  funde  minne. 
scylling,  de  ic  forleas. 

10  Ic  secge  eow,  swa  bij)  blis  beforan 
Godes  englum  be  anum  synfullum  de 
dsed-bote  de]>.^ 

1 1  He  cwsej),  S6j)lice  sum  man  hsefde 
twegen  suna ; 

12  Da  cwsej)  se  gingra  to  bis  feeder, 
Feeder,  syle  me  minne  dsel  minre  selite, 
de  me  to  gebyre]).  Da  dselde  he  him 
his  sehte. 

13  Da  pefter  feawa  dagum,  ealle  his 
})ing  gegad  erode  se  gingra  sunn,  and 
ferde  wrseclice  on  feorlen  rice  ;  and  for- 
spilde  dar  his  sehta  lybbende  on  his 
gselsan. 

14  Da  he  big  heefde  ealle  amyrrede, 
da  wear}>  mycel  hunger  on  dam  rice, 
and  he  wear])  wsedla. 

15  Da  ferde  he,  and  folgode  anum 
burh-sittendum  men  dees  I'ices.  Da 
sende  he  bine  to  his  tune,  deet  he  heolde 
his  swyn. 

16  Da  gewilnode  he  his  wambe  gefyl- 
lan  of  dam  bean-coddum  de  da  swyn 
seton,  and  him  man  ne  sealde. 

17  Da  be})ohte  he  bine,  and  cwse]?, 
Eala  hu  fela  byrlinga  on  mines  feeder 
liiise,  hlaf  genohne  habba]) ;  and  ic  her 
on  hungre  forweorde. 

1 8  Ic  arise,  and  ic  fare  to  minum  fajder, 
and  ic  secge  him,  Eala  fteder,  ic  syngode 
on  heofeuas,  and  beforan  de  ; 

19  Nu  ic  ne  eom  wyrde  deet  ic  beo  dm 
sunu  genemned,  do  me  swa.  anne  of  din-  . 
um  hyrlingum. 

20  And  he  aras  da  and  com  to  his 


XV.  8-20.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

be  in  hcucnc  on  o  synful  man  doynge 
penauiK'C,  than  of  nynti  and  nyne  iuste, 
that  hau  no  node  of  ponaunce. 

8  Ether  what  woniman  hauynge  ten 
dragmes,^  and  if  sche  hath  lost  o  dragmc, 
■\vhei-  sche  li5teth  not  a  lanterne,  and 
turneth  vpsodonn  the  hous,  and  sekith 
diligently,  til  sche  fynde  1 

9  And  whanne  sche  hath  foundcn,  sche 
clepith  to  gidcre  frcndis  and  neijcboris, 
seyinge,  Thauke  50  me,  for  I  haue 
founden  the  dragme,  which  I  hadde 
lost. 

10  So  I  seic  to  50U,  ioye  schal  be  to 
the  aungels  of  God  on  o  synful  man 
doynge  penaunce. 

T  I  Forsothe  he  seith,  Sum  man  hadde 
tweye  soucs ; 

1 2  And  the  jongere  seide  to  the  fadir, 
Fadir,  5yue  to  me  the  porcioun  of  sub- 
staunce,^  that  byfallith  to  me.  And  the 
fadir  departide  to  him  the  substaunce, 

13  And  not  aftir  manye  dayes,  alle 
thiugis  gederid  to  gidre,  the  5ongere 
sone  wcnte  in  pilgrymage  in  to  a  fer 
cuntrec ;  and  there  he  wastide  his  sub- 
staunce in  lyuynge  leccherously. 

1 4  And  aftir  that  he  hadde  endid  alle 
thingis,  a  strong  hungir  was  maad  in 
that  cuntree,  and  he  bigan  to  haue  nede. 

15  And  he  wente,  and  cleuyde  to  oou 
of  the  citeseyns  of  that  cuuti'ee.  And 
he  scnte  him  in  to  his  toun,  that  he 
schulde  feede  hoggis. 

16  And  he  coueitide  to  fille  his  wombe 
of  the  coddis  whiche  the  hoggis  eeten, 
and  no  man  5af  to  him. 

17  Sothli  he  turned  a5en  in  to  him  silf, 
se3-de,  IIou  many  hirid  men  in  my  fadir 
hous,  ban  plente  of  looues ;  forsothe  I 
pcrische  here  thur5  hungir. 

18  I  schal  ryse,  and  I  schal  go  to  my 
fadir,  and  I  schal  seie  to  him,  Fadir,  I 
haue  synned  a5ens  heuene,  and  bifore 
thee ; 

19  Xow  I  am  not  worthi  to  be  clepid 
thi  sone,  make  me  as  oon  of  thi  hyrid 
men. 

20  And  he  ry.oinge  cam  to  his  fadir. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


377 


shalbe  in  heven  over  one  synncr  that 
repenteth,  moore  then  over  nynety  and 
nyne  iuste  persons,  whiche  nede  noo 
ropcntaunce. 

8  Other  what  woman  havynge  .x. 
grotcs,  if  she  loose  won,'  doth  not  light 
a  candell,  and  swepe  the  housse,  and 
seke  diligently,  till  she  finde  it  1 

9  And  when  she  hath  founde  it,  she 
callcth  her  lovers  and  her  neghbours, 
sayngc,  Reioyce  with  me,  for  I  have 
founde  the  groate,  which  I  had  loost. 

10  Lykwysc  I  saye  vnto  you,  ioye 
shalbe  in  the  presence  off  the  angels  off 
God  over  one  synner  that  repentheth. 

1 1  And  he  sayde,  A  certayne  man  had 
two  sonnes ; 

12  And  the  yonger  of  them  sayde  to 
his  father.  Father,  geve  me  my  parte 
off  the  goodes,  that  to  me  belongeth. 
And  he  devided  vnto  them  his  sub- 
staunce. 

13  And  not  longe  after,  the  yonger 
Sonne  gaddered  all  that  he  had  to  gedder, 
and  toke  his  iorney  into  a  farre  countre  ; 
and  there  he  wasted  his  goodes  with. 
royetous  llvinge. 

14  And  Avheu  he  had  spent  all  that  he 
had,  there  rose  a  greate  derth  thorow 
out  all  that  same  londe,  and  he  began 
to  lacke. 

1 5  And  he  went,  and  clave  to  a  citesyn 
of  that  same  countre.  Which  sent  hym 
to  the  felde,  to  kepe  his  swyue. 

16  And  he  Avoid  fayne  have  filled  his 
bcly  with  the  coddes  that  the  swyne  ate, 
and  noo  man  gave  hym. 

1 7  Then  he  remembred  hym  silfe,  and 
sayde,  Howe  many  hyred  servauntes  at. 
my  fathers,  have  breed  ynough  ;  and  I 
dye  for  honger. 

18  I  will  a  ryse,  and  goo  to  my  father, 
and  will  saye  vnto  hym.  Father,  I  have 
synned  agaynst  heven,  and  before  the  ; 

1 9  Nowe  am  I  not  worthy  to  be  called 
thy  Sonne,  make  me  as  one  of  thy  heyred. 
servauntes. 

20  And  he  arose  and  cam  to  his  father. 


3/8 


GOTHIC,  360. 


amma.  Naiih))auuh  |)an  faii-ra  wisanclan, 
gasawh  ina  atta  is,  yah  infeinoda.  Yah 
])i-agyancls,  di-aus  ana  hals  iSj  yah  kukida 
imma. 

21  Yah  qaj)  imma  sa  sunus,  Atta,  fra- 
wam-hta  in  himin,  yah  in  andwairj^ya 
Jjeinamma ;  ya  |mnasei|?s  ni  im  wair]>s 
ei  haitaidau  sunus  j^eins. 

22  Qa]j  ]?an  sa  atta  du  skalkam  sein- 
aim,  Spi'auto  """bringij?  wastya  }'0  frum- 
iston,  yah  gawasyij)  iua,  yah  gibi})  figg- 
ragul)?  in  handu  is,  yah  gaskohi  ana 
fotuns  'is ; 

23  Yah  ■''brmgandans  stiur  Jjana  alidan, 
ufsnei};i]?,  yah  matyahdans,  wisam  waila. 

24  Unte  sa  sunus  meins  dau])S  was,  yah 
gaqiunoda;  yah  fralusans  was,  yah  bi- 
gitans  warjn     Yah  dugunnun  wisan. 

25  Wasujj-]5an  sunus  is  sa  al};iza  ana 
akra ;  yah  qimands,  atiddya  newh  razn, 
yah  gahausida  saggwins  yah  laikins. 

26  Yah  athaitands  sumana  maglwe, 
frahuh,  wha  wesi  Jjata. 

27  paruh  is  qa]?  du  imma,  patei  bro|)ar 
J)eins  qam,  yah  afsnaij)  atta  Jjeins  stiui* 
])ana  ahdan,  unte  hailana  ina  andnam. 

28  panuh  modags  war}),  yah  ni  wilda 
inngaggan.  1]>  atta  is  usgaggands  ut, 
bad  ina. 

29  paruh  is  andhafyands,  qa})  du  attin, 
Sai !  swa  filu  yere  skalkiuoda  |)us,  yah 
ni  whanhun  anabusn  |)eina  ufariddya  ; 
yah  mis  ni  aiw  atgaft  gaitein,  ei  mi|) 
friyondam  meinaim  biwesyau. 

30  I]>  Ipan  sa  sunus  j^eins,  saei  fret  j^ein 
swes  mi])  kalkyom,  qam,  ufsnaist  imma 
stiur  ];ana  alidan. 

31  paruh  qa})  du  imma,  Barnilo,  })U 
sinteino  mij)  mis  wast  yah  is,  yah  all 
])ata  main  ])ein  ist. 

32  AVaila  wisan,  yah  faginon  skuld  was; 
unte  bro])ar  Jjeins  dau))S  was,  yah  ga- 
qiunoda ;  yah  fralusans,  yah  bigitans 
war]). 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

ffeder.  And  eta  gyt  da  he  AVfes  feor,  his 
feeder  he  hyne  geseah,  and  wear])  mid 
mild-heortnesse  Tistyi'Dd.  And  iigen  hine 
ai-n,  and  hine  beclypte,  and  cyste  hine. 

21  Da  cwae])  his  sunu.  Feeder,  ic  s3-n- 
gode  on  heofon,  and  beforan  de  ;  mi  ic 
ne  eom  wjrde  claet  ic  din  sunu  beo  ge- 
nemned. 

22  Da  cwje]?  se  feeder  to  his  })eowum, 
Bringaj)  rade  deene  selestan  gegyi'elan, 
and  scrydaj)  hyne,  and  sylla])  him  bring 
on  his  hand,  and  gescy  to  his  fotum ; 

23  And  bringa])  an  fsett  styi'ic,  and 
ofslea}),  and  uton  etan,  and  gewistful- 
lian. 

24  Fordam  des  min  sunu  wses  dead 
and  he  ge-edcucode ;  he  forwear]),  and 
he  is  gemet.  Da  ongunnon  hig  ge- 
wistleecan. 

25  S6])lice  hys  yidra  sunu  wees  on 
secere ;  and  he  com,  and  da  he  dam 
huse  geneala^hte,  he  gehyrde  daene  sweg 
and  dset  wered. 

26  Da  clypode  he  anne  ])eow,  and  acs- 
ode  hine,  hweet  dset  weere, 

27  Da  cw?e])  he,  Din  brodor  com,  and 
din  feeder  ofsloh  an  feett  cealf,  fordam  de 
he  hyne  halne  onfeng. 

28  Da  gebealh  he  hine,  and  nolde  in- 
gan.  Da  code  his  fa^der  iit,  and  ongan 
hine  biddan. 

29  Da  cwee])  he  his  feeder  andswai'- 
igende,  Efne  !  swa  fela  geara  ic  de  })eow- 
ode,  and  ic  nsefre  din  bebod  ne  for- 
gymde ;  and  ne  sealdest  du  me  neefre 
an  ticcen,  deet  ic  mid  minum  freondum 
gewistfullode. 

30  Ac  syddan  des  din  sunu  com,  de 
hj's  spede  mid  myltystrum  umyrde,  du 
ofslcge  him  fjett  cealf. 

31  Da  cwee})  he,  Sunu,  du  eart  sjTnle 
mid  me,  and  ealle  mine  ])ing  synd  dine. 

32  De  geb^Tcde  gewistfullian,  and  ge- 
blissian  ;  fordam  des  din  brodor  wees 
dead,  and  he  ge-edcucode  ;  he  forwear]) 
and  he  is  sfeniet. 


XV.  21-32.]  VVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Sothli  whaime  he  was  5it  for,  his  fadir 
sy3  Ilim,  and  he  was  stirid  by  mercy. 
And  he  rcnnynge  to,  fcldo  on  his  neckc, 
and  kiste  him. 

21  And  the  sonc  scydo  to  him,  Fadir, 
I  haue  synucd  a^ens  heuene,  and  biforc 
thee  ;  and  now  I  am  not  wortlii  to  be 
clopid  thi  sonc. 

22  Forsotli  the  fadir  srydc  to  his  scr- 
iiauntis,  Soonc  liringc  50  forth  the  firstc 
stoole,  and  clothe  50  him,  and  5yue  50  a 
ring  in  his  bond,  and  schoou  in  to  the 
feet ; 

23  And  bryngc  ^e  a  calf  maad  fat,  and 
sle  5e,  and  ete  we,  and  plcuteuously  ete 
we. 

24  For  this  ray  sone  was  deed,  and 
hath  lATied  a5cn ;  he  pcrischide,  and  is 
foundcu.  And  alle  bigunnen  to  eat 
plcnteuously. 

2,^)  Forsoth  his  eldere  sone  was  in  the 
fceld  ;  and  whanne  he  cam,  and  nei3edc 
to  the  hous,  he  herde  a  symphonye  and 
a  crowde. 

26  And  he  clepide  oon  of  the  ser- 
uauntis,  and  axide,  what  thingis  thes 
weren. 

27  And  he  seide  to  him,  Thi  brodir  is 
comcn,  and  thi  fadir  hath  slayn  a  fat 
calf,  for  he  receyuede  him  saf. 

28  Forsoth  he  was  wroth,  and  wolde 
not  cntre.  Therfore  his  fadir  gon  out, 
bigan  to  preic  him. 

29  And  he  answeringe  to  his  fadir, 
sc'idc,  Lo  !  so  manye  3eeris  I  serue  to 
thcc,  and  I  brak  neuere  thi  comaunde- 
mcnt ;  thou  hast  neuere  jouun  a  kyde 
to  me,  that  I  schulde  ete  largely  with 
my  frendis. 

30  But  aftir  that  this  thi  sonc,  which 
dcuouridc  his  substaunce  with  hooris, 
cam,  thou  hast  slayn  to  him  a  fat  calf 

31  And  he  seide  to  him,  Sone,  thou 
crt  cuerc  with  me,  and  alle  myne  thingis 
ben  thyne. 

32  Forsothe  it  bihofte  to  ete  plcnteu- 
ously, and  for  to  ioye  ;  for  this  thi  bro- 
ther Avas  deed,  and  lyuede  a3eyn ;  he 
peryschide,  and  he  is  founden. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


379^ 


When  he  was  yett  a  greate  waye  of,  his 
father  sawe  hym,  and  had  compassion 
on  hym.  And  ran  vnto  him,  and  fell 
on  his  neckc,  and  kysscd  hym. 

21  xVnd  the  sonne  sayd  vnto  hym, 
Fathei',  I  have  synned  agaynst  heven, 
and  in  thy  sight ;  nether  am  I  worthy 
hence  forthc  to  be  called  thy  sonne. 

22  Then  saydc  the  father  to  his  ser- 
vauntes,  Bringc  forth  that  best  garment, 
and  put  it  on  hym,  and  put  a  rynge  on 
his  honde,  and  shewes  on  his  fete  ; 

23  And  brynge  bidder  that  fatted 
caulfe,  and  kyll  hym,  and  lett  vs  eate, 
and  be  mery. 

24  For  this  my  sonne  was  deed,  and 
is  alive  agayne ;  he  was  loste,  and  ys 
nowe  founde.  And  they  began  to  make 
goode  clieare. 

25  The  elder  brother  was  in  the  felde  ;. 
and  when  he  cam,  and  drcwe  nye  to  the 
housse,  he  herde  minstrclcy  and  dauns- 
ynge. 

26  And  called  one  of  his  servauntes^ 
and  axed,  what  thoose  thynges  meante. 

27  He  said  vnto  him.  Thy  brother  is 
come,  and  thy  father  hath  killed  the 
fatted  caulfe,  be  cause  he  hath  receaved 
him  safe  and  sounde. 

28  And  he  was  angry,  and  wolde  not 
goo  in.  Then  cam  his  father  out,  and 
entreated  him. 

29  He  answered,  and  sayde  to  hja- 
father.  Loo !  these  many  yeares  have  I 
done  the  service,  nether  brake  at  enj 
time  thy  commaundment ;  and  yet  gavest 
thou  me  never  soo  moche  as  a  kyd,  to- 
make  mery  with  my  lovers. 

30  But  as  sone  as  this  thy  sonne  was 
come,  which  hath  devoured  thy  goodes 
wyth  harloottes,  thou  haste  for  his  plea- 
sure killed  the  fatted  caulfe. 

3  I  And  he  sayd  vnto  him,  Sonne,  thou 
wast  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I  have 
is  thine. 

32  It  was  mete  that  we  shulde  make 
mery,  and  be  glad  ;  for  this  thy  brother 
was  deed,  and  is  a  live  agayne  ;  and  was 
loste,  and  is  founde. 


380 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  Qajjujj-jjan  du  slpon- 
yam  seinaim,  Manne  sums  was  gabeigs, 
saei  aihta  fauragaggyan ;  yah  sa  fra- 
wroliij'S  warlj  du  imma,  ei  distahidedi 
^igin  is. 

2  Yah  atwopyands  ina,  qa]j  du  imma, 
Duwhe  jjata  hausya  fram  J^us  1  usgif 
raJ)yon  fauragaggyis  jieinis,  ni  magt  auk 
yu  })aiiamais  fauragaggya  wisan. 

3  Qa|j  ]>an  in  sis  sa  fauragaggya,  Wha 
tauyau,  ))andei  frauya  meins  afnimi|)  faur- 
agaggi  af  mis  1  graban  ni  mag,  bidyan 
fikama  mik. 

4  And))ahta  mik  Avha  tauyau,  ei  )jan 
Jbijje  afsatyaidau  us  fauragaggya,  and- 
nimaina  mik  in  gardins  seinans. 

5  Yah  athaitands  aiuwharyanoh  faihus- 
kulane  frauyins  seinis,  qaj>  ])amma  frum- 
istin,  Whan  filu  skalt  frauyin  meinam- 
mal 

6  paruh  qa]>,  Taihuntaihund  kase  al- 
ewis.  Yah  qa^  du  imma,  Nim  pus  bokos, 
jah  gasitands  spvauto,  gamelei  fimf 
tiguns. 

7  pa]>roh  |)an  du  anj^aramma  qaj), 
A}5|jan  Jju  whan  filu  skalt  1  1\>  is  qa)j, 
Taihuntaihund  mitade  kaurnis.  Yah 
qa])  du  iinma,  Nim  ]jus  bokos,  yah 
melei  ahtautehund. 

8  Yah  hazida  sa  frauya  |)ana  fauragagg- 
yan  i'nwindijjos,  unte  frodaba  gatawida  ; 
unte  jjai  sunyos  ])is  aiwis  frodozans 
sunum  liuhadis  in  kunya  seinamma 
sind. 

9  Yah  ik  izwis  qi]>a,  tauyaij?  izwis 
friyonds  us  faihujjraihna  inwindiJ)0S,  ei 
pan  ufligaip,  andnimaina  izwis  in  aiw- 
einos  hleipros. 

10  Saei  triggws  ist  in  leitilamma,  yah 
in  managamma  triggws  ist ;  yah  sa  in 
leitilamma  untriggwa,  yah  in  managam- 
ma untriggws  ist. 

1 1  Yabai  nu  in  inwindamma  faihup- 
raihna  triggwai  ni  waurpup,  pata  sun- 
yeino  whas  izwis  galaubeij>  1 

12  Yah  yabai  in  pamma  framapyin 
triggwai  ni  waur])u|),  pata  izwar  whas 
izwis  gibijj  1 

13  Ni  ainshun  pi  we  mag  twaim  frau- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

Chap.  XVI.  '•'i  Da  cwsep  he  to  his 
leorning-cnihtum,  Sum  welig  man  wses, 
se  hsefde  sumne  gerefan ;  se  wearp  wid 
hine  forwreged,  swylce  he  his  god  for- 
spilde. 

2  Da  clypode  he  hine,  and  ssede  him, 
Hwi  gehyre  ic  dis  be  de  1  agyf  dine 
scire,  ne  miht  dii  leng  tun-scire  bewitan. 


3  Da  cwsep  se  gerefa  on  his  gepance, 
Hwset  d5  ic,  fordam  de  min  hlaford 
mine  geref-scire  fram  me  nimp  1  ne  mseg 
ic  delfan,  me  sceamap  dset  ic  waedlige. 

4  Ic  wat  hwset  ic  do,  d?et  hig  me  on 
hyra  hus  onfon,  donne  ic  bescired  beo 
fram  tun-scire. 

5  Da  da  gafol-gyldan  gegaderode  wser- 
on,  da  sgede  he  dam  forman,  Hu  mycel 
scealt  du  minum  hlaforde  ? 

6  Da  ssede  he,  Hund  sestra  eles.  Da 
ssede  he  him,  Nim  dine  federe,  and  site 
hrade,  and  writ  fiftig. 

7  Da  Scede  he  odrum,  Hu  mycel  scealt 
du  ?  Da  cwasp  he,  Hund  mittena  hwaet- 
es.  Da  cwsep  he,  Nim  dine  stafas,  and 
writ  hund-eahtatig. 

8  Da  herede  se  hlaford  dsere  unriht- 
wisnesse  tun-gerefan,  fordam  de  he 
gleawlice  dyde  ;  fordam  de  disse  worulde 
beam  synd  gleawi'an  disses  leohtes 
bearnum  on  disse  cneoresse. 

9  And  ic  secge  eow,  wyrcap  eow  frynd 
of  disse  worulde-welau  unrihtwfsnesse, 
dset  hig  onfon  eow  on  ece  eardung- 
stowa,  donne  ge  geteoriap.''" 

I  o  Se  de  ys  on  lytlum  getry we,  se  ys  on 
maran  getry  we;  and  se  de  ys  on  lytlum 
unrihtwis,  se  ys  eac  on  maran  un- 
rihtwis. 

II  Gif  ge  on  unrihtwisum  weoruld- 
welan  naeron  getrywe,  hwa  betaecp  eow 
dset  cower  ys  ? 

12  And  gyf  ge  on  fremedum  nseron 
getrywe,  hwa  sylp  eow  dset  eower  ys  1 

1 3  Ne  mseg  nan  peow  twam  hlafordum 


XVI.  1-13.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

CiiAP.  XVI.  I  Forsotlie  he  sciilc  also 
to  his  disciplis,  Thei"  was  sum  riche  man, 
that  hackle  a  fermour  ;^  und  this  was 
tlefamyd  anentis  him,  as  he  hadde  wastid 
liis  goodis. 

2  And  he  clepide  him,  and  seide  to 
him,  "What  hcere  I  this  thing  of  tlice  'i 
5cld  resoun  of  thi  fernie,  for  now  thou 
schalt  not  mowe  holde  thi  forme. 

3  Forsoth  the  fermour  seide  with  ynne 
him  silf,  What  schal  I  do,  for  my  lord 
takith  awcy  fro  nic  the  ferme  1  I  may 
not  delue,  I  am  aschamyd  to  begge. 

4  I  woot  what  I  schal  do,  that  whanne 
I  schal  be  remouyd  fro  the  ferme,  thei 
receyue  me  in  to  her  housis. 

5  And  alle  the  dettours  of  the  lord 
clepid  to  gidere,  he  seide  to  the  firste, 
Hou  moche  owist  thou  to  my  lord  1 

6  And  he  seide  to  him,  An  hundrid 
barelis  of  oyle.  And  he  seide  to  him, 
Taak  thin  obiigaciouu,  and  sitte  soon, 
and  An-yt  fyfti. 

7  Aftirward  he  seyde  to  another,  Sothli 
hou  moche  owist  thou  1  Which  seide, 
An  hundrid  mesuris  of  whete.  And  he 
seide  to  him,  Tak  thi  lettris,  and  wryt 
foure  score. 

8  And  the  lord  preiside  the  fermour  of 
wickidnesse,  for  he  hadde  don  prudently  ; 
for  the  sones  of  this  world  ben  more 
prudent  in  her  generacioim  than  the 
soncs  of  li5t. 

9  And  I  seie  to  50U,  make  to  50U 
frendes  of  the  richesse  of  wickidnesse, 
that  whan  50  shulen  fayle,  thei  receyue 
50U  in  to  euerlastynge  tabernaclis. 

10  He  that  is  feithful  in  the  leeste 
thing,  is  feithful  also  in  more ;  and  he 
that  is  wickid  in  a  litil  thing,  is  wickid 
also  in  the  more. 

1 1  Therfore  if  50  wcren  not  trewe  in 
wicked  riches,  who  schal  bitakc  to  30U 
this  that  is  verri  1 

I  2  And  if  56  wercn  not  trewe  in  alien 
thing,  who  schal  5yue  to  50U  this  that  is 
30ure  ? 

13  No  man  seruauut  may  serue  twey 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


381 


Chap.  XVI.  i  He  sayd  also  vnto 
his  disciples,  There  was  a  ccrtayne  rich 
man,  which  had  a  stewarde,  that  was 
acused  vnto  him,  that  he  had  wasted  his 
goodes. 

2  And  he  called  him,  and  said  vnto 
him,  Howe  is  it  that  I  heare  this  of  the? 
geve  a  comptes  off  thy  steward  shi[)pe, 
for  thou  maystc  be  no  longer  my  stew- 
arde. 

3  The  stewarde  said  with  in  him  silfe, 
What  shall  I  do,  for  my  master  will 
take  a  waye  from  me  my  stewarde 
shippe  1  I  cannot  digge,  and  to  begge 
I  am  a  shamed. 

4  I  woote  what  to  do,  that  when  I  am 
put  out  of  my  stewardshippe,  they  maye 
receave  me  in  to  there  houses. 

5  Then  called  he  all  his  masters  detters, 
and  sayd  vnto  the  fyrst,  Howe  moche 
owest  thou  vnto  my  master  1 

6  And  he  sayd,  An  hondred  tonnes  of 
oyle.  And  he  sayd  to  him,  Take  thy 
bill,  and  sitt  doune  quickly,  and  write 
fiftie. 

7  Then  said  he  to  another.  What  owest 
thou  1  And  he  sayde,  An  hondred  quar- 
ters of  wheate.  He  sayd  to  him.  Take 
thy  bill,  and  writte  foure  scoore. 

8  And  the  lorde  commended  the  vniust 
stewarde,  because  he  had  done  wysly ; 
for  the  chyldren  of  this  worlde  are  in 
their  kynde  wyser  then  the  chyldren  off 
light. 

9  And  I  saye  also  vnto  you,  make  you 
frendes  of  the  wicked  mammon,  that 
when  ye  shall  have  nede,  they  may 
receave  you  into  everlastinge  habita- 
cions. 

I  o  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  wiche  is 
leste,  the  same  is  faithful  in  moche  .  .  . 

I I  So  then  if  ye  have  not  byn  faithfull 
in  the  wicked  mammon,  who  will  beleve 
you  in  that  which  is  true  ? 

12  And  if  ye  have  not  bene  faithfull  in 
another  manncs  busines,  whoo  shall  geve 
you  youre  awne  1 

13  No  servaunt  can  serve  two  masters^ 


382 


GOTHIC,  360. 


yam  skalkiaon ;  andizuh  ainana  fiyaij), 
yah  anjjarana  friyo])  ;  ai})|)au  ainamma 
andtiloj),  ij>  an|)aramma  frakanii.  Ni 
magujj  GujJa  skalkinon  yak  faihujjraih- 
na. 

14  Gahausidedun  ]:an  ]>o  alia  yah  l^ai 
Fareisaieis,  faihufrikai  wisandans,  yah 
bimampideduu  ina. 

15  Yah  qajj  du  im,  Yus  siyu}),  yuzei 
garaihtans  domeij)  'izwis  silbans  in  and- 
wairjjya  manne ;  ip  Gujj  kann  hairtona 
izwara,  unte  jjata  hauho  in  mannam, 
andaset  in  andwah']>ya  GuJ^s. 

16  WitoJ>  yah  praufeteis  und  lohannen; 
J)a|)roh  J)iudangardi  Gujjs  wailameryada, 
yah  whazuh  in  izai  nau}>yada. 

17  ip  azetizo  ist  himin  yah  airj^a 
hiudai'leijjan,  J)au  witodis  ainana  writ 
gadriusan. 

18  Whazuh  sa  afletands  qen  seina,  yah 
lingands  an})ara,  hoi'ino]) ;  yah  whazuh 
saei  afleitana  liugaij;,  horinoj). 


19  Aj)J)an  manne  sums  was  gabigs,  yah 
gawasids  was  paurpaurai,  yah  bwssaun, 
yah  waila  wisands  daga  whammeh  bairh- 
taba. 

20  I|j  unleds  sums  was,  namin  haitans 
Lazarus,  sah  atwaurpans  was  du  daura 
is  banyo  fulls, 

21  Yah  gairnida  saj?  itan  drauhsno, 
|)izo  driusandeino  af  biuda  ))is  gabeigins, 

;  akei  yah  hundos  atrinuandans, 

bilaigodeduu  banyos  is. 

22  War])  Jjan,  gaswiltan  ]?amma  un- 
ledin,  yah  briggan  fram  aggilum  in 
barma  Abrahamis.  Gaswalt  J)an  yah  sa 
gabeiga,  yah  gafulhans  war]j. 

23  Yah  in  halyai  ushafyands  augona 
seina,  wisands  in  balweinim,  gasawh 
pan  Abraham  fairrajsro,  yah  Lazzaru 
»n  barmim  is. 

24  Yah  is  ufhropyands, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

))eowian ;  odde  he  anne  hata]?,  and 
oderne  lufa]) ;  odde  he  anum  folga]?, 
and  oderne  forhoga}).  And  ge  ne  magon 
Gode  Jjeowian  and  weoruld-welan. 

14  Das  )?ing  ealle  da  Farisei  gehyrdon, 
da  de  gifre  weeron,  and  hig  hine  tseldon. 

15  Da  cwsejj  he  to  him,  Ge  synd,  de 
eow-sylfe  beforan  mannum  gerihtwisia}) ; 
sojjlice  God  can  eowre  heortan,  fordam 
de  beforan  Gode  ys  ascuniendlic,  dost 
mannum  heah  ys. 

1 6  Seo  06  and  witegan  od  lohannem ; 
and  of  him  is  bodod  Godes  rice,  and 
ealle  on  dset  strangnesse  wyrca]). 

17  Eadre  is  dset  heofen  and  eorjje 
gcAviton,  donne  an  staef  of  dsere  » 
fealle. 

18  ^'Ic  man  de  his  wif  forleet,  and 
oder  nim|),  se  unriht-hsemjj ;  and  se  de 
doet  forlsetene  wif  nimj),  se  unriht- 
hsemjj.''' 

19  Sum  welig  man  wees,  and  he  wees 
gescryd  mid  purpuran,  and  mid  twine, 
and  dteghwamlice  riclice  gewistfullode. 

20  And  sum  wsedla  wtes,  on  naman 
Lazarus,  se  Iseg  on  his  dura  swyde 
forwundod, 

21  And  wilnode  dset  he  hine  of  his 
crumum  gefylde,  de  of  his  beode  feollon, 
and  him  nan  man  ne  sealde  ;  ac  hund- 
as  comon,  and  his  wunda  liccedon. 

22  Da  wses  geworden,  dset  se  wsedla 
for})-ferde,  and  hine  englas  bseron  on 
Abrahames  greadan.  Da  wear))  se  wel- 
ega  dead,  and  wses  on  helle  gebyrged. 

23  Da  ahof  he  his  eagan  upp,  da  he 
on  dam  tintregum  wfes,  and  gescah 
feorran  Abraham,  and  Lazarum  on  his 
greadan. 

24  Da  hrymde  he  and  cwsej),  Eala 
fabler  Abraham,  gemiltsa  me,  and  send 
Lazarum,  dset  he  dyppe  his  fingeres  li}> 
on  wsetere,  and  mine  tungan  gecsele ; 
fordam  de  ic  com  on  dis  lige  cwylmed. 


XVI.  14-24-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

loriHs ;  forsothe  ether  he  schal  hate  oon, 
and  loue  the  totliir  ;  ether  he  schal  cleue 
to  oon,  and  dispise  the  otliir.  ^e  mown 
not  scrue  to  God  and  to  riches. 

1 4  Forsoth  Farisees,  that  weren  coucyt- 
ouse,  herden  alle  thes  thingis,  and  thei 
scornyden  him. 

15  And  he  seidc  to  hem,  ^e  it  hen, 
that  iustifyen  5011  bifore  men  ;  sothli 
God  knowith  jom'e  hertis,  for  that  thing 
that  is  hi;  to  men,  is  abominacioun 
anemptis  God. 

16  The  lawe  and  prophetis  til  to  John  ; 
fro  that  tyme  the  rcwme  of  God  is 
pvechid,  and  ech  man  makith  violence 
iu  to  it. 

17  Forsothe  it  is  lijter  hcucne  and 
erthe  to  passe  ouer,  than  0  titil  falle  fro 
the  lawe. 

18  Ech  man  that  forsakith  his  wyf, 
and  weddith  another,  doith  auoutrie ; 
and  he  that  weddith  the  wi/f  forsakun 
of  the  hosebonde,  doith  auoutrie. 

1 9  Sum  man  was  rich,  and  was  clothid 
in  purpur,  and  biys,^  and  he  eet  ech  day 
schynyngli. 

20  And  ther  was  sum  beggere,  Lazarus 
by  name,  that  lay  ful  of  bylis  at  his 
5ate, 

21  Coueytinge  to  be  fillid  of  the 
crummes,  that  felden  doun  fro  the  riche 
maunis  boord,  and  no  man  5af  to  him ; 
but  and  houndis  canien,  and  lickiden  his 
bylis. 

22  Forsothe  it  was  don,  that  the  beg- 
gere deiede,  and  was  borun  of  aungels 
in  to  Abrahams  bosum.  Forsothe  and 
the  riche  man  is  deed,  and  is  biried  in 
belle. 

23  Forsothe  he  reysinge  his  y;en, 
whanne  he  was  in  turmeutis,  sy;  Abra- 
ham a  fer,  and  Lazarus  in  his  bosum. 

24  And  he  criyngc  seyde,  Fadir  Abra- 
ham, haue  mercy  on  me,  and  send  Laza- 
rus, that  he  dippc  the  laste  part  of  his 
fyngur  in  watir,  and  kelc  my  tunge ; 
for  I  am  turmcutid  in  this  flawmc. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


383 


for  other  he  shall  hate  the  one,  and  love 
the  other  ;  or  els  he  shall  lenc  to  the 
one,  and  despyse  the  other.  Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon. 

1 4  All  these  thinges  herde  the  Pharises 
also,  which  were  eoveteous,  and  they 
mocked  him. 

15  And  he  sayd  vnto  them.  Ye  are 
they,  which  iustifie  youre  selves  before 
men  ;  but  God  knoweth  youre  hertes, 
for  that  which  men  magnifie,  is  abhomi- 
nablc  in  the  sight  of  God. 

1 6  The  lawe  and  the  prophcttes  raygned 
vntyll  the  tyme  of  Jhon ;  seuce  that 
tyme  the  kyngdom  of  God  is  preached, 
and  every  man  stryveth  to  goo  in. 

1 7  Soner  shall  heven  and  erth  perisshe, 
then  won  title  of  the  lawe  shall  perisshe. 

t8  Whosoever  forsaketh  his  "v^'^'fe,  and 
marieth  anothei*,  breakcth  matrimony ; 
and  every  man  which  marieth  her  that 
is  divorsed  from  her  husbande,  com- 
mitteth  advoutry  also. 

19  There  was  a  certayne  riche  man, 
which  was  clothed  in  purple,  and  fyne 
raynes,  and  fared  deliciously  every  daye. 

20  And  there  was  a  certayne  begger, 
name  Lazarus,  whiche  laye  at  hys  gate 
full  off  scores, 

2 1  Desyrynge  to  be  refrcsshcd  Avith 
the  cromes,  whiche  fell  fi'om  the  ryche 

mannes  borde, ;  neverthelesse  the 

dogges  cam,  and  licked  his  soores. 

22  And  yt  fortuned,  that  the  begger 
dyed,  and  was  can-yed  by  the  an  ge lies 
into  Abrahams  bosome.  The  riche  man 
also  died,  and  was  buried  in  hell. 

23  When  he  lifte  vppe  his  eyes,  as  be 
was  in  tourmcntes,  he  sawc  Abraham  a 
farre  off,  and  Lazainis  in  his  bosome. 

24  And  crycd  and  sayd.  Father  Abra- 
ham, have  mercy  on  me,  and  sende 
Lazarus,  that  he  maye  depe  the  tippe 
off  his  fynger  in  water,  and  cole  my 
tongc ;  for  I  am  tcnu-mented  in  this 
flame. 


384 


GOTHIC,  360. 


3  .  .  .  .  ,  .  yabai  frawaurkyai  bro|)ar 
Jjeins,  gasak  imma ;  yah  ^an  yabai 
idreifjo  sik,  fraletais  imma. 

4  Yah  yabai  sibun  sin}jam  ana  dag 
frawaurkyai  du  |)us,  yah  sibun  sinjjam 
ana  dag  gawandyai  silv,  qij)ands,  Idreigo 
mik,  fraletais  imma. 

5  Yah  qejjun  apaustauleis  du  Frauyin, 
Biauli  uns  galaubein. 

6  Qa]j  pan  Frauya,  Yabai  habaidedeijj 
galaubein  swe  kaurno  sinajiis,  ai})|)au 
JUS  yabai  qijjeijj  du  bairabagma  J)amma^ 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.    [Si,  Luke 

25  Da  cwse]?  Abraham,  Eala  sunu, 
ge))enc,  dset  du  god  onfenge  on  dinum 
life,  and  gelice  Lazarus  onfeng  yfel ;  nu 
ys  des  gefrefrod,  and  dii  eart  cwylmed. 

26  And  on  eallum  dissum  betweox  us 
and  eow  is  mycel  dwolma  getrymed  ; 
da  de  "willajj  heonon  to  eow  faran,  ne 
magon,  ne  danon  faran  hidere. 

27  Da  cw3e]j  he.  Feeder,  ic  bidde  de,, 
dset  du  sende  hine  to  mines  feeder  huse. ' 

28  Ic  hsebbe  fi'f  gebrodi'u,  dset  he  cyde 
him,  dset  hig  ne  cumon  on  dissa  tintrega 
stowe. 

29  Da  ssede  Abraham  hym,  Hig  hab- 
ba]j  Moysen  and  witegan ;  hig  hlyston 
him. 

30  Da  cwse|)  he,  Nese,  feeder  Abraham^ 
ac  hig  d6)>  dsed-bote,  gif  hwylc  of  deaj^e 
to  him  i-eer\>. 

31  Da  cwse]>  he,  Gif  hig  ne  gehyra]> 
Moysen  and  da  witegan,  ne  hig  ne  ge- 
lyfa)?,  deah  hwylc  of  deajje  arise. 


Chap.  XVII.  ^  i  Da  cwss]>  he  to  his 
leorning-cnihtum,  Unmihtlic  is  dset  ge- 
drefednyssa  ne  cumon  ;  wa  dam,  de  hig, 
Jjurh  cuma}?. 

2  Nyttre  him  wsere,  dset  an  cweorn- 
stan  sy  gecnyt  abiitan  his  sweoran,  and 
si  on  sse  beworpen,  donne  he  gedrefde 
anne  of  dyssum  lytlin^um. 

3  WarniaJ)  eow  ;  gyf  din  brodor  syng- 
a]j,  cid  hym  ; ^ 


4  And  gif  he  on  dseg  seofen  sidum 
syngaj),  and  seofen  sidum  to  de  on  dfeg 
gecyrred  by];,  and  cwyj),  Hit  me  of- 
J)inc]?,  forgyf  hit  him. 

5  Da  cwsedon  his  apostolas,  Drihten,. 
geyc  urne  geleafan. 

6  Da  cwse])  Drihten,  Gif  ge  hsefdon 
geleafan  swa  senepes  corn,  ge  sajdon 
dissum  treowe,  Sy  du  awyrtwalod,  and 


•    YI.  25.-XVII.  6.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

25  And  Abraliara  seide  to  liim,  Sonc, 
liauo  juynde,  for  thou  liast  rcccyued 
<j;ood  thingis  in  tlii  lyf,  and  Lazarus  also 
yucle  thingis ;  sothli  he  is  now  coni- 
fortid,  but  tliou  art  turinentid. 

26  And  in  alle  tlies  thingis  a  greet 
derk  ])lace^  is  stablischid  by  twixc  vs 
and  50U  ;  that  tlici  that  wolcn  fro  hennis 
])asse  to  50U,  mown  not,  nether  fro 
thennis  ]>asse  oner  lii(Uir. 

27  And  he  seide,  Therforc  I  prcye 
thee,  fadir  Abraham,  that  thou  scndc 
liini  in  to  the  hous  of  my  fadir. 

28  For  I  hauc  fyuc  bretheren,  that  he 
witnesse  to  liem,  lest  also  thei  come  in 
to  this  place  ot"  turmcntis. 

29  And  Abraliam  seide  to  him,  Thei 
ban  Morses  and  the  prophetis ;  hecre 
thei  hem. 

30  And  he  seide,  Nay,  fadir  Abraham, 
but  if  ony  of  deede  men  schal  go  to 
hem,  thei  pchulen  do  penaunce. 

31  Forsothe  he  sej'de  to  him,  If  thei 
heere  not  Moyses  and  the  prophetis, 
neither  if  ony  of  deede  men  schal  ryse 
a5en,  thei  schulen  bileue  to  him. 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


385 


CiiAP.  XVIL  I  And  he  seide  to  his 
disciplis,  It  is  inpossible  that  sclaundris 
come  not ;  but  woo  to  him,  by  whom 
thei  comcn. 

2  It  is  more  profitable  to  him,  if  a 
mylne  stoon  be  put  a  boutc  his  necke, 
i,nd  he  be  caat  in  to  the  see,  than  that 
he  sclaundre  oon  of  thes  litle. 

3  Take  5e  heede  to  50U  silf ;  if  thi  bro- 
ther hath  synned  a3ens  thee,  blame  him  ; 
and  if  he  schal  do  penaunce,  for5yue  to 
him. 

4  And  if  seuene  sithis  in  the  day  he 
s.-hal  synne  a5ens  thee,  and  seuene  sithis 
ill  the  day  he  schal  be  conuertid  to 
thee,  seyinge.  It  forthenkith  me,  for3yue 
to  him. 

r,  And  the  postlis  seidcn  to  the  Lord, 
ICncreesse  feith  to  vs. 

6  Forsoth  the  Lord  seyde,  If  50  schulen 
liaue  feith  a,s  the  corn  of  syneuey,  50 
schulen  seye  to  this  more  tree,  Be  thou 


25  Abraham  sayd  vnto  hym,  Sonne, 
remcmbre,  that  thou  in  thy  lyfetyme 
rcccavcdst  thy  pleasure,  and  contrary 
wyse  Lazarus  paync  ;  nowe  therforc  is  he 
comforted,  anil  thowc  art  pnnnysshed. 

26  Ueyonde  all  this  bitwene  you  and 
vs  there  is  a  greate  space  sett ;  so  that 
they  which  wolde  goo  from  hence  to 
you,  canot,  nether  from  thence  come 
bidder. ' 

27  And  he  sayd,  I  praye  the  therforc, 
father,  send  him  to  my  fathers  housse. 

28  For  I  have  fyve  brethren,  for  to 
warne  them,  lest  they  also  come  into 
this  place  off  tourment. 

29  Abraham  sayd  vnto  hym,  They  have 
Moses  and  the  prophet tes  ;  lett  them 
heare  them. 

30  And  he  sayd,  Naye,  father  Abraham, 
but  yf  Avon  from  the  ded  cam  vnto 
them,  they  wolde  repent. 

31  He  sayd  vnto  hym,  Yf  they  heare 
not  Moses  and  the  prophetes,  nether 
woU  they  belevc,  though  won  roose  from 
deeth  agayne. 


Chap.  XVII.  i  Then  sayde  he  to 
his  disciples,  It  can  not  be  avoyded  but 
that  occasions  of  evyll  come ;  neverthe- 
lesse  wo  be  to  hym,  throw  whom  they 
come. 

2  It  Averc  better  for  hym,  if  a  mylstone 
wer  hanged  aboute  his  necke,  and  that 
he  Avere  cast  into  the  sec,  rather  then  he 
shulde  offende  won  oft"  this  litle  Avonf 

3  Take  hede  to  youre  selves ;  if  thy 
brother  trespas  agaynst  the,  rebuke 
hym  ;  and  if  he  repent,  foi-geve  hym. 

4  And  though  he  syn  agenst  the  seven 
tymes  in  avou  daye,  and  seven  tymes  in 
a  daye  tourne  agayne  to  the,  sayinge,  It 
repenteth  me,  forgcve  hym. 

5  And  the  apostles  sayde  vnto  the 
Lorde,  In  crease  oure  faytli. 

6  The  Lorde  sayde,  Y^  ye  had  fayth 
lyke  a  grayne  off  mustard  sede,  and 
shulde   saye  vnto  thys  sycarayne   tree, 

c  c 


i8G 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Uslausei  J>uk  us  waurtim,  yali  ussatei  1 
])uk   'ill   mai'ein,  yah   anclhausidedi    j'au 
izwis. 

7  Wlias  ]>nn  izwara  skalk  aigands  ai"- 
yaiidau,  ail^Jjau  haklandan,  saei  atgagg- 
andin  af  haijjyai;  qipai,  Suns,  liiudarlei]>, 
anvikkumbei ; 

8  Ak  niu  qijji}?  du  imma,  Manwei, 
wha  du  nalit  matyau,  yah  bigaurdans, 
andbahtei  mis,  unte  matya  yah  drigka, 
yah  bijje  gamatyis  yah  gadrigkais  Jju ; 

9  Iba  ]>ank  ))us  fairhaitis  skalka  yain- 
amma,  uute  gatawida  jjatei  auabudan 
was?     Ni  man. 

10  Swa  yah  yus  j^an  tauyaijj  alia  |)0 
a,nabudanona  izwis,  qipiaij),  patei  skalk- 
os  unbrukyai  si}nim,  unte  j^atei  skul- 
dedum  tauyan  gatawidedum. 

11  Yah  war]j,  mij^jjanei  iddya  is  in 
lairusalem,  yah  is  ];airhiddya  ])airh 
midya  Samarian,  yah  Galeilaian. 

12  Yah  inngaggandin  imma  in  suma 
haimo,  gamotideduu  imma  taihun  J^ruts- 
fillai  mans,  J^aih  gastoJ?un  fairraj^ro, 

13  Yah  silbans  ushofon  stibna,  qi])- 
andans,  Tesu,  talzyaud,  armai  unsis. 

14  Yah  gaumyands,  qa]j  du  im,  Gagg- 
andans,  ataugeij?  izwis  gudyam.  Yah 
war]?,  mij)j3anei  galijjun,  gahrainidai 
waur]?un. 

15  Ij)  ains  |)an  ize,  gaumyands  Jjammei 
brains  war]j,  gawandida  sik,  mip  stibnai 
mikilai  hauhyands  Gu]j. 

16  Yah  draus  ana  andawleizn  faui'a 
fotum  is,  awiliudonds  imma ;  sah  was 
Samareites. 

17  Andhafyands  ])an  lesus  qa]>,  Wm 
taihun  ])ai  gahrainidai  waur]jun,  ij?  J)ai 
niun  whar  1 

18  Ni  bigitanai  waurjjun,  gawandyand- 
ans,  giban  wuljju  Gujja,  niba  sa  alya- 
kunya. 

19  Yah  qaj)  du  imma,  Usstandands, 
gagg  ;  galaubeins  ])eina  ganasida  ))uk. 

20  Fraihans  |;an  fram  Fareisaium, 
whan  qimi];  ])iudangardi  Gu])S,  andhof 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

aplantod    on    S£e,    and    hit    hyrsumode 
eow. 

7  Hwylc  eower  hsef)?  ercgendne  Jjeow, 
odde  sccp  Ifesgendne,  dam,  of  dam  jecere 
gelnvorfenum,  he  him  s5na  seg]?,  Ga, 
and  site ; 

8  And  ne  scgjj  him,  Geai-wa,  dset  ic 
ete,  and  gyrd  de,  and  pena  me,  da 
hwyle  de  ic  ete  and  drince,  and  syddan 
du  ytst  and  drincst ; 

9  Wenst  dii  hpefjj  se  j^eowa  cenigne 
l^anc,  fordam  de  he  dyde  dfet  him  bebod- 
en  wees  1     Ne,  wene  ic. 

10  Swa  ys  eow  donne  ge  do]?  eall  dset 
eow  beboden  ys,  cweda}>,  Unnytte 
jjeowas  we  synd,  we  dydon  dset  we  don 
sceoldon.'*' 

1 1  Da  he  ferde  to  Hierusalem,  he  eode 
Jjurh  midde  Samai'ian,  and  Galileam. 

12  And  da  l:e  eode  on  sum  castel,  him 
agen  urnon  tyn  hreofe  weras,  da  st5don 
hig  feorran, 

13  And  hyra  stefna  up-ahofon,  and 
cwcedon,  Hselend,  bebeodend,  gemiltsa 
us. 

14  Da  he  hig  geseah,  da  cwsej?  he, 
Ga}),  and  setf-wa]>  eow  dam  sacerdum. 
Da  hig  ferdon,  hig  wurdon  gecleensode. 

15  Da  hyra  an  geseah,  dset  he  ge- 
clsensod  wies,  da  cyrde  he,  mid  mycelre 
stefne  God  nicersiende. 

16  And  feoll  to  Lys  fotum,  and  hym 
])ancode  ;  and  des  wass  Samaritanisc. 

17  Da  cwpejj  ge  Hs^lend  him  and- 
swariende,  Hii  ne  synd  tyn  geclaensode, 
hwfer  synd  da  nigone  1 

18  Najs  gemet,  se  de  agen-hwurfe,  and 
Gode  Avuldor  sealde,  biiton  des  eel- 
fi-emeda. 

1 9  Da  cwjep  he,  A'ris,  and  ga  ;  fordam 
de  din  geleafa  de  halne  gedyde. 

20  Da  acsodon  hine  da  Farisei,  hwsen- 
ne  Godes  I'lce  come,  da  andswarode  he, 


XVII.  7-30.]  'WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

iliawim  vp  by  the  route,  and  be  jilauntid 
oner  iu  to  the  sec,  and  it  sohal  oheye  to 
5011. 

7  Fovsotlie  Avlio  of  5011  liauynp;e  a  scr- 
uaunt  cringe,  other  lesowyngc  oxun, 
which  scith  to  him,  turnyd  a5cu  fro  the 
fcehl,  Anoon  go,  and  sitto  to  incte ; 

8  And  seith  not  to  him,  ^Take  thou 
rcdy,  that  I  soupe,  and  girdc  thee,  and 
mynystrc  to  nic,  til  I  cte  and  drynke, 
and  aftir  thcs  thingis  thou  schalt  etc 
and  drynke  ; 

9  Whcr  he  hath  grace  to  that  seruaunt, 
for  he  dide  this  that  he  comamidide  to 
him  ]    Nay,  I  gesse. 

10  So  also  ^e  whanne  56  han  don  alle 
thingis  that  ben  comaundid  to  50U,  seie 
t5C,  We  ben  vnproHtable  seruauutis,  ■we 
ban  dou  this  that  we  0U5te  to  do. 

1 1  And  it  was  done,  the  while  Jhesu 
wente  in  to  Jerusalem,  he  passide  thorw 
tlie  myddel  of  Samarie,  and  of  Galilee. 

1 2  And  whanne  he  entride  in  to  sum 
castel,  ten  leprouse  men  camen  a5ens 
him,  whiche  stoode  afer, 

1 3  And  reyside  the  vois,  seiynge,  Jhesu, 
coniaunduur,  luiue  mercy  on  vs. 

14  Whiche  as  he  syj,  he  seide.  Go  ^e, 
schewe  56  ;ou  to  prestis.  And  it  was 
don,  the  while  thci  wenten,  thei  wereu 
clensid. 

15  Forsothe  oon  of  hem,  as  he  sy3  for 
he  was  clensid,  wente  a3en,  magnyfiynge 
God  with  greet  vois. 

16  And  he  feldc  doun  in  to  the  face 
bifore  his  feet,  doynge  thankingis ;  and 
this  was  a  Samaritan. 

17  Forsothe  Jhesu  answeringe  seide, 
Wiicr  ten  ben  not  clensid,  and  where 
ben  the  nyne  ? 

18  Noon  is  foundun,  that  turnyde 
a3en,  and  jaf  glorie  to  God,  no  but  this 
alien. 

19  And  he  seith  to  him,  Ryse  thou,  go 
thou  ;  for  thi  feith  hath  maad  thee  saaf. 

20  Forsothe  he  axid  of  Pharisees, 
whanne  the  rewmc  of  God  comcth,  an- 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


387 


Plucke  thy  silfe  vppc  by  the  rotes,  and 
plant  thy  silfe  in  the  sec,  he  shoulde 
obey  you. 

7  Which  of  you  havynge  a  scrvauntc  a 
plowyngo,  or  fedynge  catcll,  wolde  saye 
vnto  hym,  when  he  were  come  from  the 
fclde,  Goo  quickly,   and  sitt   doune  to       v 
meatc  ; 

8  And  rather  saycth  not  to  hym,  Dressc, 
wherwith  I  maye  suppc,  and  apoynt  thy 
silfe,  and  serve  me,  tyll  I  have  eaten 
and  dronkcn,  and  aftcrwarde  eate  thou 
and  drynke  thou ; 

9  Doctli  he  thanke  that  servaunt,  be- 
cause he  did  that  which  was  commaunded 
vnto  hym  1  I  trowc  not. 

10  Soo  lykewyse  ye  when  ye  have  done 
all  thoose  tliynges  which  are  commaunded 
vnto  you,  saye.  We  are  vnprofitable  ser- 
vauutcs,  we  have  done  that  which  was 
oure  ducty  to  do. 

11  And  it  chaunsed,  as  he  went  to 
Jerusalem,  that  he  passed  thorG'.ve  Sa- 
maria, and  Galile. 

12  And  as  he  entred  into  a  certayne 
toune,  there  met  hym  ten  men  that  were 
lepers,  which  stode  a  farre  of, 

13  And  put  forth  their  voices,  and 
sayde,  Jesu,  master,  have  mercy  on  vs. 

1 4'  When  he  sawc  them,  he  sayde  vnto 
them.  Goo,  and  shcwe  youre  selves  to 
the  prestes.  And  hit  chaunsed,  as  they 
went,  they  wei'e  clensed. 

15  And  Avon  of  them,  when  he  sawe 
that  he  was  clensed,  turned  backe  a- 
gayne,  and  with  a  loude  voice  praysed 
God. 

16  And  fell  doune  on  his  face  at  his 
fete,  and  gave  hym  thankcs  ;  and  the 
same  was  a  Samaritan. 

17  Jesus  answered  and  sayde.  Arc  there 
not  ten  clensed,  but  were  are  those 
nyne  1 

1 8  There  are  not  founde,  that  returned 
agane,  to  geve  God  prayse,  save  only 
this  straungcr. 

19  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Aryse, 
and  goo  thy  waye  ;  thy  fayth  hath 
saved  the. 

20  When  he  was  dcmaundcd  off  the 
Pharises,  when  the  kyngdom   off  God 

c  c  2 


388 


GOTHIC,  360. 


im,    yali    qaj>,    Ni    qimijj    })iudangardi 
Gujjs  mi|)  atwitalnai, 

21  Nih  qi[)aiKl,  Sai !  lier,  ai}))iau  sai  ! 
yainui- ;  sai  !  auk  Jjiudangardi  Gu])S  in 
'izvAs  i'st. 

22  Qajj  Jjan  du  siponyam,  Aj)]5an  qim- 
aud  diigos,  Jjan  gairnei|)  ainana  ])ize  dage 
sunaus  mans  gasaiwhan,  yah  ni  ga- 
saiwlii)). 

23  Yah  qijjand  'izwis,  Sai !  her,  aijjjjau 
sai !  yaiuar.  Ni  galei])ai]5,  nih  hiist- 
yai}j; 

24  SwasAve  ralhtis  lauhmoni  lauhat- 
yandei  us  })amma  uf  himina  in  ]>ata  uf 
hiniina  skeini]j,  swa  wairj)!])  sunus  mans 
in  daga  scinamma. 

25  A])];an  faurjjis  shal  manag  ga])ulan, 
yah  uskiusada  frani  J)amnia  kunya. 

26  Yah  swaswe  war);  in  dagam  Nauel- 
is,  swah  waii"])i])  yah  in  dagam  sunaus 
mans. 

27  Etun  yah  drugkun,  liugaidedun, 
yah  liugaidos  wesun,  und  Jjanei  dag 
galaijj  Nauel  in  arka ;  yah  qam  mid- 
yasweipalns,  yah  fraqistida  allans. 

28  Samaleiko  yah  swe  war])  in  dagam 
Lodis,  etun  yah  drugkun,  bauhtedun 
yah  frabauhtedun,  satidedun  timridedun ; 

29  II?  Jiammei  daga  iisiddya  Lod  us 
Saudaumim,  riguida  swibla  yah  fuuin 
us  himina,  yah  fraqistida  allaim. 

30  Bi  jiamma  Avair})iJ>,  J^amma  daga  ei 
sunus  mans  andhulyada. 

31  In  yainamma  daga  saei  siyai  ana 
hrota,  yah  kasa  is  in  razna,  ni  atsteigai 
dak)})  niman  |50 ;  yah  saei  ana  haijjyai, 
samaleiko  ni  gawandyai  sik  ibukana.  .  . 


32  Gamuneil)  qenais  Lodis. 

33  Saei  sokeijj  saiwala  seina  ganasyan, 
fraqistei|)  izai ;  yah  saei  fraqistei]?  izai 
in  uieina,  ganasyi)?  |jo. 

34  Qijia  izwis,  l^atei  j^izai  naht  twai 
"\va;rj;and  ana  ligra-  samiu,  aius  usnim- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

and    cw0e]>,  Ne    cym]j    Godes  rice   mid 
begymene, 

2 1  Ne  hig  ne  cwedaj),  Efne  !  her  hyt 
ys,  odde  dar ;  Godes  rice  is  betwynan 
cow. 

22  Da  cwsejj  he  to  his  leorning-cnilit- 
um.  Da  dagas  cuma];,  donne  ge  ge- 
wilniajj  diet  ge  geseon  senne  dteg  man- 
nes  suna,  and  ge  ne  geseo}?. 

23  And  hig  secga[)  eow,  Her  he  is, 
and  dar  he  is.    Ne  fare  ge,  ne  ne  fyliap> ; 

24  WitodL'ce  swa  se  llg-rsesc  lyhtende 
scinj)  under  heofone  on  da  ])ing  de 
under  heofone  synd,  swa  bij)  manner 
sunu  on  his  dsege. 

25  illl'ryst  him  gebyre]?  da^t  he  feki 
))inga  I'olige,  and  been  fram  disse  cneor- 
ysse  aworpen. 

26  And  swa  on  Noes  dagum  wpes  ge- 
worden,  swa  beo]?  mannes  suna  to- 
cyme. 

27  Hig  £cton  and  druncon,  and  wifodon, 
and  wseron  to  gyftum  gesealde,  od  done 
dseg  de  Noe  on  earce  code ;  and  flod 
com,  and  ealle  forspikle. 

28  Eall-swa  wees  geworden  on  Lo])es 
dagum,  hig  Eeton  and  druncon,  and 
bohton  and  sealdon,  and  plautedon  and 
timbredon  ; 

29  Sojjlice  on  dam  drege  de  Lo|)  code 
of  Sodoma,  hyt  riude  f^'r  and  swell  of 
heofone,  and  ealle  forspikle. 

30  ^fter  dysum  Jjingum  bi].\  on  dam}; 
dsege  de  mannes  sunu  onwrigen  bij?.         ;, 

31  On  dam  dsege  se  de  bijj  on  |3ecene,{; 
and  his  fatu  on  huse,  ne  stihjj  he  nyderj 
dset  he  hig  nime  ;  and  se  de  bijj  onj 
secere.  ne  Avent  he  on-bsec I 


32  Beojj  ge  myndige  Lo))es  wifes. 

33  Swa  hwylc  swa  secj)  his  sawle  ge- 
don  hfile,  sehig  forspil]);  and  swa  hwylcl 
swa  hig  forsi)iljj,  se  hig  geliffsesta}). 

34  S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  on  dsere  nihte 
beoj?  twegen  on  bedde,  an  byj)  genumen, 


XV ir.  21-34.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

s\\oriilc  to  hem,  and  scidc,  The  rewmc 
vi  (iod  Cometh  not  with  aspying, 

2  I  Xethir  tliei  sehulen  seye,  Lo  !  here, 
ctluT  lo  !  there  ;  forsothe  lo  !  the  rewme 
of  (lod  is  with  ynne  30U. 

r:  And  he  seide  to  his  disciplis,  Daycs 
-.  iilcu  eomc,  whanne  5e  sehulen  desyre 
t<i  se  0  day  of  manuis  sone,  and  5c 
t-chulen  not  se. 

23  And  tliei  sehulen  soye  to  50U,  Lo  ! 
here,  and  lo  !  there.  Xyle  50  go,  nether 
sue  5e  ; 

24  For  as  leit  schynynge  fro  vndir 
heuenc  schyneth  on  thoo  thingis  that 
lion  vndir  heueue,  so  mannis  sone  schal 
hf  in  his  day. 

;  25  Forsothe  first  it  bihoueth  him  to 
suttVe  many  thingis,  and  to  be  reproued 
of  this  gencracioun. 

26  And  as  it  was  don  in  the  daycs  of 
Noe,  so  it  schal  be  in  the  dayes  of  manuis 
sone. 

27  Thei  eeten  and  drnnlcen,  and  wed- 
<lideu  wyues,  and  weren  jouun  to  wed- 
dingis,  til  in  to  the  day  in  which  Noe 
cntride  in  to  his  schip  ;  and  the  greet 
flood  cam,  and  loste  alle. 

28  Also  as  it  was  don  in  the  dayes  of 
Loth,  thei  eeten  and  drunken,  boujten 
and  seelden,  plantiden  and  byldeden  ; 

29  Sothli  in  what  day  Loth  wcnte  out 
of  Sodom,  the  Lord  rcynede  fier  and 
brymstoon  fro  heuene,  and  loste  alle. 

I  30  Vp  this  thing  it  schal  be,  in  what 
clay  mannis  sone  schal  be  schewid. 

31  In  that  our  he  that  schal  be  in  the 
roof,  and  his  vesels  in  the  hous,  come 
he  not  doun  to  take  hem  awei ;  and  he 
that  schal  be  in  the  feeld,  also  turne  not 
a5en  biliynde 

32  Be  5e  myndcful  of  the  wyf  of  Loth. 

33  Who  euere  schal  seke  to  make  his 
lyf  saf,  schal  leese  it ;  and  who  euere 
schal  leese  it,  sclial  quykene  it. 

34  I  seye  to  50U,  in  that  nijt  tweync 
sehulen   be  in  o  bed,  oon  schal   be  rc- 


TYNDALE,  ir,2  6. 


."WD 


shnlde  come,  he  answered  them,  and 
sayde,  Tlie  kyngdom  of  Cod  connneth 
not  with  waytingefore, 

21  Nether  shall  men  saye,  Loo  !  here, 
loo  !  there  ;  for  bcholde  !  the  kyngdom 
of  God  is  within  you. 

22  And  he  sayde  vnto  hys  disciples. 
The  dayes  will  come,  when  ye  shall  de- 
sire to  so  won  daye  of  the  sonne  of  man, 
and  ye  shall  not  se  it. 

23  And  they  shall  saye  to  3'ou,  Se ! 
here,  se  !  there.  Goo  nott  after  them, 
nor  folowe  them  ; 

24  For  as  the  lightenynge  that  apereth 
out  of  the  one  parte  of  the  hevcn  and 
shyneth  vnto  the  other  parte  of  heven, 
soo  shall  the  sonne  of  man  be  in  his 
dayes. 

25  But  fyrst  must  he  suffre  many 
thinges,  and  be  reproved  of  this  nacion. 

26  As  it  happened  in  the  tyine  of  Noe, 
soo  shall  it  be  in  the  tyme  of  the  sonne 
of  man. 

27  They  ate  they  dranke,  they  niaryod 
wyves,  and  were  maryed,  even  vnto  that 
same  daye  that  Noe  went  into  the  arko  ; 
anel  the  Houd  cam,  and  destroyed  them 
all. 

28  Likewise  also  as  it  chaunsed  in  the 
dayes  of  Lot,  they  ate,  thei  dranke,  thei 
bought,  thei  solde,  thei  planted,  they 
bilte ; 

29  And  even  the  same  daye  that  Lot 
went  out  of  Zodom,  hit  rayned  fj're  and 
brymstone  from  heven,  and  destroyed 
them  all. 

30  After  these  ensamples  shall  the 
daye  be,  when  the  sonne  of  man  shall 
apere. 

31  Att  that  daye  he  that  is  on  the 
housse  toppe,  and  his  stufic  in  the 
housse,  lett  hym  nott  come  doune  to 
take  hit  out ;  and  lyke  wysc  lett  not 
him  that  is  in  the  feldes,  turne  backo 
agayne  to  that  he  lefte  behynde  hym. 

32  llcmcmber  Lottes  wyfe. 

33  "Whosoever  will  goo  about  to  save 
his  lyfe,  shall  loose  it ;  and  whosoever 
shall  loose  his  life,  shall  quyckcn  it. 

34  I  tell  yon,  in  that  ny.i;ht  there  shalbe 
two  in  one  becd,  the  one  shalbe  I'cceavcd, 


300  GOTHIC,  360. 

ada,  yah  anjnir  bilei|)acla  ; 

35  Twos  wiiivj-aiid  malandcins  sarnana, 
aina  usiiimada,  yah  aiijjara  blleipada ; 

36 

37  Yali  andliafyandans  qe|)un  du  im- 
ma,  AVhar,  Frauya  1  I]>  is  qaj)  im, 
parei  leik,  yaindre  galisand  sik  araus. 


Chap.  XYIII.  i  Qa]5u]>-]>an  yah  ga- 
yukon  'im,  da  j'animei  sinteiuo  skulun 
bidyan,  yah  ni  wair|)an  usgrudyans  ; 

2  Qijjands,  Staua  was  sums  in  sumai 
baurg,  Gu})  ni  ogands,  yah  mannan  ni 
aistands. 

3  Wasu]5-])an  yah  Aviduwo  in  ))izai 
baurg  yainai,  yah  atiddya  du  imma, 
qi|;andei,  Fraweit  mik  ana  andastaj'ya 
meinamma ; 

4  Yah  ni  wilda  laggai  Avheilai.  Afai-u)?- 
pan  J)ata  qajj  in  sis  silbin,  Yabai  yah 
Gu|>  ni  og,  yah  mannan  ui  aista, 

5  I  J)  in  ])izei  us])riuti)?  mis  so  widuwo, 
fraweita  \o ;  ibai  und  audi  qimandei 
usaglyai  mis. 

6  Qaj)  ))an  Frauya,  HauseiJ),  wha  staua 
inwindi|)os  qi\>i]> ; 

7  I|j  GuJ)  niu  gawrikai  j^ans  gawalid- 
ans  seinans,  j^ans  wopyandans  du  sis 
dagam  yah  nahtam,  yah  usbeidands  ist 
ana  im  ] 

8  A|>[)an  qijja  izwis,  J^atei  gawrikij)  ins 
sprauto.  Ij)  swel'anh,  sunus  mans  qim- 
ands  biugitai  galaubein  ana  airjiai  ? 

9  Qaj)  |)an  du  sumaim,  Jjaiei  silbans 
trauaidedun  sis,  ei  Aveseina  garailitai, 
yah  frakunnandans  Jjaim  an];araim,  ])0 
gayulcon, 

10  Mans  twai  usidd3-cdun  in  alh  bid- 
yan ;  ains  Fareisaius,  yah  anjjar  niot- 
areis. 

1 1  Sa  Fareisaius  standands,  sis  }-o  bad, 
Gu|>,  awiliudo  };us,  unte  ni  im  swaswe 
Jai   anj^arai   mans,   wihvans,  inwindans, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 
and  otter  bi]j  forlseten  ; 

35  Twa  beojj  a:^tg?edere  grindende,  an 
bi|)  genumen,  and  oder  bi])  Isefed ; 

36  Twegen  beo]j  on  tecere,  an  bijj  ge- 
numen, and  oder  \>\\  Igefed. 

37  Da  cwpedon  hig  to  him,  Hwar, 
Drihten  %  Da  cwoe]>  he,  Swa  hwar  swa 
se  lichama  bij),  dyder  beo]?  earnas  ge- 
craderod. 


Chap.  XVIIL  i  Da  Stcde  he  him 
sum  bigspel,  daet  hit  ys  riht  dpet  man 
symle  gebidde,  and  na  geteorige  ; 

2  And  dus  cwaej),  Sum  dema  wses  on 
sumere  ceastre,  se  God  ne  ondred,  ne 
nanne  man  ne  onjjracode. 

3  Da  wses  sum  wuduwe  on  drere 
ceastre,  da  com  heo  to  him,  and  cwoejj, 
AVrec  me  wid  mlune  Avider-wiunan  ; 

4  Da  nolde  he  langre  txle.  ^fter  dam 
da  cwse})  he,  .  .  .  Deali  ic  God  ne  ou- 
drsede,  ne  ic  man  ne  onjjracige, 

5  Deah  fordam  de  deos  wuduwe  me  is 
gram,  ic  wrece  hig ;  de-lees  heo  set 
neahstan  cume  rae  behrojiende. 

6  Da  cw£e]j  Drihten,  Gehyra]?,  hwset 
se  unrihtwisa  dema  cwy]? ; 

7  Sojjlice  ne  dej>  God  his  gecorenra 
wrace,  clypiendra  to  him  dteges  and 
nihtes,  and  he  ge])yhl  on  him  hsefj)  ? 

8  Ic  eow  secge,  da^t  he  rade  hyra 
WTace  dejj.  Deah-hAva^dere  Avenst  du, 
dfenne  mannes  sunu  cym]),  geraet  he 
geleafan  on  eorj^an  % 

9  Da  CAv?e])  he  to  sumum  dis  bigspel, 
de  on  hig  sylfe  truwedon,  and  cdre 
forhogodon,'^ 

10  Twcgcn  men  f6rdon  to  sumum  tem- 
ple daet  hig  hig  geb?cdon  ;  tin  Sundor- 
halga,  and  cder  manful!. 

1 1  Dfi  stod  se  Fariseus,  and  hine  dus 
geb?ed,  God,  de  ic  |;ancas  do,  fordam  de 
ic  ne   com   swylce   cdre  men,   reaferas, 


XVII.  35.-XVIIL  II.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9, 

ccyucd,  and   tlic   totlici-   selial  be   for- 
sakun ; 

35  Twcyc  icymmcn  scliulcu  be  gryiul- 
ingc  to  gidcre,  0011  sclial  be  rcccyucd, 
and  the  totlicr  scbal  be  forsakim  ; 

36  Tweyiie  in  a  feeld,  oon  sehal  be  rc- 
ceyucd,  the  tothcr  sohal  be  forsakun, 

37  Thei  answeiinge  scydon  to  him, 
AVherc,  Lord  '\  A\'hich  soide  to  hem, 
"Where  cucrc  the  body  sclial  be,  also  the 
C'rlis  schulen  be  gederid  to  jridere  thidur. 


Chap.  XYIII.  i  Forsothe  be  seide 
also  a  parable  to  hem,  for  it  bihoueth  to 
preie  eucre,  and  to  fayle  not ; 

2  Se}ange,  Sum  iuge  was  in  sum  citee, 
Avhich  dredde  not  God,  nether  sehaniede 
of  men. 

3  Forsothe  sum  widowe  was  in  that 
citee,  and  sche  cam  to  him,  seyinge, 
Venge  me  of  myn  aduersarie ; 

4  And  he  wolde  not  by  myche  tyme. 
Sothli  aftir  thes  thingis  he  seide  with 
ynne  him  silf,  Thou5  I  drede  not  God, 
and  sehame  not  of  man, 

5  Xethelcs  for  this  widowe  is  hcuy''"  to 
me,  I  schal  venge  hir  ;  lest  at  the  laste 
sche  comynge  strangle  me. 

6  Sothli  the  Lord  seide,  Hcere  5e,  what 
the  domesman  of  wickiduesse  seith  ; 

7  Forsoth  wher  God  schal  not  do  the 
veniaunce  of  his  chosene,  criynge  to 
liim  nyjt  and  day,  and  schal  haue  pa- 
cience  in  hem  1 

8  Sothli  I  seie  to  50U,  for  soone  he 
schal  do  the  veniaunce  of  hem.  Nethe- 
les  gessist  thou,  mannis  sone  comynge 
schal  fynde  feith  in  erthc  1 

9  Forsoth  he  seide  also  to  sum  men, 
that  tristiden  in  hem  silf,  as  ri5tful,  and 
Uispiseden  othere,  this  parable,  seyiuge, 

10  Tweye  men  sti5edcn  in  to  the  tem- 
ple for  to  preie  ;  oon  a  Pharise,  and  the 
tothir  a  pupplican. 

1 1  Forsothe  the  Farise  stondinge,  prai- 
cde  anentis  him  silf  thes  thingis,  sey- 
inge, God,  I  do  thankiugis  to  thee,  for 


TYXDALE,  1526.  391 

and  the  other  shalbc  forsaken  ; 

35  Two  shalbe  also  a  gryndyngc  to 
gcddcr,  the  one  shalbc  rcccavcd,  and  the 
other  forsaken ; 

36 


37  And  they  answered  and  saydc  to 
him,  Whcare,  Lorde  ?  And  he  said  vnto 
them,  Whersoever  the  body  shalbe,  thid- 
ther  will  the  egles  resoorte. 


Chap.  XVIII.  i  He  put  fortli  a  simi- 
litude vnto  them,  signifyinge  that  men 
ought  alwayes  to  praye,  and  not  to  be 
wery  ; 

2  Sayinge,  There  was  a  iudge  in  a  ccr- 
taine  cite,  which  feared  not  God,  nether 
regarded  man. 

3  And  there  was  a  certayne  widdowe 
in  the  same  cite,  whych  cam  vnto  hym, 
sayinge,  Avenge  me  of  myne  adversary ; 

4  And  a  greate  whyle  he  Avolde  noott. 
Afterwarde  he  sayd  vnto  hymsilfe. 
Though  I  feare  nott  God,  nor  care  for 
man, 

5  Yett  because  this  widdowe  ti'oubleth 
me,  I  woU  a  venge  her  ;  lest  at  the  last 
she  come  and  rayle  on  me. 

6  And  the  Lorde  sayd,  Heare  what 
the  vnriglitewes  iudge  sayeth  ; 

7  And  shall  not  God  avenge  his  electe, 
which  crye  nyght  and  daye  vnto  him  ? 
ye,  though  he  difFerre  them, 

8  I  tell  you,  he  will  avenge  them,  and 
that  quicly.  Neverthelesse  when  the 
Sonne  of  man  commeth,  suppose  ye, 
that  he  shall  fynde  faithe  on  ertlie  1 

9  And  he  put  forthe  this  similitude 
vnto  certaine,  which  trusted  in  them 
selves,  that  they  wer  perfect,  and  de- 
spysed  other. 

10  Two  men  went  vp  into  the  temple 
to  praye ;  the  one  a  Pharise,  and  the 
other  a  publican. 

1 1  The  Pharise  stode,  and  prayed  thus 
with  hym  silfe,  God,  I  thanke  the,  that  I 
am  nott  as  other  are,extorsioncrs,vniuste, 


392  GOTHIC,  360. 

horos,  ai}>])au  swaswe  sa  motareis  ; 

1 2  Fasta  twaim  sin|'am  sabbataus,  yali 
afdailya  taihundon  dail  allis  })ize  ga- 
stalda. 

13  Yali  sa  motai-eis  fairrajjro  staud- 
aiids  ni  Avilda  nih  augona  seina  ushaf- 
yau  du  himina,  ak  sloh  in  brusts  seinos, 
qi})ands,  GuJ>  huljjs  siyais  mis,  frawaurlit- 
amma. 

14  Qijja  izwis,  atiddya  sa  garalhtoza 
gataihans  du  gai'da  seiuamma  Jjau  raiht- 
is  yains.  Unte  sawhazuli  saei  hauheij) 
sik  silba  gahnaiwyada,  i]>  saei  hnaiweijj 
sik  silba,  ushauhyada. 

15  Beruii  |;an  du  imma  bavna,  ei  im 
attaitoki ;  gasaiwbaudans  ])an  siponyos, 
andbituu  ins. 

16  I})  lesus  athaitands  ins,  qa|>,  Leti]> 
]>o  barna  gaggan  du  mis,  yah  ni  waryi}) 
])0,  unte  ])ize  swaleikaize  ist  jjiudangardi 

Gu)3S. 

17  Amen  qi))a  izwis,  saei  ni  andnimi]? 
I^iudangardya  Guj^s  swe  barn,  ni  qimij) 
in  izai. 

18  Yab  frah  ina  sums  reike,  qij^ands, 
Laisari  I'iujjciga,  wha  tauyands  libainais 
aiweinons  ai'bya  wairjiau  1 

1 9  Qa|>  Jjan  du  imma  lesus,  Wha  niik 
qijjis  )>iul)eigana  ?  Ni  ainshun  J^iujjeigs, 
niba  ains  Gu]j. 

20  pos  anabusnins  kant,  'N'l  horinos, 
Ni  maurjjiyais,  Ni  hlifais,  Ni  gahuga- 
weitwods  siyais,  Swerai  attan  J^einana 
yah  aijjein. 

21  Ij>  is  qa})idi,  pata  allata  gafastaida 
us  yundai  meinai. 

22  Gahausyands  ]?an  }iata,  lesus  qaj) 
du  imma,  Nauh  ainis  ])us  wan  ist ;  all 
I'atei  habais,  frabugei,  yah  gadailei  un- 
ledaim,  yah  habais  liuzd  iu,  himina  ;  yah 
hiri,  laistyan  mik. 

23  I])  is  gahausyands  |:ata,  gauvs  war]?, 
was  auk  gabeigs  filu. 

24  Gasaiwhands  ]jan  ina  lesus  gaurana 
waui-jjanana  qa]),  WhaiAva  agluba  ]>ai 
faihu  habaudaus  inngaleijjand  in  }jiud- 
angardya  Gujjs  ; 

25  EaJ)izo   allis    ist    ulbandau    J^airh 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

unrihtwise,    unriht-hsemeras,   odde    eac 
swylce  ctes  manfulla ; 

12  Ic  fieste  tuwa  on  wucan,  ic  sylle 
teo}5unga  ealles  dass  cle  ic  haebbe. 

13  Da  st5d  se  manfulla  feorran,  and 
nolde  furctun  his  eagan  ahebban  up  to 
dam  heofone,  ac  he  beot  his  breost,  and 
cwpejj,  God  beo  du  milde  me,  syn- 
fuUum. 

14  S5])lice  ic  eow  secge,  dset  des  ferde 
gevihtwisod  to  his  huse,  .  .  .  Ibrdam 
de  selc  de  hine  upp-ahefjj  hi]'  genyderod, 
and  se  de  hine  nyderajj,  byp  upp-uhafeu. 

15  Da  brohton  lug  cild  to  him,  dset 
he  hig  £et-hrine  ;  da  his  leorniug-cniht- 
as  hie:  o-esawon,  his:  clddon  him. 

16  Da  clypode  se  Hselend  hig  to  hini, 
and  cw8e}>,  Lseta]?  da  Ij'tlingas  to  me 
cuman,  and  ne  forbeode  ge  hig,  swylcera 
ys  Godes  rice.  . 

17  Sol^lice  ;c  eow  secge,  swa  hwylc  swii 
ne  onfehj)  Godes  rice  swa  swa  cild,  ne 
gA'\>  he  on  Godes  rice. 

18  Da  acsode  hine  sum  ealdor,  Gcdne 
lareow,  hwaet  do  ic  dset  ic  ece  lif 
lu-ebbe  ] 

19  Da  cwse))  se  Hselend,  Hwl  segst  du 
me  godne  1  Nis  nun  man  god,  biiton 
God  ana. 

20  Canst  du  da  bebodu,  Ne  ofsleh  dd, 
Ne  f3Tena  dii,  Ne  stel  du,  Ne  leoh  dii, 
Wurba  diune  faeder  and  dine  mcder. 


21  Da  cwiej)  he,  Eall  dis  ic  heold  of 
minre  geogu))e. 

22  ...  .  Da  cw£e|j  se  Hselend,  A'n 
)>ing  de  is  wana ;  syle  eall  dajt  du  hasfst, 
and  syle  eall  dset  ]?earfum,  donne  hsefst 
du  gold-hord  on  heofone  ;  and  cum,  and 
folga  me. 

23  Da  he  das  word  gehyrde,  he  wear}? 
se-unret,  fordam  de  he  wajs  swide  welig. 

24  Da  se  Hfelend  hine  unrctne  geseah, 
he  cwfe]7,  Ealu  hu  earfo|)lice  on  Godes 
rice  gaj)  da  de  feoh  habba}) ; 

25  Eadelicor  ma?g  se  olfend  gau  )mrh 


XVIII.  12-25.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

I  am  not  as  othcre  men,  rnuoynouris, 
\  uiust,  aaiouters,  as  also  this  jmijplican  ; 

1  2  I  faste  twyes  in  the  woke,  I  5yue 
tythis  of  allc  thingis  whiche  I  haue  in 
{losscssioun. 

1  .^  And  the  pupplican  stondinge  a  fer 
noltle  nethir  reyse  the  y5en  to  heiicne, 
but  snioot  his  brest,  seyiuge,  Cod  be 
iucre}ful  to  nic,  synnere. 

14  Trouli  I  scye  to  5011,  this  cam  doun 
in  to  his  lions  institied  of  him.  For  ech 
tluit  enhaunsith  him  silf  schal  be  maad 
!ou5,  and  he  that  mekith  him  silf,  schal 
be  enhaunsid. 

15  For.sothe  tliei  brou5teu  to  him  5onge 
children,  that  he  schulde  touch  hem  ; 
which  thing  whaune  disciplis  sy5en,  thei 
blamyden  hem. 

16  Sothli  Jhesu  clcpingc  to  gidcre 
hem,  scitle,  Suffre  5c  children  to  come 
to  me,  and  nyle  5e  forbcde  hem,  for  of 
siche  is  the  rewme  of  heuenes. 

1 7  Treuli  I  seie  to  50U,  who  euci'e  schal 
not  take  the  kyngdoiu  of  God  as  a  child, 
he  .schal  not  entre  in  to  it. 

18  And  sum  prince  axide  him,  seyiuge, 
Good  maistir,  what  thing  doynge  schal 
I  wclde  euerlastyng  lyf  ? 

19  Sothli  Jhesu  seyde  to  him,  "What 
seist  thou  me  good  \  Xo  man  is  good, 
no  but  God  aloone. 

20  Thou  knowist  the  comaundemcntis. 
Thou  schalt  not  sle,  Thou  sclialt  not  do 
lecchei'ie,  Thou  schalt  not  do  thefte. 
Thou  schal  not  seye  fals  witncssyng, 
Worschipe  fadir  and  modir. 

21  Which  seide,  I  haue  kept  alle  thes 
thingis  fro  my  50uthe. 

22  Which  thing  herd,  Jhesu  seide  to 
him,  3it  o  thing  faylith  to  thee  :  sille 
thou  ulle,  what  euere  thingis  thou  hast, 
and  3yuc  to  pore  men,  and  thou  schalt 
haue  tresour  in  hcuene ;  and  come,  and 
sue  me. 

23  Thes  thingis  herd,  he  was  sorwful, 
for  he  was  ful  riche. 

24  Sothli  Jhesu  seincjc  him  maad  sorw- 
ful seide.  How  hard  thei  that  han  rich- 
essis  schuleu  entre  in  to  tht  rewme  of 
God  : 

25  rorsoth  ii  is  esyer  a  canicl  to  passe 


TYNDALE,  1526.  393 

advoutres,  and  even  as  this  publican  is; 

12  I  fast  twyse  in  the  weke,  I  gcve 
tythe  of  all  that  I  j)ossessc. 

13  And  the  ]niblican  stodc  afarre  of 
and  wolde  not  liftc  vp  his  eyes  to  heven, 
but  smote  hys  brest,  sayinge,  God  be 
mercyfuU  to  me,  a  sinner. 

14  I  tell  you,  this  man  departed  home 
to  his  housse  iustificd  moorc  then  the 
other.  For  every  man  that  exalteth 
him  silfc  shalbe  brought  lowe,  and  he 
that  humbleth  hym  silfe,  shalbe  exalted. 

15  They  brought  vnto  him  also  babes, 
that  he  shuldo  touche  them  ;  when  his 
disciples  sawe  that,  they  rebuked  them. 

16  But  Jesus  called  them  vnto  him, 
and  sayde,  Suffre  children  to  come  vnto 
me,  and  forbidde  tlicm  not,  for  vnto 
souche  belongcth  the  kingdom  of  God. 

17  Verely  I  saye  vnto  j'ou,  whosoever 
receavcth  not  the  kyngdom  of  God  as 
a  chylde,  he  shall  not  enter  there  in. 

18  And  a  certayne  ruler  axed  him, 
sayinge,  Goode  master,  what  ought  I  to 
do  to  obtaine  eternall  lyfe  % 

19  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym.  Why  callcst 
thou  me  goode?  No  man  is  goode,  save 
God  only. 

20  Thou  knowcst  the  commaundmcntes. 
Thou  shalt  nott  commit  advoutry,  Thou 
shalt  nott  kill.  Thou  shalt  nott  stcale. 
Thou  shalt  not  bcarc  falce  witnes, 
Honoure  thy  father  and  thy  mother. 

2 1  And  he  sayde,  All  these  have  I  kept 
from  my  youthe. 

22  When  Jesus  herdc  that,  he  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Yelt  lackest  thou  one  thynge ; 
sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute  it 
vnto  the  povre,  and  thou  shalt  have 
treasure  in  heven ;  and  come,  anil 
folowe  me. 

23  AVhcn  he  heei'd  that,  he  was  hevy, 
for  he  was  ryche. 

24  When  Jesus  sawe  hym  morne  he 
sayde.  With  whath  difficulte  shall  they 
that  have  ryehes  enter  into  the  kyngdom 
off  God ; 

25  Esyer  it  is  for  a  cammell  to  passe 


594 


GOTHIC,  360. 


J)airko  nc])los  l^airlileiljan,  |;au  gabigam- 
111a  'in  |)iudangardya  Gu]7S  galei|-an. 

26  Qej)un  pan  );ai  galiausyaudaus,  An 
whas  mag  ganisan  1 

27  iij5  is  qa]7,  pata  unmaliteigo  at  man- 
nam,  maliteig  ist  at  GuJ;a. 

28  QaJ)  })an  Paitrus,  Sai !  weis  aflai- 
lotum  allata,  yah  laistidedum  jjuk. 

29  I))  is  qa'puh  du  im,  Amen  qij^a 
izwis,  jjatei  ni  ainshun  ist,  l^ize  afletand- 
ane  gard,  aijjj^au  fadrein,  aijjjiau  bro- 
pruns,  aijjjjau  qen,  aij?|3au  barna,  in  jnud- 
angardyos  Gujis, 

30  Saei  ni  andnimai  managfalj)  in  ]'am- 
ma  mela,  yah  in  aiwa  Jjamma  qimandin 
libain  aiweinon. 

3 1  Ganimands  J^an  j'ans  Ab.  qa]>  du  im, 
Sai !  usgaggara  in  lairusalem,  yah  us- 
tiuhada  all,  |?ata  gamelido  )5airh  praufet- 
uns  bi  sunu  mans. 

32  Atgibada  auk  jjiudom,  yah  bilaik- 
ada,  yah  anamahtjada,  yah  bispeiwada  ; 


33  Yah  usbliggwandans,  usqiraand  im- 
ma,  yah  Jji'idyiu  daga  usstandi|>. 

34  Yah  eis  ni  waihtai  jjis  frojjun  ;  yah 
Avas  {jata  waurd  gafulgin  af  im,  yah  ni 
wissedun  Jjo  qijjanona, 

..35  War}j  ]>an,  mijjjjanei  newha  was  is 
laireikon,  blinda  sums  sat  faur  wig  du 
aihtron. 

36  Gahausyands  ]>an  managein  faur- 
gaggandein,  frah,  wha  wesi  Jjata. 

37  Gataihun  Jjan  imma,  ])atei  lesus 
!Nazoraius  J)airhgaggil>. 

38  i]>  is  ubuhwopida,  qij^ands,  lesu, 
sunu  Daweidis,  ai'mai  mik. 

39  Yah  jjai  faurgaggandans  andbitun 
ina,  ei  ])ahaidedi ;  'i\>  is  und  filu  mais 
hropida,  >Sunau  Daweidis,  armai  mik. 

40  Gastandands  {^an  lesus  haihait  ina 
tiuhan  du  sis.  Bi))e  newha  was  }jan 
imma,  frah  ina, 

41  Qi])ands,  Wha  |)us  wileis  ei  tauyau  ? 
J\>  is  qaj),  Frauya,  ei  ussaiwhau. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Luke 

anre  needle  eage,  donne  se  welega  on 
Godes  rTce. 

26  Dii  cwsedon  da  de  dis  gehyrdon. 
And  hwa  niKg  hal  beon  1 

27  Da.  SEfcde  he  him,  Gode  synd  mihte- 
lice  da  |jing,  de  mannum  synd  unmihte- 
lice. 

28  Da  cwa?|)  Petrus,  Ealle  j'ing  we  for- 
leton,  and  fulgodon  de. 

29  Da,  cwfe])  he,  S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge, 
nis  nan  man,  de  his  hiis  forlset,  odde 
magas,  odde  brcdru,  odde  wif,  odde 
beam,  for  Godes  rice, 

30  De  ne  onfo  mycele  mare  on  dyssp 
tide,  and  ece  lif  on  towerdre  Avorulde. 

31  Da  nam  se  Hselend  his  leorning- 
cnihtas,  and  cwfej;  to  him,  Faraj'  to  Hie- 
rusalem,  and  ealle  jjingbeo})  gefyllede,  de 
be  mannes  suna  ].urh  witegan  awritene 
synd. 

32  He  hj\>  l^eodum  geseald,  and  h\]> 
gebysmrod,  and  geswungen,  and  on- 
spset ; 

33  And  fefter  dam  de  hig  hine  swinga]?, 
hig  hine  ofsleaj),  and  he  Jiriddan  da?ge 
ai'ist. 

34  And  hig  naht  dass  ongeton ;  and 
him  dis  word  wees  behydd,       .... 


35  Da  he  genealcehte  Hiericho,  sum 
blind  man  sost  wid  done  weg  wsedlig- 
ende. 

36  And  da  he  geliyrde  da  msenigeo 
farende,  he  acsode,  hwset  dset  wsere. 

37  Da  ssedon  hig,  dset  dser  ferde  se 
Nazarenisca  Hselend. 

38  Da  hi-ymde  he,  and  cwse)?,  Eala 
Hselend,  Dauides  sunu,  gemiltsa  me. 

39  And  da  de  fore-stCpon  hine  ))readon, 
da;t  he  suwode  ;  he  dies  de  ma  cleopode, 
Dauides  sunu,  gemiltsa  me. 

40  Da  stod  se  Hselend  and  Iiet  1  sedan 
hine  to  him.  Da  he  genealsehte,  he 
acsode  hine, 

4 1  Hwset  wylt  du  dset  Ic  de  d5  ?  Da 
cwsej)  he,  Drihteu,  dset  ic  geseo. 


XVIII.  26-41.]    WYCLIFFE,i3S9. 

tluir5  a  iie.llis  y5C,  than  ft  rlclie  iimu  for 
to  cntre  in  to  the  kin<;tloiu  of  God. 

26  Ami  tlici  that  hcrdcn  thcs  thingis 
seulon,  And  who  may  be  maad  sail 

27  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Tho  thingis 
that  ben  vnjiossible  anemptis  men,  ben 
possible  anemptis  God. 

28  Forsoth  IVtre  seide,  Loo!  wo  hau 
forsake  alle  tliiiigis,  and  han  sued  tlicc. 

29  Which  seyde  to  hem,  Treuly  I  seye 
to  50U,  no  man  is,  that  selial  forsake 
hons,  etlier  faUir,  ethir  modir,  ethir  bri- 
thercn,  ether  wyf,  ether  soncs,  ether 
feeldis,  for  the  rewmc  of  God, 

30  And  schal  not  receyue  myche  mo 
thingis  in  tliis  tymc,  and  in  the  woi'ld 
to  comynge  ciierehisting  lyf 

31  Forsothe  Jhesu  took  twelue  disciplis, 
and  seide  to  hem,  Lo  !  we  sti5en  to  Je- 
rusalem, and  alle  thingis  schulcn  be 
endid,  that  ben  writun  by  the  prophetis 
of  mannis  sone. 

32  Forsoth  lie  schal  be  bitrayed  to 
liethen  men,  and  he  schal  be  scorned, 
and  scourgid,  and  bispet ; 

33  And  aftir  that  thel  han  scoiu-gid, 
thei  schulen  sle  him,  and  the  thridde 
day  he  schal  ryse  a5ein. 

34  And  thei  vnderstoden  no  thing  of 
tliese  ;  and  this  word  was  hid  fro  hem, 
and  thei  vndirstoden  not  tho  thingis 
that  weren  seid. 

35  Forsothe  it  was  don,  whanue  Jhesu 
cam  ny5  to  Jerico,  sum  blynd  man  saat 
bisydis  the  Aveye  bcggynge. 

36  And  whanne  he  herdc  the  cumpany 
])assynge,  he  axide,  what  this  thing  was. 

37  Sothli  thei  seidcn  to  him,  that 
Jhesu  of  Nazareth  passide. 

38  And  he  cryede,  seyinge,  Jhesu,  the 
sone  of  Dauith,  haue  mercy  on  mc. 

39  And  thei  that  wenten  bifore  blam- 
yden  him,  that  he  schulde  be  stillc  ; 
sothli  he  cryede  myche  more.  Thou  sone 
of  Dauith,  haue  mercy  on  me. 

40  Forsothe  .Jhesu  stondinge  comaund- 
idc  him  to  be  brou5t  forth  to  him.  And 
whanne  he  cam  ny5,  he  axide  him, 

^  I  Seyinge,  What  wolt  thou  I  schal  do 
to  thee  I  And  he  seide,  Lord,  that  I  se. 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


3!)5 


thorowc  a  nedles  eye,  then  for  a  ryche 
man  to  enter  into  the  kyngdom  off  God. 

26  Then  sayde  they  that  herdc  that, 
And  who  shall  then  be  saved*! 

27  He  sayde,  Thynges  which  arc  vn- 
possiblc  with  men,  arc  possible  with 
God. 

28  Then  Peter  sayde,  Loo  !  we  have 
forsaken  all,  and  have  folowed  the. 

29  He  sayde  vnto  them,  Verily  I  save 
vnto  you,  there  is  noo  man,  that  for- 
saketh  housse,  other  father,  and  mother, 
other  brethren,  or  wyfe,  or  children,  for 
the  kyngdom  off  Goddes  sake, 

30  Which  same  shall  nott  receave 
moche  moore  in  this  worlde,  and  in  the 
worlde  to  come  lyfe  everlastynge. 

31  He  toke  vnto  hym  the  twelve,  and 
sayde  vnto  them,  Loo  !  we  go  vp  to 
Jerusalem,  and  all  shalbe  fulfilled,  that 
are  written  be  the  prophettes  off  tho 
Sonne  off  man. 

32  He  shalbe  delivered  vnto  the  gen- 
tyls,  and  shalbe  mocked,  and  shalbe 
despyitfuUy  entreated,  and  shalbe  spetten 
on  ; 

33  And  when  they  have  scoui-ged  hym, 
they  will  putt  hym  to  deeth,  and  the 
thyrde  daye  shall  he  aryse  agayne. 

34  They  vnderstode  none  of  these 
thynges  ;  and  this  sayinge  was  hid  from 
them,  and  they  perceavcd  nott  the 
thynges  which  were  spoken. 

35  Hit  cam  to  passe,  as  they  were  come 
ncye  vnto  Jerico,  a  ecrtayne  blynde  man 
sate  by  the  waye  syde  bcggynge. 

36  And  when  he  herdc  the  people 
passe  by,  he  axed,  what  it  meant. 

37  They  sayd  vnto  hym,  that  Jesus  oflT 
Nazareth  went  by. 

38  And  lie  cryed,  saynge,  Jesus,  the 
Sonne  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me. 

39  And  they  which  Avent  before  re- 
bucked  hym,  be  cause  he  shulde  holdc  liis 
peace  ;  and  he  moche  the  moare  cryed,. 
The  Sonne  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me. 

40  Jesus  stodc  styll  and  commaunded 
him  to  be  brought  vnto  hym.  And 
when  he  was  come  nearc,  he  axed  hym, 

41  Sayinge,  What  wilt  thou  that  I  do 
vnto  the  1  And  he  sayde,  Lorde,  that  I 
maye  raceave  my  sight. 


)oa 


GOTHIC,  360. 


42  Yah  iesus  qa)>  du  imma,  Ussaiwh  ; 
galaubeins  jjeiua  ganasida  ]juk. 

43  Yah  suns  iissawh,  yah  laistida  ma, 
awiliudonds  Guj^a.  Yah  alia  managei 
gasaiwhandei,  gaf  hazeiu  Gu})a. 


Chap.  XIX.       i  Yah   inngaleiliands, 
]>airhlai)>  laireikon. 

2  Yah  sai !  guma,  namin  haitans  Zak- 
kaius,  sail  was  fauramajjleis  motarye, 
yah  was  gabigs, 

3  Yah  sokida  gasaiwhan  lesu,  whas 
wesi,  yah  ni  mahta,  faura  managein,  unte 
wahstau  leitils  was. 

4  Yah  bij)ragyands  faur,  usstaig  ana 
smakkabagm,  ei  gasewhi  ina  ;  unte  is 
and  \>ata  munaida  [jairhgaggan. 

5  Yah  bijie  qam  ana  };amma  stada,  Vn- 
saiwliands  iup  Iesus,  gasawh  ina,  yah 
qajj  du  imma,  Zakkaiu,  sniumyands  dala]) 
atsteig,  himma  daga  auk  in  garda  j  oin- 
amma  skal  ik  wisan. 

6  Yah  sniumyands  atstaig,  yah  andnam 
ina  fa^inonds. 

7  Yah  gasaiwhandans  allai,  birodide- 
dun,  qi)jandans,  patei  du  frawaurhtis 
mans  galai])  in  gard  ussalyan. 

8  Standands  Jjan  Zakkaius  qa)?  du  Frau- 
yin,  Sai  !  halbata  aiginis  meinis,  Frauya, 
gadailya  unledaim  ;  yah  yabai  whis  wha 
afholoda,  fidurfaljj  fragilda. 

9  Qajj  Jjan  du  imma  Iesus,  patei  him- 
ma daga  naseins  jjamnia  garda  war]?, 
unte  yah  sa  sunus  Abrahamis  ist ; 

10  Qam  auk  sunus  mans  sokyan,  yah 
nasyan  Jjans  fralusanans. 

11  At  gahausyandam  ])an  im  |)ata, 
biaukands,  qaj)  gayukon,  bi  jjatei  newha 
laivusalem  was,  yah  )mhta  im,  ei  suns 
skulda  wesi  ])iudangai-di  Gu])s  gaswi- 
kun[)yan. 

1 2  Q,i})  ))an,  Manna  sums  godakunds 
gaggida  landis,  franiman  sis  |)iudangard- 
ya,  yah  gawandida  sik. 

13  Atliaitands    \>nn    taihun    skalkans 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

42  Da  cwsejj  se  Hselend,  Eeseoh ;  din 
geleafa  cte  gehaelde. 

43  And  he  sona  geseah,  and  him  folg- 
ode,  God  wuldrigende.  And  eall  folc 
Gode  lof  sealde,  eta  big  da^t  gesawon. 


Chap.  XIX.      i  Da  code  he  geond 
Hiericlio. 

2  Da  Avtes  dar  sum  man,  on  namau 
Zacheus, se  woes  welig. 

3  And  he  wolde  geseon  liwylc  se  Hfel- 
end  Avsere,  da  ne  niibte  he,  for  dan-e 
msenegu,  fordam  de  he  wies  lytel  on 
wpestmum. 

4  Da  arn  he  beforan,  and  stfih  up  on 
an  treow  sicomorum,  dcTt  he  bine  ge- 
sawe  ;  fordam  de  he  wolde  danon  faran. 

5  Da  he  com  to  dvere  stowe,  da  geseah 
se  Hselend  bine,  and  cwaj])  to  hym,  Za- 
cheus, efst  to  dinum  huse,  fordam  de  ic 
wylle  to-doeg  on  dinum  hiise  wunian. 

6  Da  efste  he,  and  bine  blidebce  on- 
feng. 

7  Da  big  doet  gesawon,  da  murcnodou 
big  ealle,  and  cwsedon,  Dtet  be  to  syn- 
fiillum  men  gecyrde. 

8  Da  stod  Zacheus  and  cwa^])  to  Drihtne, 
Nd  !  ic  sylle  jjearfum  healfe  mine  eelita  ; 
and  gif  ic  Eenigne  bereafodc,  ic  hit  be 
feowerfealdura  agyfe. 

9  Da  cwrejj  se  Hselend  to  him,  To-doeg 
disse  biw-rpedene  j's  lijcl  geworden,  for- 
dam de  he  wses  Abrahames  beam  ; 

!o  Mannes  sunu  com  secan,  and  bell 
ddn  doet  forweai  ]>. 

1 1  Da  big  dis  gehyrdon,  da  ge-ichte 
be  sum  bigspcU,  fordam  de  be  wses  neb 
Hierusalem,  and  fordam  de  big  Avendon, 
d:et  braedlice  Godes  rice  geswutelod 
wsere.^' 

12  Witodlice  be  cwte]'.  Sum  aadel-boreu 
man  ferde  on  fyrlen  land,  dret  be  him 
rice  onfenge,  and  eft  agJn  come. 

13  Da  clvpode  he  bis  tyn  ]->eowa«,  and 


XVIII.  4-^-XIX.  13.]  AVYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

42  And  Jliosu  scule  to  him,  Biliold 
tlio;i  ;  till  feitli  liath  maad  tliee  saaf. 

43  And  a  non  he  sy;,  and  suede  him, 
ni;iy;iiyfiynife  CJocl.  And  al  the  peple,  as 
it  sy5,  5af  heriyuge  to  God. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


307 


I'liAP.  XIX.  I  And  Jhcsu  goynge 
yn,  walkido  thonv  Jerico. 

2  And  lo  !  a  man,  Zachee  by  name, 
and  he  was  prince  of  pupplicaus,  and  he 
was  rieho. 

3  And  he  soiijtc  to  sec  Jhesu,  Avho  he 
was,  and  he  niy5te  not,  for  the  cumpany, 
for  he  was  litel  in  stature. 

4  And  he  rcnnynge  bifore,  sti5ede  in 
to  a  sycamoure  tree,  that  he  schulde  see 
Jhesu  ;  for  lie  was  to  passinge  thcunis. 

,■;  And  Jhcsu  biholdinge  vpward,  whanne 
he  cam  to  tlie  place,  sy5  him,  and  seyde 
to  him,  Zachee,  hastinge  cum  doun,  for 
to  day  I  moot  dwelle  in  thin  hous. 

6  And  he  hastinge  cam  doun,  and  ioy- 
inge  reseyuede  him. 

7  And  whanne  alle  men  sayen,  thei 
grucchidcn,  seyinge,  For  he  hadde  turned 
to  a  synful  man. 

8  Forsoth  Zachee  stondinge  seide  to 
the  Lord,  Lo  !  Lord,  I  5yue  the  half  of 
my  goodis  to  pore  men ;  and  if  I  haue 
ony  thing  dcfraudid  ony  man,  I  5elde 
the  fourcfold. 

9  Jhcsu  seide  to  him.  For  in  this  day 
heelthe  is  maad  to  this  hous,  for  and  he 
is  the  sone  of  Abraham  ; 

10  Forsothe  mannis  sone  cam  to  seke, 
and  make  saaf  this  thing  that  perischede. 

1 1  Hem  heringe  thes  thingis,  he  putt- 
inge  to,  seide  a  parable,  for  he  was  ny3 
Jerusalem,  and  for  thei  gessiden,  that 
the  kyngdom  of  God  schulde  be  schewid 
a  non. 

1  2  Therfore  he  seide.  Sum  noble  man 
wente  in  to  a  fer  cuntree,  to  take  to  him 
a  kjTigdom,  and  to  turne  a5eyn. 

13  Sothli  hi.s  ten  scruauntis  clcpid,  he 


42  Jesus  sayde  vnto  liym,  Ecceave  thy 
sight  ;  thy  faith  hath  saved  the. 

43  And  iinmcdiatly  he  sawe,  and  folowcd 
hym,  ])raysinge  God.  And  all  the  peo- 
ple, when  they  sawe  it,  gave  laude  to 
God. 


Chap,  XIX.  i  And  he  entred  in,  and 
went  thorowe  Jerico. 

2  And  beholde  !  there  was  a  man, 
named  Zachcus,  and  he  was  a  rueler 
amonge  the  publicans,  and  ryche  alsoo. 

3  And  he  made  meancs  to  se  Jesus, 
what  he  shulde  be,  and  he  coulde  nott, 
for  the  preace,  be  cause  he  was  oif  a 
lowe  stature. 

4  And  he  ran  before,  and  ascended 
vppe  into  a  sicomorc  tree,  to  se  hym;. 
for  he  wolde  come  that  same  waye. 

5  And  when  Jesus  cam  to  the  place, 
lie  lokcd  vp,  and  sawe  him,  and  sayd 
vnto  hym,  Zache,  attonce  come  doune,, 
for  to  da}e  I  niuste  a  byde  at  thy 
housse. 

6  And  hastely  he  cam  doune,  and  rc- 
ceaved  hym  ioyfully. 

7  And  when  they  sawe  that,  they  all 
groudged,  sayinge,  He  is  gone  into  tary 
with  a  man  that  is  a  synner. 

8  Zache  stode  forthe  and  sayde  vnto 
the  Lorde,  Beholde !  Lorde,  the  liaulfc 
of  my  gooddes  I  gevo  to  the  povre  ;  and 
if  I  have  done  eny  man  WTonge,  I  Avyll 
restoore  hym  fower  folde. 

9  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym.  This  daye  is- 
healthe  come  vnto  this  housse,  for  as- 
moche  as  it  also  is  become  the  clulde 
off  Abraham ; 

10  For  the  Sonne  off  man  is  come  to 
seke,  and  to  save  that  which  was  looste. 

11  As  they  herde  these  thynges,  he 
added  therto  a  similitude,  l)e  cause  he 
was  neye  to  Jerusalem,  and  be  cause 
also  they  thought,  that  the  kyngdom  of 
God  shulde  shortely  apere. 

1 2  He  sayde  therfore,  A  ccrtayne  noble 
niiin  went  into  a  farre  countre,  to  re- 
ceave  a  kyngdom,  and  then  to  come 
agayne. 

J  3  He  called  his  ten  scrvauntes,  audi 


398 


GOTHIC,  360. 


seinans,  atgaf  "im  taihun  dallos.      Yali 
qajj  du  im,  Kaupo|j,  unte  'ik  qimau. 

14  Ij)  baurgyans  is  fiyaidedun  ina,  yah 
insandidedun  aii'u  afar  imma,  qifniiidans, 
JSTi  wileima  J^ana  piudanon  ufar  uusis. 

15  Yali  wai']?,  bijje  atwandida  silc,  aftva 
andnimands  Jnudangardya ;  yah  haihait 
ivopyan  du  sis  ]>ans  skalkans,  jjaimei 
atgaf  )3ata  silubr,  ei  gakunuaidedi,  wha 
wharyizuh  gawaurhtedi. 

16  Qam  ]?an  sa  frumista,  qijiands, 
J'rauya,  skatts  Jjeuis  gawaurhta  taihun 
skattans. 

17  Yah  qa)>  du  imma,  WaiLa,  goda 
skalk  ;  unts  in  leitilamma  wast  triggws, 
•siyais  wahlufni  habands  ufai*  taihun 
bauvgim. 

18  Yah  qara  aiijjar,  qijjands,  Frauya, 
skatts  );eins  gawaurhta  tinif  skattans. 

19  Qa}j  ])an  yah  du  jjamuia,  Yah  |)U 
siyais  utaro  finif  baurgim. 

20  Yah  sums  qam,  qij^ands,  Frauya, 
sai !  sa  skatts  ])eins,  jianei  habaida,  ga- 
lagida  ina  in  fanin. 

21  Ohta  mis  auk  ]uk,  unte  manna 
hai-cius  is  ;  nimis  j^atei  ni  lagides,  yali 
sneij)is  );atei  ni  saisost. 


22  Yah  qaj)  du  imma,  Us  munjja 
}'einamma  stoya  ]3uk,  unselya  skalk,  yah 
lata.  Wisseis,  |atei  ik  manna  hardus 
am,  nimands  })atei  ni  lagida,  yah  sncij)- 
ands  jatei  ni  saiso  1 

23  Yah  duwlie  ni  atlagides  {^ata  silubr 
mein  du  skattyam,  yah  qimands  mijj 
wokra  galausidedyau  J;ata  ? 

24  Yah  du  }>aim  fauvastandandam 
qa)',  Nimi)?  af  imma  }>ana  skatfc,  yah 
gibi])  jjarama  ])0S  taihun  dailos  haband- 
in. 

25  Yah  qc)nin  du  imma,  Frauya,  ha- 
baijj  taihun  dailos. 

26  Qijja  allis  izwis,  jjatei  ■\vharyammeh 
habandane  gibada  ;  iJ)  af  ])amma  unhab- 
andin,  yah  jatei  luibaijj,  afnimada  af 
Vmina. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

sealde  tyn  pund  him.      And  cw«]j  to 
him,  Ceapia^,  oCt  fet  ic  cume. 

14  Da  hatedon  hine  his  leode,  and 
sendon  serend-racan  sefter  him,  and 
cwsedon,  We  nylla}),  dast  ties  ricsie  ofer 
us. 

15  Da  he  agen  com,  and  dcet  rice  on- 
feng ;  he  het  clypian  his  jieowas,  (to  he 
dxt  feoh  sialde,  tla^t  he  wiste,  hu  niycel 
Q'ehwilc  a'emans:ode. 


1 6  Da  com  se  forma,  and  cAvreji,  Hlaf- 
ord,  din  pund  gestrynde  tyn  piiud. 

17  Da  cw{fi|)  se  hlaford,  Geblissa,  du 
g5da  Jjeowa  ;  fordam  de  dii  weere  on 
lytlum  getrywe,  du  byst  anweald  hceb- 
bende  ofer  tyn  ceastra. 

18  Da  com  cder,  and  cw?e}),  Hlaford, 
din  pund  gestrynde  fif  pund. 

19  Dil  cwa'})  he  to  dam,  And  beo  dil 
ofer  fif  ceastra. 

20  Dii  com  oder,  and  cwce]),  Hlaford, 
her  ys  dm  piind,  de  ic  haifde,  on 
swat-li'n  died. 

2 1  Ic  do  adred,  fordam  de  du  eart 
st'ij)  man  ;  du  nimst  da^t  dii  ne  settest, 
and  du  ripst  diet  dii  ne  seowe. 


22  Da  cwte]j  he  to  him,  Of  dinum 
mu):e  ic  de  deme,  la  ly))ra  ];eowa.  Du 
Avistest,  dset  ic  eom  stijj  man,  diet  ic 
nime  d?et  ic  ne  sette,  and  ripe  daet 
ic  ne  seow  1 

23  And  hwi  ne  scaldest  du  min  feoh 
to  hire,  and  donne  ic  come,  ic  hit 
witodlice  mid  gestreone  onfenge  1 

24  Du  cwce})  he  to  dam  de  him  tibiitan 
stodon,  Nimaj)  dret  pand  fram  him,  and 
sylla];  dam  de  ha^fj?  tyn  pund. 

25  Da  cweedon  hig  to  him,  Hlaford, 
he  ]\sei\>  tyn  piind. 

26  Sojjlice  ic  secge  eow,  dtet  selcum 
hasbbendum  bij?  geseald ;  fram  dam  de 
nfef[i,  ge  dtet  da^t  he  ha^f|->,  him  by|) 
afyrred. 


XIX.  14-^6.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

jaf  to  lioiu  ten  besauiitis.     And  lie  sciJc 
to  licni,  ^larcliaundiso  5c,  til  I  oonio. 

14  Forsoth  his  citesovns  liatiden  liini, 
and  sontc  a  ino.ssaL;or  aftir  Iiini,  seyingc, 
AVe  nylc,  that  he  regno  on  vs. 

15  And  it  was  don,  that  the  I'cwmc 
taknn,  he  turnede  ajen  ;  and  he  com- 
auiulide  his  seruauntis  to  be  clepid,  to 
whiche  he  jaf  money,  that  he  scliulde 
Avito,  hou  moche  cch  hadde  wunnc  by 
ehalFariiig. 

1 6  Forsoth  the  firste  cani,scyinge,  Lord, 
thi  bcsannt  hath  ^vunne  ten  besauntis. 

17  He  seide  to  him,  Wei  be,  thou 
goode  seruaunt  ;  for  in  litil  thing  thou 
hast  be  trcwe,  thou  schalt  hauc  i^ower 
on  ten  citces. 

1 8  And  another  cam,  scyinge,  Lord, 
thi  besaunt  hatli  maad  fyue  besauntis. 

19  And  he  seide  to  this,  And  be  thou 
on  fyue  citees. 

20  And  the  thridde  cam,  seyinge.  Lord, 
lo !  thi  besaunt,  Avhich  I  hadde,  kept  in 
a  sudaric.^ 

21  Forsotli  I  drcdde  thee,  for  thou  art 
an  austcrnc  man  ;  tliou  takist  awcy  this 
thing  which  thou  settist  not,  and  thou 
rcpist  this  thing  Avhich  thou  hast  not 
sowe. 

2  2  He  seith  to  him,  'Wej'ward  seruaunt, 
of  till  mouth  I  denie  thee.  Wistist  thou, 
that  I  am  an  haustcrne  man,  takinge 
a  ■\vey  this  thing  which  I  settide  not, 
and  repinge  this  thing  which  I  hauc  not 
sowe  1 

23  And  whi  hast  thou  not  50uun  my 
money  to  the  boord,  and  I  comynge 
schulde  haue  rcccyucd  it  sothli  with 
vsuris  1 

24  And  he  seide  to  liem  that  stooden 
ny5,  Take  50  awey  fro  liim  tlie  besaunt, 
and  5yue  50  to  him  that  hath  ten  be- 
sauntis. 

25  And  tlici  seidcn  to  him,  Lord,  he 
hath  ten  besauntis. 

26  Sothli  I  seie  to  50U,  for  to  ech 
hauynge  it  schal  be  5ouun,  and  he  schal 
be  plenteuous  ;  but  fro  him  that  hath 
not,  also  this  thing  that  he  hath,  schal 
be  takun  of  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  309 

delivered    them    ten    ponnde.      Sayingc 
vntu  them,  r>y  and  sell,  till  I  come. 

14  IJut  his  eitesens  hated  hym,  and  sent 
messengei's  after  hym,  saynge,  We  will 
not  have  this  man  to  raigne  over  vs. 

15  And  it  cam  to  passe,  when  lie  was 
come  agaync,  and  had  rcceaved  his 
kyngdom,  lie  commaunded  his  ser- 
vauntcs  to  be  called  to  hym,  to  whom  he 
gave  his  money,  to  witt,  what  every 
man  had  done. 

16  Then  cam  the  fyrst,  sayinge,  Lorde, 
thy  poimde  hath  encrcased  ten  pouude. 

17  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Well,  goodc 
servaunte  ;  be  cause  thou  wast  faithful  I 
in  a  very  lytell  thynge,  take  thou  aucto- 
rite  over  ten  cities. 

18  And  the  other  cam,  sayinge,  Lorde, 
thy  pounde  hath  encrcased  fyve  poundc. 

19  And  to  the  same  he  sayde.  And  be 
thou  alsoo  rueler  over  fyve  cities. 

20  And  the  thirde  cam,  and  sayde, 
Lorde,  beholde !  here  thy  pounde,  which 
I  have,  kepte  in  a  napkyn. 

2 1  For  I  feared  the,  be  cause  thou  arte 
a  strayte  man;  thou  takest  vp  that  tliou 
laydest  nott  doune,  and  repest  that  thou 
diddest  nott  sowe. 

22  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Of  thyne 
awne  mougtlie  iudge  I  the,  thou  cvyll 
servauiit.  Knewest  thou,  that  I  am  a 
strayte  man,  takynge  vppc  that  I  layde 
not  doune,  and  repinge  that  I  did  nob 
sowe  1 

23  Wherfore  then  gavcst  not  thou  my 
money  into  the  bankc,  and  then  at  my 
commyng  shulde  I  have  required  mync 
awne  Avith  vauntagc  1 

24  And  he  sayde  to  them  that  stodc 
by.  Take  from  hym  that  pounde,  aiul 
geve  it  hym  that  hathe  ten  pounde. 

25  And  they  sayd  to  hym,  Lorde,  lie 
hath  ten  poundc. 

26  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  vnto  all  them 
that  have  it  shalbe  geven  ;  and  from 
hymc  that  hath  not,  even  that  he  luitli, 
shalbe  taken  awaye. 


400 


GOTHIC,  360. 


27  Aj>}ian  swejjauli  fiyands  meinans 
yaiiians,  ]>aiei  ni  wildedun  mik  ))iudanon 
iifar  sis,  briggi]?  her,  yah  usqiinijj  faura 
mis. 

28  Yali  qij^aiids  ))ata,  iddya  fram,  us- 
gaggands  111  lairusaulwma. 

29  Yali  war]',  h\\>e  newha  was  Be))- 
sfagein  yah  Bejianiyin,  at"  fairgunya,  J)atei 
haitada  Alewyo,  insandida  twans  siponye 
seinaize, 

30  Qijjands,  Gaggats  'in  ])0  Avij^vawair]:- 
on  haim  ;  'in  |)izaiei  inngaggandans 
bigitats  fulan  asilaus  gabundanaua,  ana 
]?ammei  ni  ainshun  aiw  manne  sat  ; 
andbindaudans  ina,  attiuhijj. 

31  Yah  yabai  Avhas  'inqis  fraihnai, 
duwhe  audbindit?,  swa  qijmits  du  imma, 
patei  Frauya  )ns  gairnei}'. 

32  Galeijjandans  )?an  ]>a\  insandidans, 
bigetuu  swaswe  qajj  du  im,    .... 

33  Andbindandam  ];an  i'ln,  qejnm  ]jai 
frauyans  I'is  du  ira,  Duwhe  audbindats 
J)ana  fulan  1 

34  Ij)  eis  qej>un,  Frauyin  jjaurfts  ]ns 
i'st. 

35  Yah  attauhun  Jjana  fulan  lesua  ; 
yah  uswairpandans  wastyos  seinos,  ana 
jmna  fulan  ussatidedun  lesu. 

36  Gaggandiu  Jjan  imma,  ufstraAvi- 
dedun  wastyom  seinaim  ana  wiga. 

37  Bijje  jjan  is  newha  was  yuj;an  at 
ibdalyin  }'is  fairgunyis  Alewabagme,  du- 
gunuun  alakyo  managei  siponye  faginon- 
dans  liazyan  Gujj  stibnai  mikilai  in 
allaizo.  j^oze  sewhun,  mahte, 

38  Qijjandans,  piu])ida  sa  qimanda 
]5iudans  in  namin  Frauyins ;  gawair)>i 
in  himina,  yah  Avuljius  in  hauhistyam. 

39  Yah  suniai  Farelsaie  us  )jizai  man- 
agein  qe])un  du  imma,  Laisari,  sak  ]>aiva 
siponyam  jjeinaim. 

40  Yah  andhafyands  qa|)  du  im,  Qij^a 
izwis,  jiatei  yabai  ];ai  slawand,  stainos 
hropyand. 

41  Yah  sunsei  newha  was,  gasaiwhands 
]>o  baurg,  gaigrot  bi  |jo, 

42  Qij^ands,  patei  ijj  wissedeis,  yah  J)u, 
in  jiamma  daga  Jieinamma.   \)0   du  a:a- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

27  Deah  hwtedere  (Ja  mine  fynd,  cte 
noldon  diset  ic  ofer  hig  ricsode,  l^eda}) 
hider,  and  ofsleaj)  hig  beforan  me. 

28  And  (Jysum  gecwedenum,  he  ferde 
to  Hierusalem.''" 

29  Da  he  genealsehte  Bethfage  and 
Bethania,  to  dam  munte,  de  is  genemned 
Oliueti,  lie  sende  his  twegeu  cuihtas, 

30  And  cwoe]?,   Fara]?  on  dset  castel,. 

de  ongen  inc  ys  ;  on  dam 

gyt  gemetajj  assan  folan  getiged,  on 
dam  nan  man  gyt  ne  sset;  untiga])  hyne, 
and  Isedajj  to  me. 

31  And  gif  inc  hwa  ucsaji,  hwi  gyt 
hine  untiga}),  secga])  him,  Drihten  hsefj). 
his  neode. 

32  Da  ferdon  da  de  asende  Avsevon, 
and  fiindon  swa  he  him  ssede,  done 
folan  standan. 

33  Da  hig  hine  untigdon,  da  cwsedou 
da  hlafordas,  Hwi  untige  ge  done  folan  !■ 

34  Dii  cwsedon  hig,  Fordam  de  Drihten 
hsefj)  his  neode. 

35  Da  leeddon  hig  hyne  to  dam  HekI- 
ende ;  and  hp^a  reaf  wurpon  ofer  done 
folan,  and  done  Hcelend  on-ufan  setton. 

36  And  da  he  for,  hi  strehtou  under 
hine  hyra  reaf  on  dam  wege. 

37  And  da  he  genealtehte  to  Oliuetes 
miintes  nyder-stige,  da  ongunnon  ealle 
da  ma^nigeo  geblissian,  and  mid  mycelre 
stefne  God  heredon  be  eallum  dam 
mihtum,  de  hig  gesuwon, 

38  And  cwsedon,  Gebletsod  sy  se  cyning, 
de  com  on  Drihtnes  naman  ;  syb  sy  on 
heofenum,  and  wuldor  on  heahnessum. 

39  Da  cwsedon  sume  of  dam  Faviseum 
to  him,  Lareow,  cid  dinum  leorning- 
cnihtum. 

40  Da  cwfe])  he  to  him,  Ic  eow  secge, 
deah  das  siiwion,  stanas  clypia]?.''' 

41  And  da  he  genealsehte,  and  gesealx 
da  ceastre,  he  Aveop  ofer  hig, 

42  And  cwfe}7,  Ealii  gif  du  wistest,  and 
witodlice  on  dysum  dinum  da?ge,  de  de 


XI  X.  27-42.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

ry  Xethclcs  brvni^c  5c  liidir  tlio  niync 
onemycs,  that  iioldo  me  to  reguc  on 
liom,  ami  sle  je  biforc  me. 

28  Antl  thes  tliingis  scyJ,  he  Avcntc 
biforo,  sti5yugc  to  Jerusalem. 

29  Ami  it  was  don,  wlianne  he  cam 
ny5  to  Bethfiige  and  Betanye,  at  the 
mount,  which  is  clepid  of  Olyuctc,  he 
scute  his  tweye  disciplis, 

30  Seyinge,  Go  50  in  to  the  castel, 
which  is  a5ens  50U ;  in  to  which  5e 
cntrynge  schulen  fynde  a  colt  of  a  she 
asse,  on  which  uou  of  men  cucre  saat ; 
vabynde  ^c  him,  and  brynge  50  to  me. 

31  And  if  ouy  man  schal  axe,  whi  5c 
ynbynden,  thus  50  schulen  seye  to  him, 
For  the  Lord  desyrith  his  work. 

32  Foi'sothe  thei  that  weren  sent, 
wenten  forth,  and  fouuden  as  he  seyde 
to  hem,  a  colt  stondinge. 

33  Sothli  hem  vntyynge  the  colt,  the 
lordis  of  him  seyde  to  hem,  What  vntyen 
5c  the  colt  1 

34  And  thei  seiden.  For  the  Lord  hath 
him  nedful. 

35  And  thei  ledden  him  to  Jhesu  ;  and 
thei,  castinge  her  clothis  on  the  colt, 
puttedyn  Jhesu  on  him. 

36  Forsothe  him  goynge,  thei  vndir 
strewiden  her  clothis  in  the  weye. 

37  And  whanne  now  he  cam  ny3  to 
the  comynge  doun  of  the  hil  of  Olyuete, 
alle  the  cumpanyes  of  men  comynge 
doun  bigunnen  ioyinge  to  herie  God 
with  greet  vois  on  alle  the  vcrtues, 
whiche  thei  sy5en, 

38  Seyinge,  Blessid  is  the  kyng,  that 
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  pecs 

'in  heuenc,  and  glorie  in  hi5  thingis. 

39  And  summe  of  the  Pharisees  of 
.  the  cumpanyes  seyden  to  him,  Maistei', 

blame  thi  disciplis. 

40  To  whiche  he  seide,  I  seye  to  50U, 
for  if  thes  schulen  be  stille,  stoones 
schulen  crye. 

41  And  whanne  he  nei3ede,  he  seynge 
the  citcc,  wcpte  on  it, 

42  Seyinge,  For  if  thou  haddist  knowe, 
aud  thou,  and  sothcli  in  this  thi  day. 


TYNDALE, 


j6. 


401 


27  ^rorover  thoose  mync  cnemys,  which 
Avolde  iu)t  that  I  sliulde  raigne  over 
them,  brynge  bidder,  and  slee  them  be- 
fore me. 

28  And  when  he  hadd  thous  spoken, 
he  procedcd  forthe  before  them,  and 
went  vp])c  to  Jerusalem. 

29  Aud  it  fortuned,  when  he  was  come 
noye  to  I'ethfage  and  Ijcthany,  besydes 
mounte  Olivcte,  he  sent  two  of  his  dis- 
ciples, 

30  Saylnge,  Goo  ye  into  the  tonne, 
which  is  over  against  you  ;  in  the  which 
as  Sonne  as  ye  are  come  ye  shall  fynde 
a  coolte  tyed,  whcr  on  yett  never 
man  sate ;  loose  hym,  and  brynge  hym 
bidder. 

31  And  if  eny  man  axe  you,  why  that 
ye  loose  hym,  thus  saye  vnto  hym.  The 
Lorde  bathe  nede  of  hym. 

32  They  that  wer  sent,  went  their 
Avaye,  and  founde  even  as  he  had  sayde 
vnto  them,  .... 

33  And  as  they  were  aloosynge  the 
coolte,  the  owners  sayde  vnto  them. 
Why  loose  ye  the  coolte  1 

34  And  they  sayde,  For  the  Lorde 
hath  nede  of  hym. 

35  And  they  brought  hym  to  Jesus  ; 
aud  they  cast  their  rayment  on  the 
coolte,  and  sett  Jesus  thcron. 

36  As  he  went,  they  spredde  their 
eloothes  in  the  waye. 

37  When  he  was  come  wheare  he 
shulde  goo  doune  from  the  mounte  Oli- 
vcte, the  whole  multitude  of  his  disci- 
ples began  to  rcioycc  and  to  lawde  God 
with  a  loude  voyce  for  all  the  miracles, 
that  they  had  sene, 

38  Sayinge,  Blessed  be  the  kynge,  that 
commeth  in  the  name  off  tiie  Lorde  ; 
peace  in  heven,  and  glory  in  the  hyest. 

39  And  some  off  the  Pharises  off  the 
company  sayde  vnto  him.  Master,  re- 
buke thy  disciples. 

40  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
I  tell  you,  yff  these  holde  their  peace, 
the  stones  will  crye. 

41  And  when  he  was  come  neare,  he 
behcldc  the  citie.  and  wept  on  hit, 

42  Sayinge,  Yfi'  thou  haddcst  knowen 
thoose  thynges,  whych  bclonge  vuto  thy 


402 


GOTHIC,  360. 


■\vair}iya  j^einanima  ;   1])  nu  gafulgiii  ist 
faui'a  augam  |)einaim. 

43  patei  qimancl  dagos  ana  ])US,  yah 
bigraband  fiyands  |)einai  grabai  Inik, 
yah  bistandand  j^iik,  yah  biwaibyand 
jmk  alla]>ro ; 

44  Yah  aiv})ai  jnik  gaibnj-and,  yah 
barna  ]jeina  in  Jms ;  yah  ni  letand  in 
])iis  stain  ana  staina,  in  ];izei  ni  ufkunj)- 
es  J^ata  mcl  niuhseinais  )jeinaizos. 

45  Yah  galei}>ands  in  alh,  dugann  us- 
wairpan  Jjans  frabugyandans  in  izai  yah 
bugyandans, 

46  Qij^ands  du  im,  Gamell]?  ist,  patei 
gai'ds  meins  gards  bido  ist,  i]j  yus  ina 
gatawidedn])  du  filegrya  Jjiube. 

47  Yah  was  laisyands  daga  ^Yhammeh 
in  l^izai  alh.  1]>  ])ai  auhniistans  gud- 
yans,  yah  bokaryos  sokidedun  ina  us- 
qistyan,  yah  ])ai  frumistaus  manageins  ; 

48  Yah  ni  bigetun  wha  gatawidedeina, 
nianagei  auk  alakyo  hahaida,  du  bausyan 
inima. 


Chap.  XX.  i  Yah  warjj  in  sumam- 
ma  dage  yainaize,  at  laisyandin  imma 
|)0  managein  in  alh,  yah  wailameryandin, 
atstojjun  jai  gudyans  yah  bokaryos  mi]? 
I'aini  sinistam  ; 

2  Yah  qe})uu  du  imma,  qijtandans, 
Qij)  unsis,  in  ■whamma  waldufnye  J^ata 
taiiyis,  ail')-au  whas  ist  saei  gaf  ])us 
]iata  waldufni  ? 

3  Andhafyands  ]'an  qa]?  du  im,  Fraihna 
izwis  yah  ik  ainis  waurdis  ;  yah  qi)'i|> 
mis. 

4  Daupeins  lohannis  uzuh  himina  was, 
])au  uzuh  mannam  ? 

5  I\)  eis  |iahtedun  mi]?  sis  misso,  qi|)- 
andaus,  patei  yabai  qijiam.  Us  himina, 
qij'ij)  a])|)an,  Duwbe  ni  galaubideduj)  im- 
ma 1 

6  1\>  yabai  qi]jam.  Us  mannam,  alia 
so  managei  stainam  afwaii-pi)>  unsis  ; 
ti'iggwaba  galaubyand  auk  allai,  lo- 
bannen  praufetu  wisan. 

7  Yah  andhofun,  ei  ni  wissedeina 
wiial)ro. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.    [St.  Luke 

to  sybbe  synd  ;  mi  big  synd  fram  ctinum 
eagum  bebydde. 

43  Fordam  cte  da  dagas  to  de  cuma}?, 
and  dine  fj'nd  de  betrymia]',  and  bebab- 
baj)  de,  and  genyrwa})  de  eeghwanon  ; 


44  And  to  eor]ian  afyllajj  de,  and  dine 
beam  de  on  de  synd  ;  and  big  ne  lEefa|) 
on  de  stan  ofer  stane,  fordam  de  du  ne 
oncneowe  da  tide  dinre  geneosunge. 

45  Da  ongan  he  of  dam  temple  ut- 
drifan  da  syllendan  and  da  bicgendan, 

46  And  him  to  cwa^}),  Hit  ys  awriten, 
Dffit  min  bus  ys  gebed-hus,  ge  bib 
wovhton  to  sceajjena  scrsefe. 

47  And  he  wees  doggbwamlice  on  dam 
temple  Iserende.  S6})lice  dara  sacerda 
ealdras,  and  da  boceras,  and  dtes  folces 
ealdor-men  smeadon  hu  big  bine  fordon 
mihton ; 

48  And  big  ne  fundon  hAveet  hi  him  to 
gylte  dydoTi,  sojilice  eall  folc  wses  abysgod, 
de  be  him  gebyrde  secgan. 


Chap.  XX.  i  Da  wees  anum  drege 
gewovden,  da  he  dret  folc  on  dam  temple 
Iserde,  and  him  bodude,  da  comon  dasra 
sacerda  ealdras  and  da  boceras  ; 

2  And  to  him  cwsedon.  Sage  us,  on 
hwylcum  anwalde  wyrcst  du  das  jbing, 
odde  hwset  ys  se  de  disne  anweald 
sealde  1 

3  Da  cwsej)  he  him  to  andsware,  And 
ic  acsige  eow  an  word  ;  andswaria])  me. 

4  Wfes  Johannes  fulluht  of  heofone, 
hwseder  de  of  mannum  1 

5  Da  J'ohtou  big  betweox  him,  and 
cwsedon,  Gyf  we  secga]?,  Da;t  he  sy  of 
heofone,  he  cwyj)  to  us,  Hwi  ne  gelyfde 
ge  him  1 

6  Gyf  we  secgap,  Dret  he  sy  of  man- 
num, eall  folc  us  hsen];;  hi  wiston  geare, 
dvet  lohannes  wses  Avitega. 

7  Da  andswaredon  big,  dtet  big  nyston, 
hwanon  he  wses. 


XIX.  43--^^-  7-]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

which  is  to  pecs  to  thee ;  but  now  thci 
ben  hid  fro  thin  y5en. 

43  For  daics  schulen  come  into  thee, 
and  thin  cncmyes  scluilcn  enuyroune 
thee  with  pale,  and  schulen  enuyroune 
thee,  and  thci  schulen  make  thee  streyt 
on  alle  sydis  ; 

44  And  thei  schulen  caste  thee  doun 
to  erthe,  arid  thi  sones  that  ben  in  thee; 
and  thei  schulen  not  leouc  in  thee  a 
stoou  on  a  stoon,  for  thou  hast  not 
kuowe  the  tyme  of  thi  visitacioun. 

45  And  he  gon  in  to  the  temple,  bigan 
to  caste  out  men  sellinge  ther  ynue  and 
bigg}^lge, 

46  Seyingc  to  hem,  It  is  writun,  For 
myn  hous  is  an  hous  of  preier,  forsothe 
5e  han  maad  it  a  den  of  theuys. 

47  And  he  Avas  techinge  euery  day 
in  the  temple.  Forsoth  the  princes  of 
])rcstis,  and  scribis,  and  the  princis  of 
the  peple  sou3ten  to  lease  him ; 

48  And  thei  founden  not  what  thei 
schuklen  do  to  him,  for  al  the  peple 
was  al  ocupyed,  heeringe  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


403 


Chap.  XX.     i  And   it  was  don  in 

oon  of  dayes,  him  techinge  the  peple 
in  the  temple,  and  prechinge  the  gospel, 
the  princis  of  prestis  and  the  scribis 
camen  to  gidere  with  the  eldre  men  ; 

2  And  seiden,  seyiuge  to  him,  Seye 
to  vs,  in  what  power  thou  dost  this 
thing,  ether  who  5af  to  thee  this  power? 

3  Forsothe  Jhcsu  answeringe  seide  to 
hem,  And  I  schal  axe  50U  a  word ; 
answere  3e  to  me. 

4  Was  the  baptym  of  Joon  of  heuene, 
ether  of  men  1 

5  And  thei  thoujten  with  ynne  hem 
selue,  seyinge.  For  if  we  schulen  seye. 
Of  heuene,  he  schal  seye,  Whi  therfore 
bileuen  50  not  to  him  ] 

6  Forsoth  if  we  schulen  seye,  Of  men, 
all  the  comyn  peple  schal  stoone  vs  ; 
for  thei  ben  certeyn,  that  John  is  a 
prophete. 

7  And  thei  answcriden,  that  thei  witen 
not,  of  whennis  it  was. 


peace,  even  att  thys  daye  ;    but  nowe 
arc  they  hidde  from  thyne  eyes. 

43  For  the  dayes  shall  come  apon  the, 
and  thyne  encmys  shall  conipas  the 
about  wytli  a  banke,  and  shall  bescge 
the  rounde  aboute,  and  kcpc  the  in  ou 
every  syde ; 

44  And  make  the  even  wyth  the 
grounde,  wyth  thy  chyldrcn  Avhych  are 
in  the ;  and  they  shall  nott  Icve  in  the 
one  stone  apon  another,  because  thou 
knewest  nott  the  tyme  off  thy  visitacion. 

45  And  he  went  into  the  temple,  and 
began  to  cast  out  them  that  soldo  therin 
and  them  that  bought, 

46  Sayinge  vnto  them,  Hyt  is  written, 
My  liousse  is  the  housse  off  prayer, 
butt  ye  have  made  it  a  den  off  thevcs. 

47  And  he  taught  dayly  in  the  temple. 
The  hye  prestes,  and  the  scrybcs,  and 
the  chefe  oft"  the  people  went  about  to 
destroye  hym ; 

48  Butt  coulde  nott  fynde  what  to  do, 
for  all  the  people  stacke  by  hym,  and 
crave  him  audience. 


CiiAP.  XX.  I  And  yt  fortuned  in 
one  off  those  dayes,  as  he  taught  the 
I^eople  in  the  temple,  and  preached  the 
gospell,  the  hye  prestes  and  the  serybes 
cam  vnto  hym  wyth  the  seniours ; 

2  And  spake  vnto  hym,  sayinge,  Tell 
vs,  by  Avhat  auctorite  thou  doest  these 
thyngcs,  other  who  is  he  tliat  gave  the 
thys  auctorite  1 

3  He  answered  and  sayde  vnto  them, 
I  also  will  axe  you  a  question  ;  and 
answer  me, 

4  Was  the  baptem  of  Jhon  from  heven, 
or  of  men  1 

5  They  thought  wyth  in  them  selves, 
sayinge,  Yff  we  shall  saye,  From  heven, 
he  will  saye.  Why  then  bcleved  ye  hym 
not? 

6  But  and  yff  we  shall  saye.  Of  men, 
all  the  people  will  stone  vs  ;  for  they 
suci-ly  beloved,  that  Jhon  was  a  pro- 
phett. 

7  And  they  answered,  that  they  coulde 
nott  tell,  whence  it  was. 

D  (1,2 


404 


GOTHIC,  360. 


8  Yali  lesus  qn\i  'im,  Ni  ik  izwis  qij'a, 
in  whamma  waldufnye  |)ata  tauya. 

9  Dugann  l^an  du  managein  qij)an  Jio 
gayukon.  Manna  xissatida  weinagard, 
yah  anafalh  ina  waurstvvyam  ;  yah  atlaijj 
yera  ganoha. 

10  Yah  in  mela,  insandida  du  })aim 
aurtyam  skalk,  ei  akranis  j'is  weina- 
gardis  gebeina  imma ;  ij)  |;ai  aurtyans 
usblWwandans  iua,  insaudidedun  laus- 
ana. 

1 1  Yah  anaaiauk  sandyan  anjiarana 
skalk  ;  i|)  eis  yah  yainana  bliggwandans, 
yah  unswerandans,  insandidedun  lausana. 

12  Yah  anaaiauk  sandyan  Jjridyan,  I'j) 
eis  yah  J)ana  gawondondans,  uswaurpun. 

13  Qa])  ]>an  sa  frauya  |)is  weinagardis, 
Y/ha  tauyau  ?  Sandya  sunu  meinana 
}?ana  liuban  ;  aufto  Jjana  gasaiwhandans, 
aistand. 

14  Gasaiwliandans  ]jan  ina  ])ai  am^t- 
yans,  Jjahtedun  mij)  sis  misso,  qij^andaiis, 
8a  ist  sa  arbinumya,  afslaham  ina,  ei 
vms  wair}nii  jnita  arbi. 

15  Yali  uswairpandans  ina  ut  us  })am- 
raa  weinagarda,  usqemun.  Wha  uu 
tauyai  ini  frauya  }jis  Aveinagardis  1 

16  Qimi[>,  yah  usqisteij)  aurtyam  {jaim, 
yah  gibi|)  })ana  weinagard  anjiaraim. 
Gahausyandaus,  qejmu  ]  an,  Nis-siyai. 

17  I}j  is  insaiwhands  du  im,  qa|),  A}));an 
wha  ist  }iata  gamelido,  Stains  Jjanimei 
uskusun  timryaus,  sah  warj)  du  haubida 
waihstins  1 

18  Whazuh  saei  driusi);  ana  j^ana  stain, 
gakrotuda  ;  ijj  ana  jianei  driusi|),  diswin]?- 
ei]>  ina. 

1 9  Yah  sokidedun  pai  bokaryos,  yali 
auhumistans  gudyans,  uslagyan  ana  ina 
handuns  in  jjizai  wheilai,  yah  ohtedun 
I'O  managein  ;  frojjun  auk  patei  du  im 
}>o  gayukon  qa}). 

20  Yah  afleijiandans  insandidedun  fer- 


ATs^GLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

8  Dei  cwjejj  se  Hselend  In'm  to,  Ne  ic 
eow  ne  secge,  on  hwylcum  anwakle  ic 
das  I'ing  wyrce. 

9  He  ongan  da  dis  bigspel  to  dam 
folce  cwedan.  Sum  man  plantode  him 
Avin-geard,  and  hine  gesette  mid  tiUum  ; 
and  he  waes  him  feor  manegum  tidum. 

TO  Da  on  tide,  he  sende  hys  J^eow  to 
dam  tilium,  d?et  liig  him  sealdon  of 
daes  win-geardes  wtestme ;  da  swungon 
hig  done,  and  idehie  hine  forleton. 

1 1  Da  sende  he  oderne  'peow ;  da  beot- 
on  hig  done,  and  mid  teonum  gewaec- 
ende,  hine  forleton  idehie. 

12  Da  sende  he  |?riddan,  da  wurpon 
hig  ut  done  gewundodne. 

13  Da  cwsej)  dses  wTn-geardes  hlaford, 
Hwset  do  ic  1  Ic  asende  minne  leofan 
sunu  ;  wenunga  hine  hig  forwandiaji, 
donne  hig  hine  geseo)?. 

14  Da  hine  da  tilian  gesawon,  hig 
jjohton  betweox  him,  and  cwsedon,  Her 
ys  se  yi-fe-weard,  cuma]),  uton  hine  of- 
slean,  dast  seo  teht  lire  sy. 

15  And  hig  hine  of  dam  wtn-gearde 
awurpon,  ofslegene.  Hwset  dejj  dses 
wingeardes  hlaford  1 

16  He  cym]',  and  forspil}?  da  tilian, 
and  syl|>  done  win-geard  odnim.  Hig 
cwaedon,  da  hig  dis  gehyrdon.  Diet  ne 
geweorde. 

1 7  Da  beheold  he  hig,  and  cwfej),  Hwset 
is  d«t  awriten  is,  Done  stan  de  da 
wyrhtan  awurpon,  des  is  geworden  on 
dsere  hyrnan  heafod  1 

18  JE'lc  de  fy\\>  ofer  done  stan,  by}) 
forbryt ;  ofer  done  de  he  fylj),  he  to- 
cwyst. 

19  Da  sohton  dsera  sacerda  ealdras, 
and  da  b5ceras,  hyra  handa  on  dsere 
tide  on  hine  Avurpan,  and  hig  adredon 
him  dset  folc ;  s6))lice  hi  ongeton  dset 
he  dis  bigsjiell  to  him  cwse}'. 

20  Da  sendon  hig  mid  scarwum,  da  de 


XX.  S-20.]   WYCLIFFE.isSp. 

8  And  Jliesu  scide  to  hem,  Ncitlicr  I 
soic  to  5UI1,  in  what  power  I  do  thes 
thincfis. 

9  Forsothe  he  bigan  to  seye  to  the 
coniyn  peple  this  parable.  Sum  man 
plantide  a  vyncr,  and  scttidc  it  to  fernie 
to  tilioris  ;  and  he  was  in  pilgryniagc 
many  tynies. 

10  And  in  the  tymo  of  gcdrynge  of 
grnpis,  he  scnte  a  seruauut  to  the  tilieris, 
that  thei  scliuhlcn  5yuc  to  him  of  tlic 
fruyt  of  the  vyncr  ;  whiche  leften  him, 
betun,  voydc. 

1 1  And  he  addide  to  sende  another 
seruauut  ;  forsothe  also  tliel  betiiige 
this,  and  ponyschynge  with  dispisingis, 
leften  voyde. 

1 2  And  he  addide  to  sende  tlie  thridde, 
wliiche  also  woundinge  him,  castiden 
out. 

I  •?  Sothli  the  lord  of  the  vyner  seide, 
AVIiat  schal  I  do  ?  I  schal  sende  my 
dereworthc  sone  ;  peraucnture  whanne 
thei  schulen  se  him,  thei  schulen  be 
ascham}d. 

14  AVliom  whanne  the  tilieris  hadden 
seyn,  tliei  tliou5ten  with  ynne  hem  selue, 
seyiuge,  This  is  the  eyr,  sle  we  him, 
that  the  eritage  be  maad  oure. 

15  And  thei  killiden  him,  cast  out  of 
the  vyner.  What  therfore  schal  the  lord 
of  the  vyner  do  to  hem  1 

16  He  schal  come,  and  lese  these  til- 
ieris, and  he  schal  5yue  the  vyner  to 
othere.  Which  thing  herd,  thei  seiden 
to  him,  Fer  be  it. 

17  Forsothe  he  biholdinge  hem,  seide. 
What  t'  crfore  is  this  thiug  that  is 
writuii,  The  stoon  whom  men  bildinge 
reproueden,  this  is  maad  in  to  the  heed 
of  the  corner] 

18  Ech  that  schal  falle  on  that  stoon, 
schal  be  l^rysid ;  forsothe  on  whom  it 
schal  falle,  it  schal  bi-ekc  him  iu  to 
smale  parties. 

19  And  the  princes  of  ])rcstis,  and  the 
scribis,  soujteu  to  sette  lioiidis  on  him 
in  that  our,  and  thei  dredden  the  ])cj)Ie  , 
forsothe  thei  kncwcn  that  to  hem  he 
seide  tiiis  lyknessc. 

20  And  thei  aspyinge  seuten  aspicrit, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


405 


8  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Nether 
tell  I  you,  by  what  auctorite  I  do  these 
thynges. 

9  Then  began  he  to  put  forthe  to  the 
j)euple  this  similitude.  A  cei-tayne  man 
jilantcd  a  vyneyardc,  and  lett  it  forthe 
to  formers  ;  and  went  hym  silfe  into  a 
stiMunge  countre  for  a  greate  season. 

10  And  when  the  time  cam,  he  sent 
a  servaunt  to  his  tennauutes,  that  they 
sluildc  geve  hym  of  the  frutcs  of  the 
vyneyarde  ;  the  tennauntcs  bett  hym, 
and  sent  hym  awayc  empty. 

1 1  And  he  ceased  nott  therby  but  sent 
yett  another  servaunt  ;  and  they  bett 
hym,  and  foule  entreated  hym  alsoo, 
and  sent  hym  awaye  empty. 

I  2  ]\Iorover  he  sent  the  thyrde  alsoo, 
and  hym  they  wounded,  and  cast  hym 
out. 

13  Then  sayde  the  lorde  off  the  vyne- 
yarde, What  shall  Idol  I  wyll  sende 
my  deare  sonne ;  hym  per  adventure 
they  wyll  reverence,  when  they  sc  hym. 

14  When  the  fermcrs  sawe  hym,  they 
thought  in  them  selves,  sayinge.  This  is 
the  heyre,  come,  lett  vs  kyll  hym,  that 
the  enherytaunce  maye  be  oures, 

15  And  they  cast  hym  out  of  the  vyne- 
yarde, and  kylled  hym.  Nawe  what 
shall  the  lorde  off  the  vyneyarde  do  vnto 
them  1 

1 6  He  wyll  come,  and  destroj-e  those 
fermers,  and  will  lett  out  his  vyneyarde 
to  other.  When  they  herde  that,  they 
sayde,  God  forbid. 

I  7  He  beheldc  them,  and  sayd,  What 
meaneth  thys  then  that  is  written.  The 
stone  that  the  bylders  refused,  is  made 
the  heed  corner  stunc  f 

18  Whosoever  stomble  at  that  stone, 
shalbe  bruscd  ;  but  on  whomsoever  it 
faul,  it  wyll  alto  breake  hym. 

1 9  And  the  bye  prestes,  and  the  serybes, 
the  same  howre  went  about  to  laye 
liondes  on  liim,  but  they  feared  the  peo- 
ple ;  for  they  perccaved  that  he  had 
sjjoken  this  similitude  agaynst  them. 

20  And  they   watched  him  and   sent 


40C 


GOTHIC,  360. 


yans,  };aiis  us  liutein  taiknyandans  sik 
garaihtans  wisaii,  ei  gafaifaheina  'is 
■\vaurclei,  yah  atgebeina  ina  reikya,  yah 
"waldufnya  kiudinis. 

2 1  Yah  frehun  ina,  qifiandans,  Laisari, 
witum,  |)atei  raihtaba  rodeis,  yah  laiseis  ; 
yah  ni  andsaiwhis  andvvair|ji,  ak  bi  sun- 
yai  wig  GuJjs  laiseis. 

2  2  Skuldu  ist  unsis  Kaisara  gild  giban, 
])au  niu  1 

23  Bisaiwhands  ))an  ize  unselein,  lesus 
qaj)  du  im,  Wha  mik  fraisij)  1 

24  Ataugei])  mis  skatt ;  whis  habai|) 
tnanleikan  yah  ufarmeli  1  Andhafyand- 
ans  ]>au  qejjun,  Kaisaris. 

25  I))  is  qa})uli  du  im,  us  nu  gibijj  \)0 
Kaisaris  Kaisara,  yah  ]>o  Gu]js,  Guj^a. 


26  Yah  ni  mahtedun  gafahan  is  waurde 
in  andwairjjya  manageins  ;  yah  sildaleik- 
yandans  andawaurde  is,  gaj^ahaidedun. 

27  Duatgaggandans  jjan  sumai  Sad- 
dukaie,  jmiei  qijjand  usstass  ni  wisan, 
frehun  ina, 

28  Qijjandans,  Laisai-i,  Moses  gamelida 
uns,  yabai  Avhis  broj^ar  gadaujjnai  aig- 
ands  qen,  yah  sa  unbarnahs  gadau}niai, 
ei  nimai  brojjar  is  jjo  qen,  yah  urraisyai 
fraiw  brojjr  seinamma. 

29  Sibun  nu  broJ)ryus  wesun.  Yah  sa 
fi'umista  nimands  qen,  gadaujjnoda,  un- 
barnahs ; 

30  Yah  nam  anjjar  ]>o  qen,  yah  sa  ga- 
swalt  unbarnahs  ; 

31  Yah  J)ridya  nam  ]>o  samaleiko  ; 
samaleiko  }?an  yah  ]>a\  sibun,  yah  ni 
bili})un  barne,  yah  gas^vultun ; 

32  Spedista  allaize  gadaujjnoda  yah  so 
qens. 

33  In  })izai  usstassai  nu,  wharyis  {jize 
■\vair])i]j  qens  1  fiai  auk  sibun  aihtedun  \>o 
du  qenai. 

34  Yah  andhafyands  qaj?  du  im  lesus, 
pai  sunyus  |>is  aiwis  liugand,  yah  liug- 
anda  ; 

35  I])  ]>alei  wair|)ai  sind  yaiuis  aiwis 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

hi  rihtwise  leton,  clset  hig  hine  gescyld- 
egodon,  and  dset  hig  hine  gesealdon 
dam  ealdron  to  d5me,  and  to  dtes  deman 
anwalde  to  fordemanne. 

21  Da  acsodon  hig  hine,  and  cwssdon, 
Lfireow,  we  witon,  dset  ctil  rihte  sprycst 
and  leerst ;  and  for  nanum  men  ne 
wandast,  ac  Godes  Aveg  on  sojjfsestnesse 
Iserst. 

22  Is  hit  riht  daet  man  dam  Casere 
gafol  sylle,  de  na  1 

23  Da  cwsep  he  to  him,  da  he  hyra 
facen  onget,  Hwi  fandige  ge  min  1 

24  Y'wa|)  me  anne  penig  ;  hwpes  anlic- 
nesse  hasfj)  he  and  ofer-gewrit  1  Da 
cwsedon  hig,  Dses  Caseres. 

25  Da  cwsej)  he  to  him,  Agyh]>  dam 
Casere  da  Jjing  de  dses  Caseres  synd, 
and  Gode,  da  ping  de  Godes  synd. 

26  Da,  ne  mihton  hig  his  word  befon 
bef5ran  dam  folce  ;  da  suwedon  hig, 
wuudrigende  be  his  andsware.''' 

2  7  Da  genealsehton  sume  of  Saduceum, 
da  setsacajj  dses  aeiystes,  and  acsodon 
hine, 

28  And  cweedon,  Lareow,  Moyses  us 
wrat,  gif  hwses  brodor  by]?  dead  and  wif 
htebbe,  and  se  by)?  biitau  bearnum,  dset 
his  brodor  nime  his  wif,  and  hys  brodor 
Seed  awecce. 

29  Seofon  gebrodru  wseron.  And  se 
forma  nam  wif,  and  wses  dead,  butan 
bearne ; 

30  Da  nam  oder  hig,  and  wses  dead 
butan  bearne  ; 

3 1  Da  nam  se  {ji'idda  hig ;  and  swa 
ealle  seofone,  and  nan  seed  ne  Isefdon, 
and  wseron  deade ; 

32  Da  ealra  ytemest  W£ES  daet  Avif 
dead. 

33  On  dam  seryste,  hwylces  hyra  wif 
bi>  da^t  ? 

34  Da  cwpejj  se  Hgelend  to  him,  Dysse 
worulde  beam  wifia]?,  and  beoj)  to  giftum 
gesealde ; 

35  Da  de  synd  daere  worulde  wyrde, 


XX.  21-35]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

whiclic  feynedeu  hem  scluc  iuste,  that 
tliei  scluiklcn  take  hiiu  in  word,  and 
bitakc  him  to  the  prince,  and  to  the 
jiower  of  the  iustise. 

2 1  And  thei  axiden  him,  scyinge, 
Maistir,  we  witcn,  that  thou  seist  and 
techist  vi^tly ;  and  thou  takist  jiot  per- 
soone  of  man,  but  thou  techist  in  treuth 
the  wey  of  God. 

2  2  Is  it  k'cflul  to  vs  to  5yue  tribute  to 
Cesar,  etlier  nay  1 

23  Forsothe  he  bihoklinge  the  disscyt 
of  hem,  seide  to  hem,  "What  tempte  30 
me? 

24  Schewe  5c  to  me  a  pcny ;  wlios 
ymage  and  writynge  abonc  hath  it  1 
Thei  answeringe  seiden  to  him,  Cesaris. 

25  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Therforc  5ekle 
56  to  Cesar  tho  thingis  that  ben  01 
Cesar,  and  tho  thingis  that  ben  of  God, 
to  God. 

26  And  thei  my5tcn  not  reproue  his 
word  bifore  the  pore  peple  ;  and  thei 
wondringe  in  his  auswere,  heklen  pees. 

27  Summe  of  the  Sadducees,  that  de- 
nyen  ajen  i-ysinge  to  be,  neijeden,  and 
axiden  him, 

28  Seyinge,  Maistir,  IMoyses  wrot  to 
vs,  if  the  brother  of  ony  man  haiiynge 
wyf  deiede,  and  he  was  with  outc  fre 
children,  that  his  brother  take  his  wyf, 
and  reyse  seed  to  his  brother. 

29  Therfore  seuene  britlieren  weren. 
The  firste  took  a  wyf,  and  is  deed,  with 
outen  serves ; 

30  And  the  hrotlier  suwinge  took  hir, 
and  he  is  deed  with  oute  sone  ; 

31  And  the  thridde  took  hir ;  also  and 
alle  seuene,  and  lefteu  no  seed,  but  ben 
deede ; 

32  And  the  -womman  the  laste  of  alle 
is  deed. 

33  Therfore  in  the  risynge  ajein,  wlios 
wyf  of  hem  schal  sehe  bel  forsothe 
seuene  hadden  hir  wyf 

34  And  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  Soncs  of 
this  world  wedden,  and  ben  5ouun  to 
weddingis  ; 

35  Forsothe  thei  that   be  worth i   to 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


407 


forth  spies,  whych  shulde  fayne  them 
selves  perl'ecte,  to  take  hym  in  hy.s 
wordes,  and  to  dclyvrc  hym  vnto  the 
2)0wer,  and  auotorite  off  the  presydcnt. 

2  I  And  they  axod  hym,  sayinge,  J\Iaster, 
we  knowe,  that  thou  saycst  and  teachest 
rj-ght  ;  nether  considerest  thou  eny 
niannes  degre,  but  teachest  the  waye  of 
God  truely. 

22  Ys  it  laufuU  for  vs  to  geve  Cesar 
tribute,  or  noo  ? 

23  He  pereeaved  their  craftynes,  and 
sayde  vnto  them.  Why  tempt  ye  me  ? 

24  Shcwe  me  a  peny ;  whoose  ymage 
and  superscripcion  hath  it  1  They  an- 
swered and  sayd,  Cesars. 

25  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Geve  then 
vnto  Cesar  that  which  belongeth  vnto 
Cesar,  and  to  God,  that  whych  pertayu- 
eth  to  God. 

26  And  they  eoulde  nott  reprove  his 
sayinge  before  the  people ;  and  they 
marvayled  at  his  answer,  and  helde  their 
peace. 

27  Then  cam  to  hym  certayne  off  the 
Saduees,  which  denye  that  there  is  eny 
resnrreccion,  and  they  axed  hym, 

28  Sayinge,  ]\Iastcr,  ]\Ioscs  wrote  vnto 
vs,  if  eny  manncs  brother  dye  havinge  a 
wyfc,  and  the  same  dye  wyth  out  issue, 
that  then  hys  brother  shulde  take  his 
Avyfc,  and  raysc  vp  seede  vnto  hys  bro- 
ther. 

29  There  wei'e  seven  brethren.  And 
the  fyrst  toke  awyfc,  and  died,  with  out 
children ; 

30  And  the  seconde  toke  the  w^-fe, 
and  he  dyed  chyldlcsse  ; 

3 1  And  the  tliyrde  toke  her  ;  and  in 
lyke  wyse  the  resydue  off  the  seven,  and 
leeft  noo  chyldren  be  h}  nde  them,  and 
dyed; 

32  Last  of  all  the  woman  dyed  also. 

33  Nowe  at  the  resnrreccion,  whose 
wyfe  of  tliem  shall  she  be  %  for  vj  had 
her  to  wyfe. 

34  Jesus  answered  and  sayd  vnto  them, 
The  chyldren  off  this  worldc  mary  wyves, 
and  arc  marycd ; 

35  But  they  which  slialbe  worthy  of 


408  GOTHIC,  360. 

niutan,   yali   usstassais   us  dau]ialm,    ni 
liugand,  ni  liuganda, 

36  Nih  allis  gaswiltan  |)anasei]is  mag- 
xiu  ;  ibnans  aggiluni  auk  sind,  yah  sun- 
yus  sind  Gvi];s,  usstassais  sunyus  wis- 
andans. 

:;7  A))])an  ]^atei  urreisand  dau]'an=?,  yali 
IMoses  l)anwida  ana  aiwliatundyai,  sv/e 
qij5i[>,  Sawli  Frauyan  Guj)  Abralianiis, 
yidi  Gu])  Isakis,  yah  Guj)  lakobis. 

38  A];})an  Gu]'  nist  dau]  aize,  ak  qiwaize; 
allai  auk  imnia  hband. 

39  Andhafyandans  }>an  sumai  {-ize  bok- 
arye  qelnin,  Laisari,  walla  qast. 

40  ]Sri})-lian  );anaseij>s  gadaurstedun 
fraihnau  ina  ni  waihtais. 

4r  Qa])  }'aii  du  im,  \Vliaiwa  qij-and, 
Christu  sunu  Daweidis  wisan, 

42  Yah  silba  Daweld  qij?ll>  in  bokom 
Psalmo,  Qaj)  Frauya  du  tVauyin  mein- 
amnia,  Sit  af  taihswon  meinai, 

43  Unte  ik  galagya  fiyands  ];einans 
fotubaurd  fotiwe  Jjelnaize. 

44  Daweid  ina  fr-auyan  haitlj>,  yah 
wliaiwa  sunus  imma  i'st  1 

45  At  gahausyandein  Jan  allai  nian- 
agein,  qa|)  du  siponyam  seinaini, 

46  Atsaiwlii))  faui-a  bokaryam,  j-aim 
Avilyaudani  gaggan  in  wheitaiin    .... 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

and  serystes  of  deajum,  ne  giftia]?  hi,  ne 
wif  ne  Iccdaji, 

36  Ne  ofer  fet  sweltan  ne  magon; 
hig  synd  so|)lice  englum  gelice,  and  hig 
synd  Godes  beam,  donne  liig  synd  peryst- 
es  beam. 

37  Fordam  de  so|)lice  deade  arisa]i, 
and  Moyses  set-ywde  Avid  senne  beig- 
beani,  swa  he  cwa^}),  Drihten  Abrahames 
God,  and  Isaaces  God,  and  lacobes  God. 

38  Nys  God  deadra,  ac  lybbendra ; 
ealle  hig  him  lybba]'. 

39  Da  andswai-edon  him  sume  ttcTra 
bocera  and  cwEedon,  Lareow,  vel  ttii 
CAvagde. 

40  And  hig  hine  leng  ne  dorston  renig 
jjing  ficsian. 

41  Da  cwfe]'  he  to  him,  Hwl  secgal> 
hig,  djet  Crist  sy  Dauides  sunu, 

43  And  Dauid  cwyj)  on  dam  Sealme, 
Drihten  Sccde  to  minum  drihtne,  Site  on 
mine  swidran  healfe, 

43  Od  diet  ic  asette  dine  fynd  to  Kt- 
sceamele  dinra  fota. 

44  Dauid  hine  clypaj?  drihten,  and  hu- 
meta  ys  he  hys  sunu  ] 

45  Da,  SBede  he  hys  leoming-cinlitum, 
eallum  folce  gehyrendum, 

46  Warniajj  wid  da  boceras,  da  de 
wylla);  on  gegyrlum  gan,  and  lufia]^ 
grctinga  on  streete,  and  da  yhlstan  setl 
on  gesamnungum,  and  da  ibrman  hleon- 
unga  on  gebeorscypum  ; 

47  Da  forswelgajj  wuduwena  hiis,  hiw- 
igende  lang  gebed  3  da  onfoj?  milran 
genyderunge. 


Chap.  XXI.  i  Da  he  liine  beseah, 
he  geseh  da  welegau  heora  lac  sendan 
0;;  done  sceoppan  ; 

2  Da  geseah  he  sume  earmc  wudewan 
bvingan  twegen  feov))lingas. 

-^  Da  cwie]>  he,  Sr]>  ic  eow  secge,  dast 
dcos  earme  wudewe  ealra  maest  brohte. 

4  S6);es  ealle  das  brohton  Gode  lac, 
o/'  hyra  mycelan  welan ;    deos  -wudewe 


XX.  36.-XXI.  4]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

that  world,  ami  vysiiisjf  a-en  fro  docdc 
men,  neither  beu  'vveddiil,  nether  wcddeu 

VVIU'S, 

36  Netlier  scliulen  niowc  deyo  more  : 
forsoth  thci  ben  enenc  with  auni^cls,  anrl 
hen  the  soncs  of  God,  sitheu  thci  beu 
the  sones  of  rysinge  a3en. 

37  Forsotlie  for  decde  men  rysen  a;cn, 
also  ^loyses  schewide  bysyde  the  bo3'sche. 
;is  he  seith,  The  Lord  Cod  of  Abniham. 
and  God  of  Isaac,  and  God  of  Jacob. 

■;S  Forsoth  God  is  not  of  decde  men, 
but  of  lyuynge  men  ;  forsoth  alle  men 
lynen  to  hym. 

39  Sothli  summe  of  the  scribis  answer- 
inge  seide,  Maistir,  thou  liast  well  scide. 

40  And  thci  durste  no  more  axe  him 
ony  thing. 

4 1  Forsoth  he  seide  to  hem,  How  seyn 
men,  that  Crist  is  the  sone  of  Dauith, 

42  And  Dauith  him  silf  seith  in  the 
book  of  Sahiies,  The  Lord  seide  to  my 
lord,  Sitte  thoii  on  my  ri5t  lialf, 

43  Til  I  putte  thin  encniyes  a  stool  of 
t!ii  feet. 

44  Therfoi-e  Dauith  elcpith  him  lord, 
and  how  is  he  his  sone  ? 

45  Sothli  al  the  peple  hceringe,  he 
>  yde  to  his  disciplis, 

46  Be  5e  war  of  scribis,  that  Avolcn  go 
in  stoolis,  and  louen  sulutaciouns  in  the 
che])ing,  and  the  firste  chayris  in  syna- 
gogis,  and.  the  firste  sitting  places  iu 
fcestis  ; 

47  Wliichc  deuouren  the  liousis  of 
\vidowis,  feynynge  long  ])reier  ;  ther. 
.•-cuulcii  take  more  dampnaciouu. 


TYNJWLE,  1526. 


40!) 


Chap.  XXL  i  Forsothc  he  bihold- 
ingc  s}'3  tho  riche  men,  whiche  seuten 
lier  ;iftis  in  to  the  tresorie ; 

2  Forsothc  he  sy3  also  sum  litel  pore 
widowe  scndynge  tweie  litle  moneys.'^ 

3  And  he  scyde,  Treuli  I  seye  to  -ou, 
for  this  pore  widowe  scnte  more  than 
alle  men. 

4  Forwhl  alle  thes  scnton  in  to  ;iftis 
of  God,   of   the   thing  plenteuously  to 


that  worldo,  and  of  the  rcsurrcccion  from 
doeth,  nether  nuny  wyves,  nether  are 
mai-ycd, 

36  Nor  yet  can  dye  eny  moarc  ;  for 
they  are  cquall  vnto  the  angels,  and  are 
the  sonncs  of  God,  in  as  mochc  as  they 
arc  the  chyldren  off  the  resurreccion. 

37  And  that  the  deed  shall  ryse  agayne, 
even  Moses  signified  besydcs  the  busshe, 
when  he  saydc,  The  Lorde  God  of  Abra- 
ham, and  the  God  off  Isaac,  and  the 
God  of  Jacob. 

38  For  he  is  not  the  God  off  the  deed, 
but  off  them  whych  live  ;  for  all  live  iu 
hym. 

39  Certayne  off  the  Phariscs  answered 
and  sayd.  Master,  thou  hast  wcle  sayde. 

40  And  after  that  durst  they  not  axe 
hym  eny  cpicstion  at  all. 

41  Then  sayd  he  vnto  them,  Howe  saye 
they,  that  Christ  ys  Davides  sonne, 

42  And  David  hytn  silfe  sayth  in  the 
boke  oti  the  Psalmes,  The  Lorde  sayde 
vnto  my  lorde,  Sytt  on  ni}'  ryght  honde, 

43  Tyll  I  make  thyne  cneniys  thy  fote 
stole. 

44  David  then  called  hym  lorde,  howe 
ys  he  also  hj's  sonne  1 

45  Then  in  the  audience  off  all  the 
people,  he  sayde  vnto  his  discijiles, 

46  Beware  off  the  scrybes,  whych  de- 
syre  to  goo  in  longe  clothyngc,  and  love 
gretyngcs  in  the  marketcs,  and  the  hyest 
scates  in  the  sinagogcs,  and  chefe  roumes 
at  feastes  ; 

47  Which  devourc  wlddowes  houses, 
and  praye  longe  vnder  a  coloure  ;  the 
same  shall  reccave  greater  damnacion. 


Chap.  XXL  i  As  he  bchclde  he 
sawc  the  ryche  men,  howe  they  cast  iu 
their  offeringes  into  the  tresury ; 

2  lie  sawe  also  a  certayne  povre  wid- 
dowc  which  cast  in  thydre  two  mytes. 

3  And  he  said.  Of  a  trueth  I  saye  vnto 
you,  this  povre  widdowe  hath  putt  in 
moare  then  they  all. 

4  For  they  all   have  of  their    super- 
^  fluyte,  added  vnto  the  oflcrynge  off  God; 


410  GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

brohte  of  dam  de  heo  liaefde,  ealle  liyre 
audlyfene. 

5  And  da  cwas]?  he,  to  dam  de  ssedoii 
be  dam  temple,  dret  liit  yvxre  gcg'lenged 
mid  goduin  stanum  and  godum  gifum, 

6  L)as  ping  de  ge  geseo}),  da  dagas 
cumajj,  on  dam  ne  bi|)  stan  Iccfed  ofer 
Stan,  de  ne  beo  toworpen. 

7  Da  ilcsodon  hig  hine,  La  bebeod- 
end,  bwjenne  beoj^  diis  ]'ing  1  and 
hAvylce  tucna  beoj),  donne  das  J)ing  ge- 
\veorda|j  1 

8  Da  c\vse)j  be,  Warniajj,  diet  ge  ne 
syn  beswicene  ;  manige  cumal?  on  minum 
nanian,  and  c\veda|',  Ic  bit  eom,  and 
tid  genealsec]) ;  ne  fare  ge  a'ftev  him. 

9  Ne  beo  ge  bregede,  donne  ge  ge.seo]> 
gefeoht  and  twy-i'cednessa  ;  das  j-ing  gc- 
byrigea])  seryst,  ac  nys  donne  gyt  ende. 

10  Da  cwse]>  he  to  bim,  peod  arist 
ongean  j)eode,  and  rice  ongean  rice  ; 

1 1  And  beo)?  mycele  eorj'an  styrunga 
geond  stowa,  and  cweahnas,  and  hunger, 
and  egsan  of  heofene,  and  mycele  tacnu 
beo]'. 

12  Actoforan  eallvim  dissnm  big  nimaji 
eow,  and  ehta}),  and  [syllal']^  eow  on  ge- 
samnnnga  and  on  hyrdnyssa,  and  lEedaj) 
eow  to  cyningmii  and  to  demuni,  for 
minum  naman ; 

13  Dys  eow  gebyra]?  on  gewltnesse. 

14  Ne  scyle  ge  on  eowrum  heortum 
fore-smeagean,  hu  ge  andswarion  ; 

15  Ic  sylle  eow  miij?  and  wisdom,  dam 
nc  magon  ealle  eower  widerwinuan  wid- 
standai),  and  widcwedan. 

16  Ge  beo);  gesealde  fram  magum,  and 
gebrodrum,  and  cilduni,  and  freondum, 
and  hig  eow  to  dea|)e  geswencajj ; 

17  And  ge  beo])  eallum  on  hatunga  for 
minum  naman. 

18  And  ne  forwyr]>  un  locc  of  eowrum 
heafde ; 


XXr.  5-i8.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

hem  ;  forsotlic  tliis  widowc  of  this  thing 
that  fayloth  to  hir,  scute  iil  hir  lylloodo, 
that  she  hackle. 

5  And  sum  men  seyingc  of  tlic  temple, 
that  it  was  ourned  with  goode  stooucs 
and  ;yftis,  he  se^xle, 

6  Thcs  thingis  that  5c  seeu,  dayes 
schuleu  come,  in  which  a  stoon  schal 
not  be  left  on  a  stoon,  which  schal  not 
be  distroycd. 

7  Sothli  thci  axidcn  him,  seyinge,  Com- 
aundour,  whannc  schuleu  tlics  thingis 
be  1  and  what  tokeue,  whannc  thci 
schuleu  bigynne  to  be  don  1 

8  "Which  seide,  Se  5e,  that  5c  be  not 
disccyucd  ;  forsothc  manye  schuleu  come 
in  my  name,  seyiuge,  For  I  am,  and  the 
tyme  schal  nei3e ;  therfore  nyle  30  go 
aftii"  hem. 

9  But  whannc  56  schulen  hcere  batels 
and  dissenciouus  with  yune,  nyle  56  be 
aferd ;  it  bihoueth  first  thes  thingis  to 
be  don,  but  not  ^it  a  noon  the  ende. 

10  Thanne  he  seide  to  hem,  Folk  schal 
ryse  a3ens  folk,  and  rewme  a3ens  rewme; 

1 1  And  grete  mouyngls  of  erthe  schulen 
be  by  places,  and  pestilensis,  and  hun- 
gris,  and  dredis  fro  heuene,  and  grete 
tokenes  schulen  be. 

12  But  bifore  alle  thes  thingis  thei 
schulen  sette  hir  hondis  on  50U,  and 
schulen  pursuwe,  bitakinge  in  to  syna- 
g(j:j:is  and  kepingis,'''  drawynge  to  kingis 
and  iustisis,  for  my  name; 

13  Forsothe  it  schal  bifalle  to  30U  in 
to  witnessing. 

14  Therfore  pulte  36  in  30ure  hcrtis, 
not  to  thenke  bifore,  how  36  schulen 
answere  ; 

15  For  I  schal  3yue  to  30U  mouth  and 
wysdom,  to  whiche  alle  30ure  aduer- 
saries  schulen  not  mowe  a3enstonde,  and 
a5enseye. 

16  Sothli  50  schulen  be  bytrayed  of 
fadir,  and  modir,  and  britheren,  and 
<  n-;yns,  and  frendis,  and  by  deeth  thei 
r^  liulen  turmente  summe  of  50U  ; 

1 7  And  3e  schulen  be  hatid  of  alle  men 
for  my  name. 

1 8  And  an  heer  of  30ure  heed  schal 
not  perische ; 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


413 


but  she  of  her  penuiy,  hath  cast  in  all 
the  substauncc,  that  she  hadde. 

5  As  some  spake  of  the  temple,  howc 
it  was  garnesshed  with  goodly  stones 
and  iewels,  he  saydc, 

6  The  dayes  wyll  come,  when  off  these 
thynges  which  ye  se,  shall  nott  be  lefte 
stone  apon  stone,  that  shall  nott  be 
throwen  dounc. 

7  And  they  axed  hym,  sayinge,  Master, 
when  shall  these  thynges  be  1  and  what 
signcs  will  there  be,  when  suche  thynges 
shall  come  to  passe  1 

8  And  he  sayd,  Take  hede,  that  ye 
be  not  deceaved  ;  for  many  will  come 
in  my  name,  saying  of  them  selves,  I 
am  he,  and  the  tyme  draweth  ueare ; 
folowe  ye  nott  them  therfore. 

9  Butt  when  ye  heare  of  wai-re  and 
dissencion,  be  not  afrayd ;  for  these 
thynges  must  fyrst  come,  butt  the  ende 
foloweth  not  by  and  by. 

10  Then  sayd  he  vnto  them,  Nacion 
shall  ryse  agaynst  nacion,  and  kyngdom 
agaynst  kingdom ; 

1 1  And  grcate  erthquakes  shalbe  in  all 
quarters,  and  honger,  and  pestilence, 
and  fearfuU  thinges,  and  greate  sigues 
shall  there  be  from  heven. 

1 2  But  before  all  these  they  shall  laye 
their  hondes  on  you,  and  persecute  you, 
delyverynge  you  vppe  to  the  synagoges 
and  into  preson,  and  brynge  you  before 
kynges  and  rulers,  for  my  names  sake  ; 

13  And  this  shall  chaunche  you  ffor  a 
testimoniall. 

1 4  Lett  it  sticke  therfore  faste  in  youre 
hertes,  nott  once  to  stody  before,  whatt 
ye  shall  answere  for  yourc  selves  ; 

15  For  I  will  geve  you  a  mouth  and 
wysdom,  were  agaynstc  all  yourc  adver- 
sarys  shall  not  be  able  to  speake,  nor 
resist. 

16  Ye  and  ye  shalbe  betrayed  of  youre 
fathers,  and  mothers,  and  of  youre  bre- 
thren, and  kynsmen,  and  lovers,  and 
some  of  you  sliall  tlioy  put  to  deeth  ; 

17  And  hated  shall  ye  be  off  all  men 
for  my  names  sake. 

18  Yet  tliere  shall  not  one  hccr  of 
youre  hccddcs  pcrisse ; 


41? 


GOTHIC,  z^<^. 


ANGLO-SAXO^T,  995.    [St.  Luke 

19  On  eowrum  gejjykle  ge  geliealda)> 
eowre  siiwla. 

20+ponne  ge  geseoj)  Hienisalem  mid 
bere  bctiymede,  wita];,  clset  hjre  toworp- 
ennes  geiiealsccj'. 

21  Donne  fleo})  on  muntas,  cla  de  on 
Tiuiea  synd  ;  and  njder  ne  tTstiga}?,  cla 
de  on  liyre  middele  synd ;  and  into  hyre 
ne  m;1gon,  da  de  dser-ute  synd. 

J  2  Fordam  de  dis  synd  wrace  dagas, 
diet  ealle  J)ing  syn  gefyllede,  de  awritene 
synd. 

^23  S5])lice  wa  eacnigendum  wife,  and 
fedendum  on  dam  dagiim ;  donne  \i\\> 
mycel  ofj)riccedues  ofer  eorjjau,  and  yrre 
di.sum  folce. 

24  And  hig  feallajj  on  sweordes  ecge. 
and  beo]j  hteftlingas  on  ealle  Jjcodt  ; 
Hierusalem  bijj  frani  |>eodum  fortreden, 
od  msegj)a  t;da  synd  gefyllede. 


25  And  beojj  tacnu  on  sunnan,  and  on 
monan,  and  on  steorrum  ;  and  on  eorjjan 
Jje^oda  for|u-iccednes,  for  gedrefednesse 
stts  sweges  and  yda  ; 


26  Bifigendum  mannum  for  ege  and 
anbide  de  eallum  ymbe-h\vyrfte°to-be- 
cumajj  ;  donne  beo}?  heofones  niyhta 
astyrede. 

27  And  donne  hig  geseo]^  mannes  sunu 
ou  lyfte  cumende,  mid  mycelum  anwalde 
and  m8egen-j;rymme. 

28  Donne  d.is  ))ing  agynna;^,  beseo]', 
and  eowre  beafdu  up  Ihebba]),  fordam  de 
eower  alysednes  genealaScji. 

29  Da  saede  he  him  sum  bigspel,  Be- 
heaida]i  done  fic-beam,  and  ealle  trcowa, 

30  Donne  hig  AVfestm  bringajj,  ge  witon 
dait  sumor  ys  gehende  ; 

31  And  donne  ge  das  f)ing  geseo{), 
wita]),  d£et  Godes  rice  is  gehende. 

32  S6j)I:ce    ic    eow   secge.    dset   dcos 


XXI.  19-3-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1)  111  50ure  pacicncc  5c  scliulcu  welJc 
joure  soulis. 

20  Forsoth  wliamic  5c  scluilcn  sc  Je- 
ru>alcm  enuyrowncd  of  an  oost  of  batel, 
tlianne  wito  !;o,  tliat  the  desolaciouii 
tliciof  selial  nei-e. 

21  Tliannc  tlici  tliat  ben  in  Jiulcc,  flee 
ill  to  hillis  ;  and  tlioi  that  ben  in  the 
myddcl  of  it,  '^o  awoy  ;  and  thoi  that 
be)i  in  the  cnntreis,  entre  not  in  to  it. 

22  For  tlicsbcn  thedayes  of  vcniauncc, 
that  al!e  thiiigis  that  ben  Aviitun,  be 
fiUid. 

23  Forsothe  wo  to  licm,  that  ben  with 
childe,  and  norischen  in  tho  daycs  ;  for 
a  greet  tribulacionn  schal  be  on  crthe, 
and  wratlithe  to  this  peple. 

24  And  thei  schulen  falle  in  the  mouth 
of  swerd,  and  thei  sclmlen  be  ledd  caytif 
in  to  alle  folkis  ;  and  Jerusalem  sclial 
be  defoulid  of  hethen  men,  til  the  tymes 
of  naciouns  be  tillid. 

25  And  tokenes  schulen  be  in  the 
sunne,  and  moone,  and  stenis ;  and  in 
the  erthe  schal  be  ouerleying  of  folkis, 
for  confusioun  of  sown  of  the  see  and 


26  !^^en  waxinge  drye  for  drede  and 
abidinge  that  schulen  come  on  al  the 
world  ;  forwhi  vertues  of  heuene  schulen 
be  mouyd. 

27  And  thanne  thei  schulen  se  mannis 
sone  comynge  in  a  cloude,  with  greet 
power  and  maieste. 

28  Sothli  tlies  thingis  bigynnynge  to 
be  don,  biholde  je,  and  reyse  50  joure 
heedis,  for  30ure  a3en  bying  nei5itli. 

29  And  he  scide  to  hem  a  licncsse,  Se 
56  the  Cge  tree,  and  alle  trees, 

30  "Whanne  thei  bringen  forth  of  hem 
fruyt  now,  je  witen  for  soiner  is  iii3  ; 

3 1  So  also,  whanne  5e  schulen  se  thes 
thingis  to  be  don,  wite  je,  for  the 
kyngdom  of  God  is  nys. 

3  2  Trculi  I  seie  to  30U,  for  this  genera- 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


4ia 


19  With  youre  pacience  possesse  youre 
soulcs. 

20  And  Avhen  ye  se  Jerusalem  besegcd 
with  an  hoste,  then  vndcrstondc,  that 
the  desolacion  of  tlic  same  is  nyc. 

21  Then  Ictt  them  which  arc  in  Icwrv, 
flye  to  the  mountayiies  ;  and  let  them 
which  are  in  the  myddes  off  hit,  departe 
oute  ;  and  lett  not  them  that  are  in 
other  countreis,  enter  there  in. 

2.2  For  these  be  the  dayes  of  vcnge- 
aunce,  to  fulfill  all  that  are  written. 

23  Butt  wo  be  to  them,  that  be  with 
chylde,  and  to  them  that  geve  sucke  in 
those  dayes  ;  for  thex-e  shalbe  greate 
trouble  in  the  londc,  and  wrathe  over 
all  this  people. 

24  And  they  shall  fal  on  the  edge  of 
the  swearde,  and  they  shalbe  Iced  cap- 
tiue  in  to  all  nacions  ;  and  Jerusalem 
shalbe  troodeu  vnder  fote  off  tlie  gen- 
tvls,  vntyll  the  tyme  of  the  gentyls  be 
fulfilled. 

25  And  there  shalbe  signes  in  the 
sunne,  and  in  the  mone,  and  in  the 
starres ;  and  in  the  erth  the  people 
shalbe  in  soche  perplexite,  that  they 
shall  not  tell  which  waye  to  turne  them 
selves,  the  see  and  the  waves  shall  roore  ; 

26  And  mennes  hertes  shall  faylc  them 
for  feare  and  for  lokynge  after  thoose 
thinges  whicli  shall  come  on  the  erth  ; 
for  the  powers  of  heven  shall  move. 

27  And  then  shall  they  se  the  sonne  of 
man  come  in  a  clowde,  with  power  and 
greate  glory. 

28  "When  these  thynges  begyn  to  come 
to  passe,  then  loke  vppe,  and  lifte  vppc 
youi-e  heddcs,  for  youre  redemcion  draw- 
ith  neye. 

29  And  he  shewed  them  a  similitude, 
Leholde  the  fygge  tree,  and  all  other 
trees, 

30  When  they  shutc  forth  their  buddes, 
ye  se  and  knowe  of  youre  awne  selves 
that  sommcr  is  then  neye  att  bond  ; 

31  Soo  lyke  wyse  ye,  when  ye  se  these 
thynges  come  to  passe,  vnderstonde,  that 
the  kyngdom  of  God  is  neye. 

32  Vcrcly  I  sale  vnto  you,  this  genera- 


414  GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

cneores  ne  gewit,  Eerdam  de  ealle  das 
]jing  geweordon, 

33  Heofen  and  eorj^e  gewita]?,  s6|)lice 
mine  word  ne  gewita]?.''' 

34  Warnia})  eow,  de-lses  cower  lieortan 
gehefegode  syn  on  ofer-fylle,  and  on 
druncennesse,  and  dises  lifes  carum,  and 
on  eow  se  fserlica  dteg  becume ; 

35  Swa  swa  grin  he  becym|)  on  ealle, 
da  de  sittajj  ofer  eor])an  ansyne. 

36  Wacia]>  on  ajlcere  tide,  and  bidcla}>, 
diet  ge  weorde  syn  dtet  ge  das  towerdan 
j)iiig  forfleon,  and  staudan  beforan  nian- 
nes  suna. 

37  S6j)lice  he  wees  on  dseg  on  dam 
temple  Iserende,  and  on  niht  he  code 
and  Avunode  on  dam  munte,  de  ys  ge- 
Gweden  Oliueti. 

38  And  eall  folc  on  morgen  com  to 
him,  to  dam  temple,  da^t  hi  hine  ge- 
hyrdon. 


Chap.  XXIL  '''i  Da  so]jlice  genea- 
Ifehte  freols-dseg  azimoriim,  se  is  ge- 
cweden  eastre. 

2  And  dara  sacerda  ealdras  and  da 
boceras  smeadon,  hii  hig  hine  forspildon, 
so)jlice  hig  ondredon  him  dast  folc. 

3  Da  code  Satanas  on  ludam,  se  wses 
odre  naman  Scarioth,  an  of  dam  twelf- 
um. 

4  Da  ferde  he,  and  sprsec  mid  dara 
sacerda  ealdor-mannum,  and  dugude 
ealdrum,  hii  he  hine  him  jvesealde. 

5  And  hig  fagenodon,  and  him  wed- 
dedon  feoh  to  syllanne. 

6  And  he  behet,  and  he  s5hte  hu  he 
eadelicost  hine,  be-seftan  dsere  menego, 
gesealde. 

7  Da  com  se  da3g  azimorum,  on  dam 
hi  woldon  h}Ta  eastron  gewyrcan. 

8  And  he  sende  Petrum  and  lohannem, 
and  cwa^J)  to  him,  Fara)?  and  gearwiajj 
us,  daet  we  lire  eastron  gewyrcon. 

0  Da  cwfedon  hig,  Hwar  wylt  dii,  dset 
ve  "-earwiou  1 


XXI.  33-XXII.  9.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

cioun  schal  not  passe,  til  alio  tliingis  be 
lion. 

33  Hcucnc  and  crthc  scliulcn  passe, 
but  my  wordis  scluilon  not  passe. 

34  Forsothe  take  -jc  liecdo  to  30U  silf, 
lest  per  auenturc  50ure  Ileitis  be  greuyd 
with  glotenye,  and  drunkenossc,  and 
bisynessis  of  this  lyf,  and  thilke  day 
(■■  'Hie  sudeyn  on  50U  ; 

;;,-;  For  as  a  snare  it  schal  come  on 
;il!e  men,  that  sitten  on  the  face  of  al 
erthe. 

36  And  so  wake  50,  preiyngc  in  ech 
tyme,  that  50  be  worthi  to  lie  alle  thcs 
tliingis  that  schulen  come,  and  to  stonde 
bifore  uiannis  sonc. 

37  Foisoth  in  daycs  he  Avas  tcchinge 
in  the  temple,  but  he  goynge  out  dwcll- 
ide  in  nyjtis  in  the  hil,  which  is  clcpid 
of  Olyuctc. 

38  And  al  the  peple  roos  erly,  to  come 
to  him  in  the  temple,  for  to  heere  him. 


Chap.  XXII.  i  Forsothe  the  hali- 
day  of  therf  looues,  wnicii  is  seid  paske, 
nei5ede. 

2  And  the  princes  of  prestis  and  the 
scribis  sou5ten,  hou  thei  schulden  slee 
Jhesu,  but  thei  dredden  the  peple. 

3  Sothli  Sathanas  entride  in  to  Judas, 
that  was  clepid  Scarioth,  oon  of  the 
tweluc. 

4  And  he  wcnte,  and  spak  with  the 
princes  of  prestis,  and  with  the  mages- 
tratis,  how  he  schulde  bitraye  him  to 
hem. 

5  And  thei  ioyeden,  and  maden  couen- 
aunt  to  5yue  money  to  him. 

6  And  he  bilii5te,  and  he  sou5te  couen- 
!  ablete,  that  he  schulde  bitraye  him,  with 

oute  the  cunipanyes. 

7  Sotlily  the  day  of  therf  looues  cam, 
in  which  it  was  ncde,  that  pask^  be 
slayn. 

i  8  And  he  scnte  Petre  and  John,  sey- 
inge,  5e  goynge  make  redy  pask  to  vs, 
that  we  cte. 

9  And  thei  seiden,  Where  wolt  thou, 
that  wc  make  redy  ? 


TYNDALE,  1526.  415 

ciou  shall  not  passe,  tyll  all  be  fulfilled, 

^3  TTevcn  and  erth  shall  passe,  but  my 
wordes  shall  not  passe. 

34  Take  hede  to  youre  selves,  lest 
youre  hertcs  be  overcome  with  surfctt- 
j-nge,  and  dronkennes,  and  cares  of  this 
v.'orlde,  and  that  that  dayc  come  on  you 
vnwarcs  ; 

35  For  as  a  snare  shall  hit  come  on  all 
them,  that  sit  on  the  face  of  the  erthe. 

S6  Watclie  therfore  continually,  and 
praye,  that  ye  maye  scape  all  this  that 
shal  come,  and  that  ye  maye  stonde 
before  the  sonne  of  man. 

37  lu  the  daye  tyme  taught  he  in  the 
temple,  and  at  nyght  he  went  out,  and 
had  abydynge  in  the  mount  Olivete. 

38  And  all  the  people  cam  in  the  morn- 
yuge  to  hym,  into  the  temple,  for  to 
heare  hym. 


Chap.  XXII.     i  The  feaste  ofF  swcte 
breed  drue  nye,  whych  is  called  ester. 

2  And  the  hye  prestes  and  scrybes 
sought,  howc  to  kyll  Jesus,  but  they 
feared  the  people. 

3  Then  entred  Satan  into  Judas,  whose 
syr  name  was  Iscariot,  which  was  of  the 
nombre  off  the  twelve. 

4  And  he  went  his  Avaye,  and  com- 
mened  with  the  hye  prestes,  and  officers, 
how  he  wolde  bctraye  hym  vnto  them. 

5  And  they  were  glad,  and  promysed 
to  geve  hym  money. 

6  And  he  consented,  and  sought  opor- 
tunite,  to  betraye  hym  vnto  them,  when 
the  people  were  awaye. 

7  Then  cam  that  daye  of  swete  breed, 
Avhen  off  necessite,  the  ester  lambe  muste 
be  offered. 

8  And  he  sent  Peter  and  Jhon,  seiynge, 
Goo  and  prepare  vs  the  ester  lambe, 
that  Ave  maye  eate. 

0  They  sayde  to  hym,  Where  Avilt  thou, 
that  Ave  prepare  ? 


416  GOTHIC,  3(5o. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

TO  And  lie  cwsejj  to  him,  Nu  !  itoiinc 
ge  on  da  ceastre  ga]',  eow  jlgen  yrn})  iiu 
man  mid  wseter-buce  ;  liligeajj  him  on 
dset  hus,  de  he  in-gse]). 

n  And  secgajj  dam  hiis-hlaforde,  U're 
lareow  de  secgj',  Hwar  ys  cumena  hus, 
dar  ic  mine  eastron  wyrce  mid  minum 
leorning-ciiihtum  ? 

12  And  he  eow  betsec})  mycele  healle 
gedfefte,  gegeanvia];  dara. 

13  Da  ferdon  hig,  and  gemetton  swa 
lie  him  saede,  and  hig  gcgearwodou 
eastrun. 

14  And  da  tima  wees,  he  stet,  and  his 
twelf  apostolas  mid  him. 

15  And  he  ssede  him,  Of  gewilnunge 
ic  gewilnode  etan  mid  eow  das  eastron, 
aer  ic  for])-fare  ; 

16  Ic  eow  secge,  deet  ic  heonon-for))  ne 
ete,  8er  hit  sy  on  Godes  rice  gefylled. 

1 7  And  onfeng  calice,  and  |:ancas  dyde, 
and  cwa3]j,  Oufo]),  and  dseiajj  betwux 
eow ; 

18  S6j)lice  ic  eow  secge,  dtet  ic  ne  drince 
of  dises  win-geardes  cynne,  ser  Godes 
rice  cume. 

J  9  And  he  onfeng  hlafe,  and  jjancode, 
and  him  sealde,  and  cvvee]),  Dis  is  min 
lichama,  se  is  for  eow  geseald ;  do])  dis 
en  min  gemynd. 

20  And  swa  eac  done  calic,  syddan  he 
ge-eten  h?efde,  and  cwa?]?,  Des  calic  is 
niwe  gecydnes  on  minum  blode,  se  bi[j 
for  eow  ligoten. 

21  Deah  hwsedere,  her  is  dses  Isewan 
hand  mid  me  on  mysan. 

22  And  witodlice  mannes  sunu  gsej% 
feftcr  dam  de  him  f5re-stihtod  wtes  ; 
deah  hwsedere  wa  dam  men,  de  he  };urli 
geseald  hi]). 

23  And  hi  ligunnon  betwux  liim  smea- 
gan,  hwylc  of  him  dtet  to  doime  weere. 

24  And  111  fliton  betwux  him,  hwylc 
hyra  ware  yldest. 


XXII.  IO-24.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

10  And  he  seide  to  liem,  Lo  !  50U  en-  I 
tringe  in  to  the  citee,  sun\  man  beringe 
a  vessel   with   watir   sclial   come  a3ens 
30U  ;    sue  5e  liim  in  to  the  hous,  in  to 
which  he  cntrith. 

1 1  And  5c  schulon  scyc  to  the  hose- 
bonde  man  of  tlie  hous,  Tiie  maistir 
seith  to  thee,  Where  is  the  herborgerie, 
where  I  schal  ete  pask  with  my  dis- 
cijilisl 

I  2  And  he  schal  soliewe  to  30U  a  greet 
souping  place  strewid,  and  there  make 
3e  redy. 

13  Sothli  thei  goynge  founden  as  he 
seide  to  liem,  and  there  thei  madeu 
redy  the  paske. 

14  And  whanne  the  our  was  maad,  he 
sat  to  the  mete,  and  twelue  apostlis 
with  him. 

I  5  And  he  seide  to  hem,  With  desyr 
I  haue  desyrid  to  ete  with  30U  this  pask, 
bifbre  that  I  sufFre  ; 

16  Forsothe  I  seie  to  50U,  for  fro  this 
tyme  I  shal  not  ete  it,  til  it  be  fillid  in 
the  rcwme  of  God. 

17  And  the  cuppc  takun,  he  dide 
thankingis,  and  seide,  Take  56,  and  de- 
parte  ^e  among  50U  ; 

1 8  Forsothe  I  seie  to  50U,  I  schal  not 
drynke  of  the  generacioun  of  this  vyne, 
til  the  rewme  of  God  come. 

19  And  the  breed  takun,  he  dide 
thankingis,  and  brak,  and  5af  to  hem, 
seyinge,  This  is  my  body,  which  schal 
be  jOuun  for  50U ;  do  5e  this  thing  in 
to  my  commemoracioun. 

::o  Also  and  the  chalys,  aftir  that  he 
liadde  soupid,  sepnge.  This  cuppe  is  the 
newe  testament  in  my  blood,  which 
schal  be  sched  for  50U. 

2 1  Xetheles  lo !  the  hond  of  a  mail 
bitrayinge  me  is  with  me  in  the  bord. 

22  And  sothli  mannis  sone  goth,  vp 
that  it  is  determynd  ;  netheles  wo  to 
that  man,  bi  whom  he  schal  be  bitrayed. 

23  And  thei  bigynnen  to  seche  among 
liem  silf,  who  it  was  of  hem,  that  was 
to  doynge  this  thing. 

24  And  stryf  was  maad  among  hem, 
which  of  hem  schulde  be  seyn  to  be 
more. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


417 


10  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Beholde ! 
as  ye  enter  into  the  cite,  there  shall 
a  man  mete  you  bearynge  a  i)itcher 
off  water  ;  hym  folowe  into  the  same 
housse,  that  he  entrcth  in. 

1 1  And  ye  shall  save  vnto  the  goode 
man  off  the  housse.  The  master  sayeth, 
Whore  is  the  gest  cinunber,  where  I 
shall  eate  myne  ester  landje  wyth  my 
dissciples  ] 

12  And  he  shall  sliewe  you  a  greate 
parloure  paved,  there  make  redy. 

13  They  went  and  founde  as  he  had 
sayde  vnto  them,  and  made  redy  the 
ester  land)e. 

14  And  when  the  houre  cam,  he  sate 
doune,  and  the  twelve  apostles  with 
hym. 

15  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  I  have  in- 
wardly desyred  to  eate  this  ester  lambe 
Avitli  you,  before  that  Y  suffre  ; 

16  For  I  saye  vnto  you,  hence  forthe 
I  will  nott  eate  of  it  eny  moore,  vntill 
itt  be  fulfilled  in  the  kyngdom  of  God. 

17  And  he  toke  the  cuppe,  and  gave 
thankes,  and  sayde,  Receave  this,  and 
devyde  itt  amonge  you  ; 

18  For  I  saye  vnto  you,  I  will  not 
drynke  of  the  frutc  of  the  vyne,  vntill 
the  kyngdom  of  God  be  come. 

1 9  And  he  toke  breed,  and  gave  thankes, 
and  brake  itt,  and  gave  it  vnto  them, 
sayingc,  Tiiys  is  my  body,  which  is 
geven  for  you  ;  thys  do  in  the  remem- 
braunce  of  me. 

20  Lykewyse  alsoo  when  they  had 
supped,  he  toke  the  cuppe,  sayinge.  This 
is  the  cuppe,  the  newe  testamentt  in  my 
bloud,  which  sliall  for  you  be  shedde. 

21  Yet  beholde!  the  hondc  off  hym  that 
betrayeth  me  is  with  me  on  the  table. 

2  2  And  the  sonue  of  man  goeth,  as  hit 
is  appoynted  ;  but  wo  be  to  that  man, 
by  whom  he  is  betrayed. 

23  And  they  began  to  enquyre  amonge 
them  selves,  which  off  them  it  shulde 
be,  that  shulde  do  that. 

24  And  there  was  a  stryfe  amonge 
them,  which  of  them  shulde  seme  great- 
est. 

1:  e 


418 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

25  Da  ssecle  he  him,  Cyningas  wealdaj) 
hyi-a  ))eo(la,  and  da  cle  anweald  ofer  big 
habbaj)  synd  fremfulle  genemned, 

26  Ac  ne  beo  ge  na  swa ;  ac  gewurde 
he  swa  swa  gingra,  se  de  yldra  ys  be- 
twux  eow,  and  se  de  fore-stteppend  ys, 
beo  he  swylce  he  J'en  sy. 

27  HwEeder  ys  yldra,  de  se  de  pena]?, 
de  se  de  sit?  witodlice  se  de  sit.  Ic 
eom  on  eowrum  midlene,  swa  swa  se  de 
})ena)'. 

28  Ge  synd,  de  mid  me  jjuvh-wunedon 
on  minum  geswincum  ; 

29  And  ic  eow  dihte,  swa  min  fseder 
me  rice  dihte, 

30  Diet  ge  eton  and  drincon  ofer  mine 
mysan  on  mmum  rice,  and  ge  sitton 
ofer  ])rym-setl,  demende  twelf  maeg^'a 
Israhel. 

31  Da  cwsejj  Drihten  Simon,  Simon, 
mi !  Satanas  gyrnde,  dset  he  eow  hrid- 
rode  swa  swa  hwsete  ; 

32  Ic  gebaed  for  de,  dset  din  geleafa 
ne  geteorige  ;  and  du  set  sumum  cyrre 
gewend,  getryme  dine  gebrodru. 

33  Da  cwje^  he,  Drihten,  ic  eom  gearu 
to  liirenne  mid  de,  ge  on  cwertern  ge 
on  deajj. 

34  Da  cwsejj  he,  Ic  secge  de,  Petrus, 
ne  crsew])  se  hana  to-dseg,  aer  du  me 
set-ssecst. 

35  Da  cwse})  he  to  him.  Da  ic  eow 
seude  butan  seode,  and  codde,  and  gescy, 
wses  eow  senig  \\ng  wana  %  Da  cwsedou 
hig,  Nan  jiing. 

36  Da  cwa3jj  he,  Ac  nu  se  de  h8ef|)  seod, 

gelice  nime  codd ;  and  se  de 

nsef}?,  sylle  his  tiiuecau,  and  bycge  him 
sweord. 

37  S5|)hce  ic  eow  secge,  dset  gyt  sceal 
beon  gefylled  dast  be  me  awriten  is.  And 
djfit  he  mid  unrihtwisum  geteald  woes ; 
witodhce  da  \mg  de  be  me  synd  habbaj>l 
ende. 

38  And  hig  cwBedon,  Drihten,  her  synd 
twa  sweord.  And  he  cwsejj,  Da^t  is 
genoh. 

39  And  sefter  gewunan,  he  ut-eode  on 
dsene  muut  OHuarum,  dset  is  Ele-berg- 


XXII.  25-39.]  ^VYCLIFFE,  1389. 

25  Forsoth  lie  seide  to  hem,  Kyngis 
of  lietlu'ii  men  bcu  lordis'*'  of  hem,  and 
tlioi  tliat  lian  power  on  hem  ben  clepid 
goode  ;yueris, 

26  But  56  not  so  ;  hut  he  that  is  the 
more  in  50U,  be  maad  as  the  5ongcre, 
and  lie  that  is  bifore  goer,  as  a  seruaunt. 

27  Forwlii  who  is  the  more,  he  that 
restith,  utlier  he  that  mynistrith  ]  wher 
not  he  that  restith  I  Forsoth  I  am  in  the 
nmldis  of  5()u,  as  he  that  mynistrith. 

28  iSothli  50  it  ben,  that  han  dwelt 
with  me  in  my  temptaciouns  ; 

29  And  I  dispose  to  50U,  as  my  fadir 
hath  disposed  to  me,  a  rewme, 

30  That  56  ete  and  drynke  on  my  bord 
in  my  rewme,  and  sitte  on  trones,  dem- 
ynge  twelue  kynredis  of  Israel. 

3 1  Forsothe  the  Lord  seide  to  Symount, 
Symouut,  lo  !  Sathanas  hath  axid  30U, 
that  he  seiiulde  ridele  as  Avhete ; 

32  Ijut  I  haue  preied  for  thee,  that 
thi  feith  fayle  not ;  and  thou  conuertid 
sum  tyme,  conferme  thi  britheren. 

33  Which  seide  to  him.  Lord,  I  am 
rcdi  to  go  with  thee,  and  in  to  prisoun 
and  in  to  deeth. 

34  And  he  seide,  I  seie  to  thee,  Peter, 
the  koc  schal  not  crowe  to  day,  til  thou 
thries  forsake  to  kuowe  me. 

35  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Whanne  I 
sente  50U  with  oute  sachel,  and  sci-ip, 
and  schoon,  wher  ony  thing  failide  to 
50U  ?    And  thei  scideu.  No  thing. 

36  Therfore  he  seide  to  hem,  But  now 
he  that  hath  a  sachel,  take  also  and  a 
scrippe  ;  and  he  that  hath  not,  selle  his 
coote,  and  bye  a  swerd. 

37  Sothli  I  seie  to  50U,  for  5it  it  bi- 
houcth  this  thing  that  is  Avritun  to  be 
fulfil  lid  in  me,  And  he  is  demyd  with 
■wickide  men  ;  forsothe  tho  thingis  that 
ben  of  me  han  an  eude. 

38  And  thei  seiden,  Lord,  lo  !  tweye 
swerdis  here.  And  he  scyde  to  hem,  It 
is  ynow3. 

39  And  he  gon  out,  wente  bi  custom 
in  to  the  hil  of  Olyues ;  sothli  and  the 


TYNDALE,  irafS. 


419 


25  And  he  saydc  vuto  them.  The 
kynges  of  the  gcntyls  raignc  over  them, 
and  they  that  beare  rule  over  them  are 
called  gracious  lordes, 

26  But  ye  shall  nott  be  soo  ;  but  he 
that  is  greatest  amongc  you,  shalbe  as 
the  yongest,  and  he  that  is  chefe,  shalbe 
as  minister. 

27  For  whether  is  greater,  he  that 
sitteth  at  meate,  or  he  that  serveth  1  is 
not  he  that  sitteth  at  meate  1  And  I 
am  amoiige  you,  as  he  that  ministreth. 

28  Ye  are,  which  have  bidden  with  me 
in  my  temptaclons  ; 

29  And  I  apoynt  vnto  you  a  kyngdom, 
as  my  father  hath  apoynted  to  me, 

30  That  ye  maye  eate  and  drynke  at 
my  table  in  my  kyngdome,  and  sit  on 
seates,  and  iudge  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israeli. 

3 1  And  the  Lorde  sayde,  Simon,  Simon, 
beholde !  Satan  hath  desired  you,  to 
sifte  you  as  it  were  wheate  ; 

32  Butt  I  have  prayed  for  the,  that 
thy  fayth  fayle  nott  ;  and  when  thou 
arte  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren. 

33  And  he  sayd  vnto  hym,  Lorde,  I 
am  redy  to  goo  with  the,  in  to  preson 
and  to  deth. 

34  And  he  sayde,  I  tell  the,  Peter,  the 
cocke  shall  nott  crowe  this  daye,  till 
thou  have  thryse  denyed  that  thou 
knewest  me. 

35  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  When  I 
sent  you  with  out  wallett,  and  scrippe, 
and  shoues,  lacked  ye  eny  thynge  ?  And 
they  sayd,  No  thynge. 

36  And  he  sayde  to  them,  But  nowe 
he  that  hath  a  wallet,  let  him  take  itfc 
and  lykewyse  his  scrippe ;  and  he  thatt 
hath  noo  swearde,  let  hym  sell  his  coote, 
and  bye  won. 

37  I  saye  vnto  you,  that  yet  that  which 
is  written  must  be  performed  in  me, 
Even  with  the  wicked  was  he  nombred  ; 
for  those  thynges  which  are  written  of 
me  have  an  ende. 

38  And  they  sayd,  Lorde,  beholde .' 
here  are  two  sweardes.  And  he  sayde 
vnto  them.  It  is  ynough. 

39  And  he  cam  out,  and  went  as  he 
I  was  wonte  to  mounte  Olivete ;  and  his 

E  e  2 


420 


GOTHIC.  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

ena  ;     and    his    leorniiig-cnihtas    him 
filigdon. 

40  And  da  he  com  to  clsere  st5we,  he 
ssede  him,  Gebidda}',  cJa^t  ge  on  costnunge 
ne  gan. 

41  And  he  wses  fram  him  alocen,  swa 
mycel  swa  is  anes  stanes  wyrp ;  and 
gebigedum  cneowum,  he  hine  gebasd, 

42  And  cwje)',  Faeder,  gif  ctu  wylt, 
afyr  dysne  calic  fram  me  ;  deah  hwsedere 
ne  geweorde  min  willa,  ac  din. 

43  Da  set-ywde  him  Godes  engel  of 
heofene,  and  hine  gestrangode. 

44  And  he  wses  on  gewinne,  and  hine 
lange  gebaed  ;  and  his  swat  Avses  swylce 
blcdes  droi^an  on  eorjjan  yrnende. 

45  And  da  he  of  gebede  artis,  and  com 
to  his  leorning-cnilitum,  he  hig  fiiude 
slsepende  for  unrotnesse. 

46  And  he  ssede  him,  Hwi  slaps  ge  1 
A'risa)),  and  bidda];,  dtet  ge  on  costnunge 
ne  gan. 

47  Him  da  dil  gyt  sprecendum,  da 
com  daet  wered,  and  him  to-foran  code 
an  of  dam  twelfmn,  se  waes  genemned 
ludas  ;  and  he  genealsehte  dam  Heel- 
ende,  dset  he  hine  cyste. 

48  Da  cwje})  se  Haelend,  ludas,  mannes 
sunu  du  mid  cosse  sylst  1 

49  Da  gesawon  da  de  him  abutan 
wseron,  da^t  dfer  towerd  wses,  and  cwsed- 
on,  Drihten,  slea  we  mid  sweorde  1 

50  Da  sloh  hyra  sin  dara  sacerda  ealdres 
Jjeow,  and  his  swydre  eare  of-acerf. 

51  Da  andswarode  se  Hbvlend,  Lseta)) 
dus.  And  da  he  pet-hran  his  eare,  he 
hit  gehselde. 

52  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend  to  dam  ealdor- 
mannum,  and  to  dam  witum,  and  dses 
temples  ealdrum,  Ge  ferdon  swa  swa  to 
anum  scea|)an  mid  SAveordum  and  mid 
sahlum,  dast  ge  me  gefengou  1 

53  Da  ic  wses  dieghwamlice  on  temple 
mid  eow,  ne  a})enedon  ge  eower  handa 
on  me  ;  ac  dis  is  eower  tid,  and  jjystra 
anweald. 


XXII.  40-53]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

ilisciplis  sucdon  liiin. 

40  Aiul  wlmnne  he  cam  to  tlie  place, 
he  soyde  ti)  hem,  Pieic  5e,  lost  50  ontie 
iu  to  toinptaoioun. 

41  Aiul  he  was  takuu  awcy  fro  hem, 
as  mychc  as  is  a  stoones  cast ;  and  the 
knees  put,  he  preide, 

42  SoyinLje,  Fadir,  if  thou  wolt,  turn 
oner  this  cu])pe  fro  nie  ;  ncthclcs  not 
my  wille  be  don,  but  thin. 

43  Forsoth  an  aungel  apperide  to  him 
fro  heuone,  cumfortinge  him. 

44  And  he  niaad  in  agonye,^  preiode 
lengere ;  and  his  swoot  was  maad  as 
dropis  of  blood  rennyngc  doun  in  to 
the  ertlie. 

45  And  whanne  he  hadde  rise  fro 
preier,  and  hadde  come  to  his  disciplis, 
he  fond  hem  slepinge  for  heuynesse. 

46  And  he  seide  to  hem,  What  slepen 
5e  1  Ryse  5e,  and  preie  je,  that  ■^e  eutre 
not  in  to  temptacioun. 

47  )it  him  spekinge,  lo  !  a  cumpany, 
and  he  that  was  clepid  Judas,  oon  of 
the  twelue,  wente  bifore  hem  ;  and  he 
nei5ede  to  Jhesu,  that  he  sehulde  kissc 
him. 

48  Sothli  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  Judas, 
bitrayest  thou  mannis  sone  with  a  coss  1 

49  Forsoth  thei  that  weren  aboute 
hym,  seynge  the  thing  that  was  to  com- 
ynge,  seiden  to  him,  Lord,  wher  we 
smyten  by  swerd  1 

-,0  And  oon  of  hem  smoot  the  seruaunt 
of  the  ])rince  of  the  prestis,  and  kittidc 
of  his  litel  ri5t  eere. 

51  Forsothe  Jhesu  answeringe  seyde, 
SuflTre  36  til  hidur.  And  whanne  he 
hadde  touchid  his  litil  eere,  he  heelide 
him. 

52  Forsothe  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  that 
camen  to  him,  the  princes  of  prestis, 
and  magestratis,  and  eldere  men,  As  to 
a  theef  56  han  gon  out  with  swerdis  and 
stanes  1 

53  Whanne  I  was  cche  day  with  30U 
in  the  temple,  je  strei3ten  not  out  the 
hondis  into  me  ;  but  this  is  30ure  our, 
and  the  power  of  derknessis. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 

disciples  folowed  hym. 


421 


40  And  when  he  cam  to  the  place,  he 
sayde  to  them,  Fraye,  lest  ye  fall  into 
temj)tacion. 

41  And  he  gate  hym  silfo  from  them, 
about  a  stones  cast ;  and  kneled  doune, 
and  prayed, 

42  Sayingc,  Father,  if  thou  wilt,  with- 
drawe  this  cuppe  from  me  ;  neverthe- 
lesse  nott  my  wyll,  butt  thyne  be  ful- 
filled. 

43  And  there  apercd  an  angell  vnto 
hym  from  heven,  confortynge  hym. 

44  And  he  was  in  agony,  and  prayed 
somwhat  longer ;  and  hys  sweate  was 
lyke  droppes  of  bloud  tricklynge  doune 
to  the  grounde. 

45  And  he  rose  vppe  from  prayer,  and. 
cam  to  his  disciples,  and  founde  them 
slepynge  for  sorowe. 

46  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Why  slepe 
ye  1  Ryse,  and  praye,  lest  ye  fall  into 
temptacion. 

47  Whyll  he  yet  spake,  beholde  !  there 
cam  a  company,  and  he  that  was  called 
Judas,  one  oft"  the  twelve,  went  befoi-e 
them  ;  and  j^reased  neye  vnto  Jesus,  to 
kysse  hym. 

48  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  Judas,  bc- 
trayest  thou  the  sonne  off  man  with  a 
kysse  1 

49  When  they  which  were  about  hym 
i  sawe  what  wolde  folow,  they  sayde  vnto 

hym,    Lorde,    shall    we    smyte    with    a 
swearde  1 

50  And  one  off"  them  smote  a  servaunt 
oft"  hym,  which  was  the  chcfe  preste  of 
all,  and  smote  oft"  his  righte  eare. 

5 1  Jesus  answered  and  sayde,  Soffi'e 
ye  thus  farre  forthe.  And  he  touched 
his  eare,  and  healed  hym. 

52  Jesus  sayde  vnto  the  hye  prestes, 
and  rulers  off  the  temple,  and  the  sen- 
yours,  which  were  come  to  hym,  Be  ye 
come  outt  as  vnto  a  thefe  with  swcardes 
and  staves  1 

53  When  I  was  dayly  with  you  in  the 
temple,  ye  stretched  not  forth  hondes 
agaynst  me  ;  butt  this  is  even  youre 
very  houre,  and  the  power  oft"  darknes. 


422  GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Luke 

54  Da  namon  hig  hine,  and  Iseddon  to 
dsera  sacerda  ealdres  huse ;  and  Petrus 
fyligde  feorran. 

55 And  Petrus  wses  mid  him 

on  middan  dam  cafer-tune,  dar  hig  set 
dam  fyre  sseton. 

56  Da  hine  geseah  smu  ])men  fet  leohte 
sittendne,  and  hine  beheold,  da  cwsejj 
heo,  And  des  wses  mid  him. 

57  Da  0et-s6c  he,  and  cwseji,  Eala  wif, 
ne  can  ic  hine. 

58  And  da  ymbe  lytel  hine  geseah 
oder,  and  cwee\>,  Du  eart  of  him.  Da 
cwsejj  Petrus,  Eala !  mann,  ic  ne  eom. 

59  And  da  sefter  lytlum  fsece  swylce 
anre  tide,  sum  oder  sedde,  and  cwaejj, 
S5))lice  des  wa?s  mid  him ;  witodlice  he 
is  Galileisc. 

60  Dii  cw0e]j  Petrus,  Eala  man,  nat 
ic  hwtet  dil  segst.  And  da  hig  daat 
sprsecon,  samnunga  se  liana  creow. 

61  Da.  Drihten  bewende  hine,  and 
beseah  to  Petre  ;  da,  gemunde  Petrus 
Drihtnes  wordes,  de  he  cwfeji,  Dset  du 
min  set-ssecst  jn-iwa  to-dfeg,  ser  se  hana 
crawe. 

62  Da  code  Petrus  ut,  and  biterlice 
weop. 

63  And  da  de  done  Haelend  heoldon, 
hine  bysmredon  and  beoton. 

64  And  ofer-wi"ugon  his  ansyne,  and 
J>urcson  his  nebb,  and  acsodon  hine, 
A'rsed,  hwylc  is  se  de  de  sloh  1 

65  And  manega  odre  j^ing  hig  him  to 
cwsedon  dysigende. 

66  And  da  da  dteg  wres,  da  togfedere 
comou  dres  folces  yldran,  and  dara  sa- 
cerda ealdor-menn,  and  boceras,  and 
Iseddon  hine  to  hyra  gemote,  and 
cwEedon, 

67  Sege  us,  gif  du  sy  Crist.  Da  cwse}) 
he,  Deah  ic  eow  secge,  ge  me  ne  ge- 
lyfajj ; 

58  Deah  ic  eow  acsige,  ge  ne  and- 
swaria])  me,  ne  ne  forlaeta}). 

^0  IIeonon-foi'|)  bi)>  mannes  sunu  sit- 
tende  on  Godes  msegnes  swydran  healfe. 


XXII.  54-69-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

54  Sothli  thei  takinge  him,  Icdden  to 
the  lious  of  the  ])rince  of  prestis  ;  Petrs 
forsothe  suctle  him  a  for. 

55  Sothli  a  fyer  kyndlid  in  the  niyddel 
street  hous,  and  hem  sittingc  aboute, 
Poter  was  in  the  mjnUlol  of  hem. 

56  Whom  whanne  sum  handmaydo 
hiiddc  scyn  sittinge  at  the  li5t,  and 
hatUlo  biholde  liim,  she  scide,  And  this 
was  with  him. 

.",7  And  he  denyede  him,  seiyngc, 
Womman,  I  knowe  him  not. 

58  And  aftir  a  litil  a  nothir  man 
scynge  him,  seide,  And  thou  ert  of 
hem.  Petre  forsothe  seide,  A  !  man,  I 
am  not. 

59  And  a  space  maad  as  of  oon  our, 
sothli  anothir  affermyde,  seyinge,  Treuli 
and  this  was  with  him  ;  forwhi  and  he 
is  of  Galilee. 

60  And  Petre  seide,  Man,  I  wot  not 
what  tliou  seist.  And  a  non  5it  him 
spckinge,  a  cok  crew. 

61  And  the  Lord  turned  a5en,  biheekl 
Petre ;  and  Petre  hadde  mynde  of  the 
word  of  Jhesu,  as  he  hadde  seid,  For 
bifore  that  the  koc  crew,  thries  thou 
schalt  denye  me. 

62  Anil  Petre  gon  forth,  wepte  bit- 
turl}'. 

63  And  the  men  that  hcelden  him, 
scorn\(len  him  betinge. 

64  And  thei  veyliden  ''^him,  and  smyten 
his  face,  and  axiden  him,  seyinge,  Pro- 
phesie  thou,  who  is  he  that  smoot  thee. 

65  Also  thei  blasphemyuge  seiden 
manye  othere  thingis  a5ens  him. 

66  And  as  the  day  was  maad,  the 
cldere  men  of  the  peple,  and  the  princes 
of  prestis,  and  the  scribis  camen  to 
gidere,  and  ledden  liim  in  to  her  coun- 
ceil,  seyinge, 

67  If  thou  art  Crist,  seie  to  vs.  And 
lie  seide  to  hem,  If  I  schal  seye  to  30U, 
3e  schulcn  not  bileue  to  me ; 

68  Sothli  and  if  I  shal  axe,  50  schulcn 
not  answere  to  me,  nether  30  schuitu 
leue. 

69  Forsoth  aftir  this  tyme  mannis  sone 
sclial  be  sittinge  on  the  ri3thalf  of  the 
vertu  of  God. 


TYNDALE.  TS26. 


42.1 


54  Then  toke  they  hym,  and  ledde 
liym  and  brought  liym  to  the  hye  prestes 
houssc  ;  and  Peter  folowed  a  farre  off. 

55  When  tliey  had  kyndled  a  fyre  in 
the  myddes  of  the  palys,  and  were  sett 
doune  to  gedder,  Peter  alsoo  sate  doune 
a  monge  them. 

56  And  won  off  the  wenches  as  he  sate 
beholde  him  by  the  light,  and  sett  goode 
eyesight  on  hym,  and  sayde.  This  same 
was  also  with  hym. 

57  Then  lie  denyed  hym,  sayinge.  Wo- 
man, I  knowe  hym  nott. 

58  And  after  a  lytell  whyle  another 
sawe  hym,  and  sayde.  Thou  arte  alsoo 
off  them.  And  Peter  sayd,  Man,  I  am 
nott. 

59  And  aboute  the  space  off  an  lioure 
after,  another  affirmed,  sayinge,  Veroly 
even  this  folowe  was  with  hym  ;  for  he 
is  off  Galile. 

60  Peter  sayde,  Man,  I  woote  nott 
what  thou  sayest.  And  immediatly 
whill  he  yett  spake,  the  cocke  crewe. 

61  And  the  Lorde  tourned  backe.  and 
loked  ai)on  Peter  ;  and  Peter  remem- 
bred  the  wordes  off  the  Lorde,  howe 
he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Before  the  cocke 
crowe,  thou  shalt  denye  me  thryse. 

62  And  Peter  went  out,  and  wepte 
bitterly. 

6;>  And  tlie  men  that  stode  about 
Jesus,  mocked  hym  and  smoote  hym. 

64  And  blyndfolded  hym,  and  smoote 
his  face,  and  axed  hym,  sayinge,  Arede, 
who  it  is  that  smoote  the  1 

65  And  many  other  thynges  despyt- 
fully  sayde  they  agaynst  hym. 

66  And  as  sone  as  it  was  daye,  tlie 
seniours  off  the  people,  and  the  hy 
prestes,  and  scrybes  cam  togedder,  and 
ledde  hym  into  their  counsel],  sayinge, 

67  Arte  thou  very  Christ  ?  tell  vs. 
And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  If  I  shall 
tell  you,  ye  woU  not  beleve  ; 

68  And  if  alsoo  I  axe  you,  ye  will  nott 
answere  me,  nether  lett  me  goo. 

69  Here  after  shall  the  sonne  of  man 
sit  on  the  right  honde  of  the  power  of 
God. 


424  GOTHIC.  s6o. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

70  Da  cwsedon  hig  ealle,  Eart  du 
Godes  sunu  1  Da  cw8e)>  he,  Ge  secgaj> 
dset  ic  eom. 

71  And  hig  cwsedon,  Hwi  gyrne  we 
gyt  gewitnesse '?  sylfe  we  gehyrdon  of 
his  niuj)e.  ' 


Chap.  XXIII.      i  Da  aras  call  hyra 
msenigeo,  and  leeddon  hine  to  Pilate. 

2  And    agunnon    hyne   wregan,    and    , 
cwxdon,  Disne  we  gemetton  forhwyrf- 
ende  ure    j^eode,  and  forbeodende  dset 
man  dam  Casere  gafol  ne  sealde,  and 
seg)>  dset  he  sig  Crist  cyning. 

3  Da  acsode  Pilatus  hine,  Eart  du, 
ludea  ciningl  Da  andswarode  he,  Du 
hit  segst. 

4  Da  cwse])  Pilatus  to  dam  ealdrum, 
find  dam  werede,  Ne  finde  ic  nanue 
intingan  on  dysum  men. 

5  Da  hlyddon  hig,  and  cwsedon,  He 
astyiajj  dis  folc,  Iserende  ])Ui-h  ealle 
ludeam,  agynnende  of  Galilea  od  hyder.* 

6  Da  Pilatus  gehyrde  Galileam,  he 
acsode,  hwseder  he  wsere  Galileisc  man. 

7  And  da  he  gecneow  dset  he  wses  of 
Herodes  anwalde,  he  hine  agen-sende 
to  Herode  ;  he  Avses  on  dam  dagum  on 
Hierusalem. 

8  S6|)lice  Herodes  fagnode,  da  he  done   ' 
Hselend  geseah  ;  mycelre  tide  he  wilnode 
hine  geseon,  fordani  de  he  gehyrde  my- 
cel  be  him,  and  he  hopode  dset  he  gesawe 
sum  taceu  de  fram  him  gewurde. 

9  Da  acsode  he  hine  manegum  wordum, 
and  he  naht  ne  andswarode. 

10  Da  stodon  dara  sacerda  ealdras. 
hine  an-rsedlice  Avregende. 

11  Da  oferhogode  Herodes  hine  mid 
his  hirede,  and  bysmrode  hine  gescrydne 
hwitum  reafe,  and  hine  agen-sende  to 
Piiate. 

1 2  And  on  dam  da^ge  wurdon  Herodea 


XXII.  70.-XXIII.  12.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


425 


70  Tlierforc  alle  scideu,  Thcrfore  ert 
thou  the  sone  of  God  ]  Which  seide, 
3e  scyn  for  .1  am. 

71  And  thei  seiden,  What  5it  desyren 
jve  witnessing?  forsoth  we  vs  selue  him 
herd  of  his  mouth. 


CiiAP.  XXIII.  I  And  al  the  mul- 
titude risinge  of  hem,  leddeu  him  to 
Pihat. 

2  Forsotli  thei  bigunneu  to  accuse  him, 
deyinge.  We  hau  founden  this  vkih  turn- 
yuge  vpsodoun  oure  i'olk,  and  forbedinge 
tributis  to  be  5ouun  to  Cesar,  and  sey- 
inge  liim  silf  to  be  Crist  king. 
.  3  Forsothe  Pilat  axide  him,  seyinge, 
Ert  thou  Icyng  of  Jewis  1  And  he 
answeringe  seide,  Tliou  seist. 

4  Forsothe  Pilat  seide  to  the  princes 
of  prestis,  and  to  the  cumpanyes  of 
peple,  I  fynde  no  thing  of  cause  in 
this  man. 

5  And  thei  woxen  strengere,  seyinge, 
He  moueth  to  gidere  the  peple,  techinge 
thorw  al  Judee,  bigynnynge  fro  Galilee 
til  hidur. 

6  Pilat  forsoth  heeringe  Galilee  axide, 
if  he  were  a  man  of  GaUlee. 

7  And  as  he  knew  that  he  was  of  the 
power  of  Eroude,  he  sente  him  a3en  to 
Eroude ;  which  and  he  was  at  Jerusalem 
in  tho  dayes. 

8  Forsothe,  him  seyn,  Eroude  ioyede 
ful  myche ;  for  he  was  coueitinge  of 
moche  tyme  to  se  him,  for  he  heixle 
many  thingis  of  hym,  and  hopide  to  se 
jum  myracie  to  be  don  of  him. 

9  Sothli  he  axide  him  in  manye  wordis; 
and  lie  no  thinij  answeride  to  him. 

\ 

10  Forsothe  the  princes  of  prestis  and 
the  scrybis  stooden,  stedfastli  accusinge 
him. 

1 1  Sotldi  Eroude  with  his  oost  dispiside 
him,  and  scornyde  him  clothid  with  a 
whit  cloth,  and  sente  a3en  to  Pilate. 

1 2  And  Eroude  and  Pilate  wcren  maaJ 


70  Then  sayde  they  all,  Arte  thou  then 
the  Sonne  of  God  1  He  sayd,  Ye  saye 
that  I  am. 

71  Then  sayde  they,  What  node  we 
eny  further  witnes?  we  oure  selves  have 
herde  off  his  awne  mouthe. 


Chap.  XXIII.  i  And  the  whole 
multitude  of  them  arose,  and  ledde  hym 
vnto  Pilate. 

2  And  they  began  to  accuse  hym,  say- 
inge,  We  have  founde  this  felowe  per- 
vertynge  the  people,  and  forbiddynge 
to  paye  tribute  to  Cesar,  and  sayetli 
that  he  is  Christ,  a  kyngc. 

3  And  Pilate  apposed  him,  saynge. 
Arte  thou  the  kynge  of  the  lewes  ?  He 
answered  him  and  sayde,  Thou  sayest. 

4  Then  sayde  Pilate  to  the  bye  ])restes, 
and  to  the  people,  I  fynde  noo  fuute  in 
this  man. 

5  And  they  were  the  moore  fearce,  say- 
inge.  He  mooveth  the  people,  teachyngc 
thoroout  all  lewry,  and  began  at  Galile 
even  to  this  place. 

6  AVhen  Pilate  herde  mencion  off  Ga- 
lile, he  axed  whether  the  man  were  off 
Galile. 

7  And  as  sone  as  he  knewe  that  he 
was  of  Herodes  iurisdiccion,  he  sent 
hym  to  Herode  ;  which  was  at  that 
tyme  in  Jerusalem  alsoo. 

8  When  Herode  sawe  Jesus,  he  was 
merveliously  gladde  ;  for  he  was  de- 
syrous  to  se  hym  off  a  longe  season, 
be  cause  he  had  heard e  many  thynges 
of  hym,  and  tiousted  to  have  sene  some 
myracie  done  by  hym. 

9  Then  questenncd  he  with  hym  of 
many  thynges ;  but  he  answered  hym 
not  won  worde. 

10  The  bye  prcstes  and  scrybcs  stode 
forthe,  and  accused  hym  straitly. 

1 1  And  Herod  with  his  men  off  warrc 
despysed  hym,  and  mocked  hym  and 
arayed  hym  in  whyte,  and  sent  hym 
agayne  to  Pilate. 

12  And   the    same    dayc    Pilate    and 


4'2% 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

and  Pilatus  gefrynd  ;  sol^lice  big  WBeron 
ser  gefynd  liim  betweonan. 

13  Da  cwnej)  Pilatus  to  dara  sacerda 
ealdiuin  and  dugude  ealdrum  and  to 
dam  folce, 

14  Ge  broliton  me  disne  man,  swylce 
lie  dis  folc  for-lnvyrfde,  and  ml !  befuran 
eow  acsiende  ic  nanne  intingan  findan 
ne  mseg  on  disum  men,  of  dam  de  ge 
hine  wrega]? ; 

15  Ne  fm'don  Herodes,  ic  hine  sende 
agen  to  him,  and  him  naht  dses-lices 
deajie  gedon  waes. 

16  Ic  bine  gebetne  forleete. 

17  Niede  he  sceolde  him  forgyfan 
senne  to  hyra  freols-dfege. 

18  Da  hiymde  eall  dtet  folc  setgsedere, 
and  cwae{5,  Nim  disne,  and  forgif  us 
Barrabban  ; 

19  Se  wa^s  for  sumere  twy-rsednesse 
and  man-slyhte  on  cwcrteru  asend. 

20  Eft  spgec  Pilatus  to  him,  and  wolde 
forlsetan  done  Haelend. 

21  Da  hrymdon  hig,  and  cwsedon,  A'hoj^ 
hine,  alio])  hine. 

22  Da  cwaej?  lie  to  him  {jriddan  side, 
Hwset  dyde  des  yfeles  1  Ne  geniette  ic 
n;'n  j'ing  yfeles  on  dissum  men  doet  he 
sig  dea};es  scyldig ;  ic  hine  jjreage,  and 
for-lsete. 

23  And  hig  astodon  and  mycelre  stefne 
bfedon,  dtet  he  wsere  ahaiigen  ;  and  hyi'a 
stefna  swidredon. 


24 


25  And  he  forgef  him  done,  de  waes 
for  man-slyhte  and  sumere  sace  on 
cwerterne,  done  hi  bsedon  ;  and  done 
Hselend  he  sealde  to  hyra  willan. 

26  And  da  hig  hine  Iseddon,  hi  ge- 
fengon  sumne  Cyrcniscne  Simonem,  se 
com  of  dam  tune,  and  da  rode  him  on 
setton  dagt  he  hi  bsere  sefter  dam  Hsel- 
ende. 

27  Him  fylide  mycel  wered  folces,  and 
Wifa  da  hine  heofon,  and  weopon. 


XXIir.  13-27.]  WYCLTFFE,  1389. 

freiulis  in  thilke  clay  ;   forwlii  biforcto 
tliei  wercn  cncinycs  to  giilorc. 

13  Sotlili  tlio  princes  of  prostis  and 
the  magestratis  of  tlie  peplc  clepid  to 
giilere,_ 

14  Pilat  seide  to  hem,  5c  han  oftVid 
to  me  this  man,  as  turnynge  awey  the 
pople,  and  lo  !  I  axynge  byfore  50U 
tvnde  no  cause  in  this  man  of  thes 
thingis,  in  whichc  50  accuseu  him; 

15  But  ncthir  Eroudc,  for  I  a5ein  scute 
;ou  to  him,  and  lo  !  no  thing  worthi 
of  deeth  is  don  to  him. 

16  Therfore  I  schal  dclyuere  him  a- 
mended. 

17  Forsothe  he  hadde  nede  to  deliuere 
to  hem  oon  by  the  feeste  day. 

18  Sothli  al  the  cumpanye  criede,  sei- 
ynge,  Do  hina  awey,  and  deliuere  Bar- 
abas  to  vs  ; 

19  Which  was  sent  in  to  prison  for 
sum  dissencioun  maad  in  the  citoe,  and 
for  mansleyng. 

20  Forsoth  eft  Pilat  spak  to  hem,  wil- 
linge  to  deljTiere  Jhesu. 

2  I  And  thei  vndircryeden,  seyinge,  Cru- 
cifie,  crucitie  him. 

22  Sothli  the  thridde  tyme  he  seide  to 
hem,  Sothli  what  of  yiiel  hath  he  don  1 
I  fynde  no  cause  of  deeth  in  him  ;  ther- 
fore I  schal  chastise  hym,  and  I  schal 
delyuere. 

23  And  thei  contynueden  axinge  with 
grccte  voices,  that  he  schulde  be  cruci- 
fied ;  and  the  voyces  of  hem  woxen 
stronge. 

24  And  Pilat  dcmydc  her  axinge  to 
be  don. 

25  Sothli  he  deliuerede  to  hem  him, 
that  for  manslcynge  and  dissencioun 
was  sent  in  to  i)risoun,  whom  thei 
axiden  ;  sothli  he  bitook  Jhesu  to  her 
wille. 

26  And  whanne  thei  leddcn  him,  thei 
took  sum  man,  Symount  of  Sirenen, 
coinynge  fro  the  toun,  and  thei  puttiden 
to  him  a  cross  to  here  aftir  Jhesu. 

27  Sothli  ther  suede  him  moche  cum- 
panye of  peple,  and  of  wynimen  that 
weileden,  and  bymoornyden  hira. 


TYNDALE,  152^. 


4'> 


Herod  wcr  made  frcndos  togcddcr  ;  for 
l)ofore  they  Avere  at  variaunce. 

13  Pilate  called  to  gedder  the  liye 
prestcs  and  rulers  and  the  people, 

14  And  sayde  vnto  them,  Ye  have 
brought  this  man  vnto  me,  as  won  that 
perverted  the  people,  and  loo  !  I  ex- 
amined hym  before  you,  and  founde  noo 
faute  in  this  man  off  those  thinges, 
where  of  ye  accuse  hym  ; 

15  No  nor  yett  Horodo,  for  I  sent 
you  to  him,  and  lo  !  noo  thynge  worthy 
of  deeth  is  done  to  him. 

16  I  will  therfore  chasten  hym,  and 
Ictt  hym  loosse. 

17  For  off  neccssite  he  must  have  lett 
one  loosse  vnto  them  at  that  feast. 

18  And  all  the  people  cryed  at  once, 
saynge,  Awaye  with  him,  and  delivre 
to  vs  Bai'rabas  ; 

19  Which  for  insurreccion  made  in 
the  cite,  and  morther,  was  cast  iuto 
pi-eson. 

20  Pilate  spake  agayne  to  them,  wil- 
lynge  to  lett  Jesus  losse. 

21  And  they  cryed,  sayinge.  Crucify 
hym,  crucify  hym. 

22  He  sayde  vnto  them  the  thpxle 
tyme,  What  harme  hath  he  done  ]  I 
fynde  noo  cause  off  deeth  in  hym ;  I 
will  therfore  chasten  hym,  and  lett  hym 
goo  losse. 

23  And  they  cryed  with  loude  voyce, 
antl  requyred  that  he  myght  be  cruci- 
fycd;  and  the  cryinge  off  the  hye  prestes 
prevayled. 

24  And  Pilate  gave  sentence  that  it 
sliulde  be  as  they  requyred. 

25  And  lett  losse  vnto  them  hym,  that 
for  insurreccion  and  morther  was  cast 
into  preson,  whom  they  desyred  ;  and 
delyvered  Jesus  to  do  with  hym  what 
they  wolde. 

26  And  as  they  ledde  hym  awaye,  they 
caught  won,  Simon  of  Sirene,  commynge 
out  of  the  felde,  and  on  hym  layde  they 
the  crosse  to  beare  it  after  Jesus. 

27  There  folowcd  hym  a  grcate  com- 
pany of  people,  and  of  wemen,  which 
wemen  bewayled,  and  lamented  hym. 


428 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [Sx.  Luke 

28  Da  cvvsej)  se  Hselend  bewend,  Eala 
dohtra  Hierusaleni,  nelle  ge  ofer  me 
Avei^an,  ac  Avepa))  ofer  eow  sylfe,  and 
ofer  eowre  beam. 

29  Fordam  da  dagas  cuma|',  on  dam 
lug  cwedaj),  Eadige  synd  da  untymend- 
an,  and  innodas  de  ne  cendou,  and 
da  breost  de  ne  sicton. 

30  Donne  agynnajj  big  cwedan  to  dam 
niiintum,  Feallajj  ofer  us,  and  to  beorgum, 
Ofer-wreoJ)  us. 

31  Fordam  gif  big  on  grenum  treoAve 
das  J)ing  d5j>,  bw£et  doj)  big  on  dam 
drfgum  1 

32  And  mid  bim  wseron  gelaedde 
twegen  odre  manfulle,  doet  big  wseron 
ofslegene. 

33  And  syddan  big  comon  on  da  stowe, 
de  is  genemned  Caluarie,  dset  is,  Heafod- 
pannan  stow,  dar  big  bine  bengon,  and 
anne  sceajjan  on  bis  swidran  bealfe,  and 
oderne  on  bis  Avynstran. 

34  i)a  cvvse])  se  Heelend,  F?eder,  forgif 
bim,  fordam  big  nyton  bwa't  big  do]). 
Sojjlice  big  dseldon  liys  reaf,  and  wurpon 
blotu. 

35  And  dset  folc  stod  ge-anbidiende ; 
and  da  ealdras  liine  tseldon  mid  bim, 
and  cwivdon,  O'dre  be  gebeelde  ;  gebaele 
he  bine  sylfne,  gif  be  sig  Godes  ge- 
corena. 

36  And  da  cempan  bine  bysmredon, 
and  bim  eced  brobton, 

37  And  dus  cwEedon,  Gif  du  si  ludea 
cyning,  gedo  de  babie. 

38  Da  wses  bis  ofer-gewrit  ofer  bine 
awriten  Greciscum  stafum, . . .  and  Ebre- 
iscum,  DIS  IS  lUDEA  CINING. 

39  A'n  of  dam  sceaj^um  de  mid  bim 
bangode,  bine  gremede,  and  cwoe}?,  Gif 
du  Crist  eart,  gebsel  de  sylfne  and  uuc. 

40  Da  andswarode  se  5der,  and  bine 
])reade,  and  cwse]),  Ne  du  God  ne  on- 
draetst,  dret  du  eart  on  da^re  ylean  ge- 
nyderuni^e  1 

41  And  Avyt  witodlice  be  uncer  ser- 
difcdum  onfo]) ;  s6])lice  des  nabt  yfeles 
ne  dyde. 


XXIII.  28-41.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

28  Sutlili  Jliosu  turnycl  to  hem  seide, 
D()n5tiis  of  Jerusalem,  iiylc  56  wepe  on 
me,  but  wepe  56  on  50U  silf,  and  on 
5oure  sones. 

29  For  lo  !  dayes  schulen  eome,  in 
•.vh'elie  it  sclial  be  seid,  Blessid  l)c  bareyn 
wynimen,  and  wondtis  that  ban  not 
gendrid.  and  the  teetis  \Yhielic  ban  not 
50uun  souke. 

30  Tbanne  thei  sehulen  bigynne  to 
seye  to  monteyns,  Falle  50  doun  on  vs, 
and  to  litle  billis,  Ililc  je  vs. 

31  For  if  thei  don  tlies  thingis  in  a 
grene  tree,  what  sclial  be  don  in  a  dryc? 

32  Sothli  and  othere  tweye  wickide 
men  weren  led  with  him,  that  thei 
schuldc  be  slayn. 

33  And  aftir  that  thei  eamen  in  to  a 
place,  which  is  clepid  of  Caluarie,  there 
thei  crueifieden  him,  and  the  theues. 
oon  on  the  rijthalf,  and  the  totlier  on 
the  loft  half. 

34  Forsotlie  Jhesu  seide,  Fadir,  for3}^ie 
to  hem,  fur  thei  witen  not  what  thei 
don.  Forsothe  thei  departinge  his 
clothi.s,  senten  lottis. 

35  And  the  peple  stood  abydinge  ; 
and  the  princes  scorn}d('n  him  with 
hem,  scyingc,  Othere  men  he  made  saf ; 
make  he  him  silf  saf,  if  he  is  Crist, 
the  chosun  of  God. 

36  Forsoth  and  kny5tis  nei3ynge  scorn- 
ydcn  him,  and  offrideu  vyncgre  to  him, 

37  Scyingc,  If  thou  crt  kyng  of  Jewi.s, 
make  thee  saf 

38  Sothli  and  the  wrytinge  aboue  was 
writun  on  him  with  lettris  of  Gi'cek,  of 
Latyn,  and  of  Ebrew,  This  is  the  kyng 
of  Jewis. 

39  Forsoth  oon  of  tho  theues  that 
hangiden,  blasphemyde  him.  seyingc,  If 
thou  ert  Crist,  make  thi  silf  saf  and 
vs. 

40  Sothlithe  tothir  answerjnge,blamyde 
him,  scyinge,  Nethir  thou  drcdist  God, 
that  thou  art  in  the  same  dampnacioim'? 

41  And  treuly  we  iustly,  for  we  ban 
rcccyued  worthi  thingis  to  dedis  ;  sothlr 
this  hath  don  no  yuel. 


TYNDALK,  ir,2(J. 


421) 


28  Jesus  turned  backc  vnto  them  and 
sayde,  Doughters  of  Jerusalem,  wci)c  not 
for  me,  but,  Avcpe  for  yunrc  selves,  and 
for  yourc  children. 

29  For  marke !  the  dayes  will  come, 
when  men  shall  sayc,  Happy  are  the 
baren,  and  the  worn  bos  that  never  bare, 
and  the  i)appcs  which  never  gave  sucke. 

30  Then  shall  they  begyn  to  sayc  to 
tlie  mountaynes,  Fall  on  vs,  and  to  tlic 
hilles.  Cover  vs. 

31  For  yf  they  do  this  to  a  grene  tree, 
what  shalbe  done  to  the  drye  ? 

32  There  were  two  evyll  doers  leddc 
with  hym  to  be  slayne. 

33  And  when  they  wer  come  to  the 
place,  which  is  called  Calvary,  there  they 
crucif\'ed  hym,  and  the  evyll  doars,  one 
on  the  right  hondc,  and  the  other  on 
the  Icfte  honde. 

34  Then  sayde  Jesus,  Father,  forgeve 
them,  for  they  woot  not  what  they  do. 
And  they  parted  his  rayment,  and  cast 
loottes. 

35  And  the  people  stode  and  behelde  ; 
and  the  rulers  mocked  hym  with  them, 
saying,  He  holpe  other  men ;  lett  hym 
helpe  hyni  silfe,  yf  he  be  Christ,  the 
chosen  of  God. 

36  The  soudiers  alsoo  mocked  hym, 
and  cam  and  gave  hym  veneger, 

37  And  sayde,  Yf  thou  be  that  kynge 
off  the  lewes,  save  thy  silfe. 

38  His  supcrscripcion  was  written  over 
him  in  Grcke,  Latin,  and  Ebrue  letters, 
This  is  the  kynge  off  the  lewes. 

39  The  one  off  the  malefactours  which 
hanged,  rayled  on  hym,  sayinge,  Yf  thou 
be  Christ,  save  thy  silfe  and  vs. 

40  Tiie  other  answered,  and  rebuked 
hym,  sayinge,  Nether  fearest  thou  God, 
because  thou  arte  in  the  same  damna- 
cion  ? 

41  We  are  righteously  punncsshed,  for 
we  receave  accordynge  to  oure  dedes  ; 
butt  this  man  hath  done  noo  thynge 
amysse. 


430 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

42  And  he  c\vve\)  to  dam  Hselende, 
Drihten,  gemun  du  me,  doune  du  cymst 
on  din  rice. 

43  Da  cwfej)  se  Hselend  to  him,  .... 
to-da^g  dii  bist  mid  me  on  paradiso. 

44  Da  wfes  uean  seo  syxte  tid,  and 
Jjystro  wseron  ofer  ealle  eorj^an  od  da 
nigojjan  tide. 

45  And  sunne  wees  a))ystrod,  and  dfes 
temples  wah-ryft  wear  J)  tosliten  on  mid- 
dan. 

46  Da  cwsep  se  Hcelend,  clyjjiende 
mycelre  stefue,  Fseder,  ic  bebeode  minne 
gast  on  dine  handa.  And  dus  cwedende, 
he  forjj-ferde, 

47  Da  se  hundred-man  geseah  da^t  dar 
geworden  wees,  he  God  wuldrode,  and 
cwfBJj,  S6])lice  des  man  wses  rihtwis. 

48  And  eall  wered  de  set  disse  wtefei*- 
synne  wseron,  and  gesilwon  da  |;ing  de 
gewurdon,  wseron  agen  gewende,  and 
hyra  breost  beoton. 

49  Da  stodon  ealle  hys  cudan  feorran, 
and  da  wif  de  him  fyligdon  fram  Galilea, 
das  ]?ing  geseonde. 

50  And  da  an  man,  on  naman  losep^ 
se  wtes  gerefa,  god  wer  and  rihtwis, 

51  (Des  ne  gejJWKrode  hjTa  gejieahte 
and  hyra  dsedum  ;)  fram  Arimathia,  lu- 
dea  ceastre  ;  se  sylfa  ge-anbidode  Godes 
rice. 

52  Des  genealsehte  to  Pilate,  and  bsed 
dses  Haelendes  lichaman. 

53  And  nyder-alede  hyne,  and  on  scytan 
befeold,  and  lede  bine  on  aheawene  byrg- 
ene,  on  dsere  nses  da  gyt  usenig  aled. 

54  And  da  wses  se  dseg  parasceue,  dset 
is  gegearwunge,  and  sseter-dseg  onlyhte. 

55  Da  wif  de  him  fyligdon,  de  comon 
mid  him  of  Galilea,  hig  gesawon  da 
byrgene,  and  hu  his  lichama  aled  wses. 

56  And  hig  cyrdon,  and  gearwedon 
wyrt-gemang,  and  sealfa  ;  and  on  sseter- 
dseg  hig  gestildon,  oefter  bebode. 


XXIII.  4  2-56.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

42  And  he  seide  to  Jhcsu,  Lord,  liuue  ! 
inyiulo  on  mo,  wlianno  thou  schalt  come 
in  to  thi  kingdom. 

43  And  Jhesu  seyde  to  him,  Treuli  I 
seie  to  thco,  this  day  thou  schalt  be  with 
me  in  jiaradys. 

44  Sothly  it  was  ahnost  the  sixte  our, 
and  derknessis  wereu  mand  in  al  erthc 
til  to  the  nynthe  our. 

45  And  tlie  sunno  was  maad  derk,  and 
tlie  voyl  of  the  temple  was  kitt  the 
myddel. 

46  And  Jhesu  cryinge  witli  greet  voys, 
seide,  Fadir,  in  to  thi  liondis  I  bitake 
my  spirit.  And  he  seyinge  thes  thingis, 
sente  out  the  spirit.''' 

47  Forsothe  ceuturio  seynge  the  tiling 
that  was  don,  glorifiede  God,  seyinge, 
Verily  this  man  was  iust. 

48  And  al  the  cumpany  of  hem  that 
wereu  there  to  gidere  at  this  spectacle, 
and  sy^cn  tlio  thingis  that  weren  don, 
smy tinge  her  brestis  turneden  a5eyn. 

49  Foi'soth  al  his  knowen  stoodeu  a  fer, 
and  wymmen  that  sueden  him  fro  Gali- 
lee, seynge  thes  thingis. 

50  And  lo !  a  man,  Joseph  bi  name, 
that  was  a  decurioun,"''  a  good  man  and 
iust,  of  Ai'amathie,  a  citee  of  Judee, 

51  He  consentide  not  to  the  counceil 
and  dedis  of  hem  ;  which  and  he  abood 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

52  He  cam  ny5  to  Pilat,  and  axide  the 
body  of  Jhesu, 

53  And  wlappide  it  don  doun  in  a 
lynnen  cloth,  and  puttide  him  in  a 
graue  hewun,  in  which  not  311  ony  man 
was  put. 

54  And  the  day  was  the  makinge 
redy  of  pask,  and  the  saboth  bygan  to 
schyne. 

55  Sothli  the  wymmen  suynge,  that 
camen  with  him  fro  Galilee,  sy,en  the 
gi-aue,  and  hou  his  body  was  j)ut, 

56  And  thei  turnynge  a^en,  maden 
redy  swete  spices,  and  oynementis  ;  and 
sothli  in  the  saboth  thei  restiden,  vp  the 
comaundement. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


4.11 


42  And  he  sayde  vnto  Jesus,  Lorde, 
remember  me,  when  thou  commcst  into 
thy  kyngdom. 

43  And  Je.sus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Verely 
1  saye  vnto  the,  to  daye  shalt  thou  be 
Avith  me  in  paradise. 

44  And  it  was  about  the  sixt  houre, 
and  there  cam  a  darcknes  over  all  the 
londe  vntyll  the  nynth  houre. 

45  And  the  Sonne  was  darckened,  and 
the  vayle  of  the  temple  rent  even  thorow 
the  myddes. 

46  xVnd  Jesus  cryed  with  a  greate  voyce, 
and  sayd.  Father,  into  thy  hondes  I 
connnende  my  sprete.  And  when  he 
thus  had  sayd,  he  gave  vp  the  goost. 

47  ^Yhen  the  centurion  sawe  what  had 
happened,  he  glorified  God,  sayinge,  Of 
a  surtie  this  man  was  perfecte. 

48  And  all  the  people  that  cam  to 
gedder  to  that  sight,  beholdynge  the 
thinges  which  were  done,  smoote  their 
brestes,  and  returned  home. 

49  All  h}'s  acquayntaunce  stode  a  farrc 
of,  and  the  wemen  which  folowed  hym 
from  Galile,  beholdynge  these  thynges. 

50  And  beholde  !  there  was  a  man, 
named  Joseph,  a  senatour,  which  was 
a  goode  man  and  a  iuste, 

51  (He  did  nott  consent  to  their  coun- 
sell  and  dede  ;)  which  was  of  Aramathia, 
a  cite  off  the  lewes  ;  which  same  alsoo 
wayted  for  the  kyngdom  off  God. 

52  He  went  vnto  Pylate,  and  begged 
the  boddy  of  Jesus, 

53  And  toke  it  doune  and  wrapped 
it  in  a  lynnen  clooth,  and  layed  it  in 
an  heawen  toumbe,  wherin  was  never 
man  before  layed. 

54  And  that  daye  was  the  saboth  even, 
and  the  saboth  drue  on, 

55  The  wemen  that  folowed  after, 
whych  cam  with  hym  from  Galile,  bc- 
helde  the  sepulcre,  and  howc  hys  body 
was  layed. 

56  And  returned,  and  prepared  swete 
odoures,  and  oyntmentes ;  and  the  sa- 
both daye  they  rested,  accordynge  to 
the  commaundement. 


432 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

Chap.  XXIV.  i  On  anum  reste-clsege 
swyde  ser  on  dseg-red  big  comon  to  daere 
byrgene,  and  bseron  mid  bim  da  wyrt- 
gemang,  de  bi  gegearwedon 

2  And  big  gemetton  done  stan  awyltne 
of  dsere  byrgene. 

3  And  da  lii  in  to  dsere  byrgene  eodon, 
big  ne  gemetton  na  dees  Heelendes  beb- 
aman. 

4  And  da  wa?s  gewovden,  da  big  on 
m5de  afeerede  wseron  be  dissum,  da 
stodon  twegen  weras  wid  big  on  bwituni 
reafe. 

5  And  dii  big  adredon,  and  byra  and- 
wlitan  on  eorjian  byldon,  big  cwsedon 
to  bim,  Hwi  sece  ge  lybbendne  mid 
deadum  ] 

6  Nis  be  ber,  ac  be  dras.  Gc|)enca]>, 
bu  be  spsec  wid  eow,  da  gyt  dii  be  wses 
on  Galilea, 

7  And  cwpe}),  Dset  mannes  sunu  bij) 
geseald  on  banda  synfulra  manna,  and 
beon  abangen,  and  dy  Jjriddan  dfege 
arisan. 

8  And  big  gemundon  bis  worda. 

9  And  big  gewendon  fram  dsere  byrg- 
ene, and  cyddon  eall  dis  dam  endkif- 
enimi,  and  eallum  odrum. 

10  Sojjlice  wa?s  Maria  Magdalene,  and 
lobanna,  and  Maria  lacobi,  and  odre  de 
mid  bim  weeron,  da  ssedon  das  })ing 
dam  apostolum. 

1 1  And  das  word  wseron  gefmbte  be- 
foran  bim  swa  woffung,  and  big  ne  ge- 
lyfdon  bim. 

1 2  Da  aras  Petrus,  and  arn  to  daere 
byrgene ;  and  akitende,  be  geseab  da 
lin-wseda  sylfe  alede.  And  be  ferde, 
wundrigende  dses  dar  geworden  wses.''' 

13  And  da  ferdon  twegen  of  bim  on 
dfet  castel,  dset  wses  on  fajce  syxtig  fur- 
langa  fram  Hierusalem,  on  naman  Em- 
aus. 

1 4  And  big  speecon  bim  betweonan  be 
eallum  dam  de  dar  gewordene  wseron. 

15  And  da  big  spelledon,  and  mid  him 
smeadon,  se  Hselend  genealsebte  and 
ferde  mid  bim. 

16  Sojjlice  byra  eagan  wseron  forbsefde, 
daet  hisr  bine  ne  "ecneowon. 


XXIV.  i-i6.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

Chap.  XXIV.  i  Forsothc  in  oon  of 
the  woke  fill  crly  thei  canieu  to  the 
pji-aue,  1)1  ynjjfynge  swete  spicis,  whiche 
thei  haddon  maad  rcdy,  .... 

2  And  thei  foiindon  the  stoouc  turned 
a  wey  fro  the  graue. 

3  And  thei  gou  yn,  fomideii  uot  the 
body  of  Jhesu. 

4  And  it  was  don,  while  thei  weren 
astoneyed  in  thou5t  of  this  thing,  loo ! 
twey  men  stoodeu  bisydis  hem  in  eloth 
scliynynge. 

5  Sothli  whcmie  thei  dredden,  and 
bowiden  her  soraelant  in  to  erthc,  thei 
seidon  to  hem,  What  seke  50  the  lyuynge 
with  deede  men  ] 

6  He  is  not  here,  but  he  hath  rise. 
Haue  36  mynde,  how  he  spak  to  50U, 
whanne  5it  he  was  in  Galilee, 

7  Seyinge,  For  it  bihoueth  mannis  sone 
be  bitakun  in  to  hondis  of  synful  men, 
and  to  be  crueified,  and  the  thridde  day 
to  ryse  a5en. 

8  And  thei  bithoujten  on  his  wordis. 

9  And  thei  gon  a5en  fro  the  graue, 
telden  alle  thes  thingis  to  the  enleuene, 
and  to  alle  othere. 

10  Forsuthe  Mary  Mawdeleyn  was,  and 
Joone,  and  Marye  of  James,  and  othere 
Avymmcn  that  weren  with  hem,  that 
seiden  thes  thingis  to  apostlis. 

1 1  And  thes  wordis  weren  seyn  bifore 
liem  as  madnesse,*  and  thei  bileueden 
not  to  hem. 

12  Forsothe  Petre  rysinge,  ran  to  the 
graue  ;  and  he  bowynge  doun,  sy3  the 
lynnen  clothis  put  aloone.  And  he 
wente,  wondrynge  with  him  silf  this 
thing  that  was  don. 

13  xVnd  lo !  tweyne  of  hem  wenten  in 
that  day  to  a  castel,  that  was  fro  Jeru- 
salem in  space  of  sixty  furlongis,  by 
name  Emaws. 

14  And  thei  spaken  to  gidere  of  alle 
thes  thingis  that  hadden  falle. 

15  And  it  was  don,  while  thei  talkiden, 
and  soujten  with  hem  silf,  and  Jhesu 
him  silf  nei3ynge,  wente  with  hem. 

t6  Sothli  her  y5en  weren  holdun,  lest 
thei  knewen  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  4,33 

CiiAP.  XXIV.  I  On  the  morowc  after 
the  sahotli  erly  in  the  moriiyiigc  they 
cam  vnto  the  toumbo,  and  bionglit  the 
odouros  whycli  they  had  i)ropiired,  and 
other  wcmen  wyth  them. 

2  And  they  founde  the  stone  roulcd 
awaye  from  the  sei)u]crc. 

3  And  went  in,  and  founde  nott  the 
body  off  the  Lorde  Jesu. 

4  And  it  happened,  as  they  were  amased 
ther  at,  loo  !  two  men  stode  by  them 
in  shynyuge  vestures. 

5  As  they  were  a  fraide,  and  bowed 
doune  their  faces  to  the  erth,  they  snyd 
to  them.  Why  seke  ye  the  livynge  a- 
monge  the  deed  1 

6  He  is  nott  here,  but  is  rysen.  Re- 
member, howe  he  spake  vnto  you,  when 
he  was  yett  with  you  in  Galile, 

7  Sayinge,  That  the  sonne  off  man 
must  be  delivered  into  the  hondes  off 
synfuU  men,  and  be  crucified,  and  the 
thyrde  daye  ryse  agayne. 

8  And  they  reniembred  his  wordes. 

9  And  returned  from  the  sepulcre,  and 
tolde  all  these  thynges  vnto  the  eleven, 
and  to  all  other. 

10  Hytt  was  Mary  Magdalen,  and 
Joanna,  and  Mai-y  Jacoby,  and  other 
that  were  with  them,  whych  tolde  these 
thynges  vnto  the  apostles. 

1 1  And  their  wordes  semed  vnto  them 
fayned  thynges,  nether  belcved.  they 
them. 

12  Then  aroose  Peter,  and  ran  vnto 
the  sepulcre  ;  and  stou[)ed  in,  and  sawe 
the  lynnen  cloothes  layde  by  them  sylfe. 
And  departed,  wondrynge  in  hym  sylfe 
att  thatt  whych  hadd  hapj)encd. 

13  And  beholde !  two  of  them  went 
that  same  daye  to  a  toune,  whych  was 
from  Jerusalem  about  thre  scoore  for- 
longes,  called  Emaus. 

14  And  they  talked  togedder  of  all 
thinges  which  had  happened. 

15  And  it  chaunsed,  as  they  commened 
togedder,  and  reasoned,  that  Jesus  hym 
silfe  drue  neare,  and  went  with  them. 

16  But  their  eyes  were  holden,  that 
they  coulde  nott  knowe  hym. 

f£ 


434 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  ggS-     [St.  Luke 

17  And  he  cwsej)  to  him,  Hwset  synd 
da  spseca,  de  gyt  reccea);  inc  betweonan 
gangende,  and  synd  unrote  % 

18  Da  andswarode  him  an,  dses  nama 
wses  Cleofas,  and  cwte]?,  Eart  du  ana 
forwreceu  on  Hierusalem,  and  nystest 
du  da  ))ing,  de  on  hyre  gewordene  synd 
on  dysum  dagum  1 

1 9  He  ssede  da,  Hwset  synd  da  J)ing  ? 
And  hig  ssedon,  Be  dam  ISTazareniscau 
Haelende,  se  wses  wer  and  witega,  mihtig 
on  spetce  and  on  weorce  befcran  Gode 
and  eaUum  folce ; 

20  And  hu  hine  sealdon  da  heah-sacer- 
das  and  ure  ealdras  on  deajjcs  genyder- 
unge,  and  ahengon  hine. 

2 1  We  hopedon,  dset  he  to  alysenne 
wsere  Israheh  And  mi  is  se  firidda  dseg 
to-dceg,  dtet  dys  "W'ses  geworden. 


2  2  And  eac  sume  wif  of  urum  us  breg- 
don,  da  Wceron  ser  leohte  set  dsere  byrg- 
ene ; 

23  And  na  his  hchaman  gemetton,  hig 
comon,  and  ssedon,  dset  hig  gesawon 
engla  gesih])e,  da  secgajj,  hine  lybban. 

24  And  da  ferdon  sume  of  urum  to 
da3re  bergene,  and  swa  gemetton  swa 
da  wif  ssedon,  hine  hig  ne  gesawon. 

25  Da  cwae}?  se  Htelend  to  him,  Eala  ! 
dysegan,  and  ou  heortan  Isete  to  gelyf- 
enne  eallum  dam  de  Avntegan  spsecon. 

26  Hu  ne  gebyrede  Criste  das  Jjiug 
Jjolian,  and  swa  on  his  wuldor  gan  ? 

27  And  ....  he  rehte  him  of  Moyse 
and  of  eallum  haligum  gewritum,  de 
be  him  awi-itene  wseron. 

28  And  hig  genealsehton  dam  castele, 
de  hig  to  ferdon.  And  he  dyde  swylce 
he  fyi-  faran  wolde. 

29  And  hig  nyddon  hine,  and  cwsedon, 
Wuna  mid  unc,  fordam  de  hit  sefen- 
Isecl?,  and  se  dseg  wses  ahyld.  And  he 
in-eode  dset  he  mid  him  wunode. 

30  .  .  .  And  da  he  mid  him  sset,  he 


XXIV.  I7-30.]  WYCLIFFE,i3S9. 

17  And  he  sckIc  to  hem,  "Whichc  ben 
thes  wortli-^,  that  5c  spoken  to  gklerc 
goynge,  and  5c  ben  sorwful  1 

18  And  oon  answeringe,  to  whom  tlie 
name  icas  Cleoftxs,  scide  to  him,  Thou 
aloone  ert  a  pilgrym  of  Jerusalem,  and 
hast  thou  not  knowc,  what  thingis  ben 
don  in  it  in  thes  dayes  1 

1 9  To  which  lie  seide,  Whiche  1  And 
thci  scyden  to  him.  Of  Jhesu  of  Naza- 
reth, that  was  a  man  prophete,  my5ti  in 
AYork  and  word  bifore  God  and  al  the 
peple ; 

20  And  hou  the  hijeste  prestis  and 
oure  princes  bitoken  him  in  to  dampna- 
cioun  of  deeth,  and  crucifieden  him. 

21  Foi*soth  we  hopiden,  for  he  schulde 
a5en  bye  Israel.  And  now  in  alle  thingis 
the  thridde  day  is  to  day,  that  thes 
thingis  ben  don. 

22  But  and  sum  wymmen  of  oure 
maden  vs  a  ford,  whiche  bifore  the  li3t 
weren  at  the  graue  ; 

23  And  his  bodi  not  foundun,  thei 
camen,  seyinge,  that  thei  sy5en  a  si5t  of 
aungels,  whiche  seyn,  that  he  lyueth. 

24  And  sum  men  of  oure  wenten  to 
the  gi'aue,  and  thei  founden  so  as  the 
wymmen  seiden,  but  thei  founden  not 
him. 

25  And  he  seyde  to  hem,  A !  foolis, 
and  slowe  of  hei'te  for  to  bileue  in  alle 
thingis  whiche  the  prophetis  hau  spoke. 

26  Where  it  blhofte  not  Crist  to  suffre 
thes  thingis,  and  so  for  to  entre  in  to 
his  glorie  ? 

27  And  he  big)Tinynge  at  !Moyses  and 
alle  prophetis,  expownede  to  hem  in  alle 
scripturis,  whiche  weren  of  him. 

28  And  thei  camen  n}^  to  the  castel, 
whidur  thei  wenten.  And  he  made 
cuntenaunce  him  to  go  ferthere. 

29  And  thci  constreyneden  him,  sey- 
inge, Dwel  with  vs,  for  it  drawith  to 
nyjt,  and  the  day  is  now  bowid  doun. 
And  he  entride  with  hem 

30  And  it  was  don,  while  he  restide 


TYND  ALE,  1526.  435 

17  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  What 
mancr  of  communicacions  are  these, 
that  ye  have  one  to  another  as  ye  walke, 
and  are  sadde  ? 

18  And  the  one  off  them,  named  Cle- 
ophas,  answered  and  sayd  vnto  hym, 
Arte  thou  only  a  straunger  in  Jerusalem, 
and  haste  nott  knowcn  the  thingcs,  Avhich 
have  chaunsed  tlierin  in  these  dayes  1 

1 9  To  whom  he  sayd.  What  thynges  1 
And  they  sayd  vnto  hym.  Of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  which  was  a  prophet,  myghty 
in  dede  and  worde  before  God  and  all 
the  people ; 

20  And  howe  the  hye  prestes  and  oure 
ruelers  delivered  hym  to  be  condempned 
to  deeth,  and  have  crucified  hym. 

21  We  trusted,  that  it  shulde  have 
bene  he  that  shulde  have  delivered 
Israhell.  And  as  touehynge  all  these 
thynges  to  daye  is  even  the  thp-d  daye, 
that  they  were  done. 

22  Ye  and  certayne  wemen  alsoo  of 
oure  company  made  vs  astonyed,  whych 
cam  erly  vnto  the  sepulcre  ; 

23  And  founde  nott  his  boddy,  and 
cam,  sayinge,  that  they  had  sene  visions 
off  angels,  which  sayde,  that  he  was 
alive. 

24  And  certayne  of  them  which  were 
with  vs  went  their  waye  to  the  sepulcre, 
and  founde  ytt  even  soo  as  the  wemen 
had  sayde,  but  hym  they  sawe  nott. 

25  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  0  !  foles, 
and  slowe  of  herte  to  beleve  all  that  the 
prophetes  have  spoken. 

26  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered 
these  thingcs,  and  to  enter  into  his 
glory  ? 

27  And  he  began  at  Moses  and  at  all 
the  prophetes,  and  interpreted  vnto  them 
in  all  scriptures,  which  were  written  of 
him. 

28  And  they  di'ue  neye  vnto  the  toune, 
which  they  went  to.  And  he  made  as 
though  he  woldc  have  gone  further. 

29  And  [they]  constrayned  hym,  say- 
inge, Abyde  with  vs,  for  it  draweth 
tawardes  nyght,  and  the  daye  is  farre 
passed.  And  he  went  in  to  tary  with 
them. 

30  And  it  cam  to  passe,  as  he  sate  att 

F  f  2 


43fi 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Luke 

onfeng    hlaf,    and    hine   bletsode,    and 
brsec,  and  him  rsehte. 

3 1  Da  wurdon  hyra  eagan  ge-openode, 
and  liig  gecneowon  hine  ;  and  he  gewat 
fram  him. 

32  And  hig  cwBedon  him  betwynau, 
Nses  uncer  heorte  byrnende,  da  he  on 
wege  wid  unc  spsec,  and  unc  halige  ge- 
writu  ontynde  1 

33  And  hig  arisen  on  doere  ylcan  tide, 
and  Avendon  to  Hierusalem,  and  ge- 
metton  endlufan  gegad erode,  and  da  de 
mid  him  wseron, 

34  And  cwcedon,  Dset  Drihten  s5|jHce 
aras,  and  Simone  tet-ywde. 

35  And  hig  rehton  da  |jing  da  de  on 
wege  gewordene  weeron,  and  hu  hig  hine 
oncneowon  on  hlafes  brice.'*' 

36  SuJjHce  da  hig  dis  sprsecon,  se 
Hselend  st5d  on  hyi'a  midlene,  and  ssede 
him,  Sib  sy  eow ;  ic  hit  eom,  ne  on- 
drsede  ge  eow. 

37  Da  Wceron  hig  gedrefede  and  a- 
fserede,  and  hig  wendon  daet  hig  gast 
gesawon. 

38  And  he  ssede  him,  Hwi  synd  ge  ge- 
drefede, and  gej)ancas  on  eowre  heortan 
astigajj  1 

39  Geseo)'  mine  handa  and  mine  fet, 
dset  ic  sylf  hit  eom.  Grupia}),  and  ge- 
seo}) ;  doet  gast  nsefj^  flsesc,  and  ban,  swa 
ge  geseojj  me  habban. 

40  And  da  he  dis  saede,  he  set-eowde 
him  fet  and  handa. 

41  Da  cw8e)>  he  to  him,  da  hig  da  gyt 
ne  gelyfdon,  and  for  gefean  wundredon, 
Hoebbe  ge  her  senig  ]?iiig  to  etanne  1 

42  And  higbrohton  him  deel  gebrseddes 
fisces,  and  beo-bread. 

43  And  da  he  set  beforan  him,  he  nam 
da  lafa,  and  him  sealde. 

44  And  cwse)?  to  him,  Dis  synd  da 
word  de  ic  spsec  to  eow,  da  ic  wees  da 
gyt  mid  eow ;  fordam  de  hit  is  neod 
dc-et  beon  ealle  jjing  gefyllede,  de  awritene 
synd  on  Moyses  se,  and  on  witegum,  and 
on  sealmum,  be  me. 

45  Da  ontynde  he  him  andgyt,  dset 
hig  ongeton  halige  gewritu. 

46  And  he  cwsej)  to  him,  Daet  dus  is 


XXIV.  31-46.]    WYCLIFFE,i389. 

with  hem,  he  took  breil,  and  blcssidc, 
and  brae,  and  drcssidc  to  hem. 

31  And  the  y^en  of  hem  wcrcn  opened, 
and  thei  knewen  him  ;  and  he  vanysch- 
ide  fro  her  y^en. 

32  And  thei  seiden  to  gidcre,  "Wher 
cure  herte  was  not  brennynge  in  vs, 
■while  he  spac  in  the  wcye,  and  openyde 
scripturis  to  vs  1 

33  And  thei  risinge  in  the  same  onr, 
wentcn  a5en  in  to  Jerusalem,  and  thei 
founden  enleue  gederid  to  gidere,  and 
liem  that  weren  with  hem, 

34  Seyinge,  For  the  Lord  roos  verily, 
and  aperide  to  Symount. 

35  And  thei  telden  what  thingis  weren 
don  in  the  weye,  and  hou  thei  knewen 
him  in  brekynge  of  breed. 

36  Forsothe  while  thei  spaken  thes 
thingis,  Jhesus  stood  in  the  myddel  of 
hem,  and  seide  to  hem,  Pees  to  30U ;  I 
am,  nyle  ;e  drede. 

37  Suthli  thei  troublld  and  agast,  gess- 
iden  hem  to  se  a  spirit. 

38  And  he  seide  to  hem.  What  ben  58 
troublid,  and  thou3tis  sty3en  vp  in  to 
50ure  hertis  1 

39  Se  5e  myn  hondis  and  my  feet,  foi' 
I  my  silf  am.  Feele  5e,  and  se  36  ;  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  fleisch,  and  boonys,  as  36 
seen  me  for  to  haue. 

40  And  whanne  he  hadde  seyd  this 
thing,  he  schewide  hondis  and  feet  to 
hem. 

4 1  Forsoth  3it  hem  not  bileuynge,  and 
wondringe  for  ioye,  he  seyde,  Han  30 
ony  thing  here  that  schal  be  etun  ? 

43  And  thei  offiiden  to  him  a  part  of 
a  fysch  roostid,  and  a  eoomb  of  hony. 

43  And  whanne  he  hadde  etun  bifore 
hem,  he  takynge  the  relyfs,  3af  to  hem. 

44  And  he  seyde  to  hem,  Thes  ben  the 
wordis  wbiehe  I  spak  to  30U,  whanne  I 
was  3it  with  50U ;  for  it  is  nede  that 
alle  thingis  be  fillid,  whiehe  ben  writun 
in  the  lawe  of  Moyses,  and  in  prophetis, 
and  in  salmes,  of  me. 

45  Tlianne  he  openyd  witt  to  hem,  that 
thei  scliuUIe  vndirstonde  scrii)turis. 

46  And  he  seyde  to  hem,  For  thus  it 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


437 


meate  wyth  them,  he  tokc  breed,  and 
blessed  yt,  and  brake  ytt,  and  gave  it 
vnto  them. 

31  And  their  eyes  were  openned,  and 
they  knewc  hym ;  and  he  vannisslied 
out  of  their  syght. 

32  And  they  sayde  bitwene  them  selves, 
Did  not  oure  hcrtcs  burne  wyth  in  vs, 
whyll  he  talked  with  vs  by  the  waye, 
and  openned  to  vs  the  scriptures  1 

33  And  they  I'oose  vp  the  same  houre, 
and  returned  agayne  to  Jerusalem,  and 
they  founde  the  eleven  gaddered  to 
gedder,  and  them  that  were  wytli  them, 

34  Sayinge,  The  Lorde  is  risen  in  dede, 
and  hath  apered  to  Simon. 

35  And  they  tolde  what  was  done  in 
the  waye,  and  howe  they  knewe  hym  by 
the  breakynge  off  breed. 

36  As  they  thus  spake,  Jesus  hym  silfe 
stode  in  the  myddes  of  them,  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Peace  be  with  you 

37  And  they  were  abasshed  and  afrayde, 
supposinge  that  they  had  sene  a  sprete. 

38  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  AYliy  are 
ye  troubled,  and  why  do  thoughtcs  aryse 
in  youre  hertes  1 

39  Beholde  my  hondes  and  my  fete, 
for  it  ys  even  I  my  sylfe.  Handle  me, 
and  se ;  for  spretes  have  nott  flesshe, 
and  bones,  as  ye  se  me  have. 

40  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he 
shewed  them  his  hondes  and  his  fete. 

41  And  whyll  they  yett  beleved  nott 
for  ioye,  and  wondred,  he  sayde  vnto 
them.  Have  ye  here  eny  meate  I 

42  And  they  gave  hym  a  pece  of  a 
brouled  fisshe,  and  of  an  hony  combe. 

43  And  he  toke  it,  and  ate  it  before 
them 

44  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  These  are 
the  wordes  which  I  spake  vnto  you, 
whill  I  was  yett  with  you ;  that  all 
must  be  fulfilled,  which  were  written  of 
me  in  the  lawe  of  Closes,  and  in  the 
prophetes,  and  in  the  psalraes. 

45  Then  openned  he  their  wyttes,  that 
they  myght  vnderstond  the  scriptures. 

46  And  sayde  vnto  them,  Thus  ys  yt 


438 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Luke 

awriten,  and  dus  gebyrede  Criste  ];olian, 
and  dy  Jriddan  dsege  of  deaj)e  arisan ; 

47  And  beon  bodod  on  bis  naman 
dsed-bote  and  synna  forgyfenesse  on 
ealle  Jjeoda,  agynnendum  fram  Hieru- 
salem. 

48  S6]jlice  ge  synd  })inga  gewitan. 

49  And  ic  sende  on  eow  mines  feeder 
behat ;  sitte  ge  on  ceastre,  od  ge  syn 
ufene  gescrydde. 

50  S6)jlice  he  gelsedde  big  ut  on  Eeth- 
aniam,  and  be  bletsode  big,  bis  bandum 
up-abafenum. 

5  I  And  bit  wees  geworden,  da  be  blet- 
sode big,  be  ferde  fram  bim,  and  wass 
fered  on  beofen. 

52  And  big  gebiddende  big  gebwurfon 
on  Hierusalem  mid  mycelum  gefean  ; 

53  And  big  weeron  symle  on  dam 
temple,  God  berigende,  and  byne  eac 
bletsicende.    Amen. 


XXIV.  47-53-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

is  writun,  and  thus  it  bihofte  Crist  to 
suflVe,  and  to  ryse  a5cu  fro  deed  men  in 
the  thridde  day  ; 

47  And  penaunce  and  reniyssioun  of 
synnes  to  be  prochid  in  his  name  to  allc 
folkis,  men  bigynnynge  at  Jerusalem. 

48  Forsothc  5c  bcu  witncssis  of  tbes 
thingis. 

49  And  I  scndc  the  bihecstc  of  my 
fadir  in  to  50U ;  sothli  sitte  56  in  the 
citee,  til  that  50  be  clothld  with  vertu 
fro  an  hij. 

50  Forsoth  he  Icdde  hem  forth  in  to 
Bcthanye,  and,  his  hondis  reysid,  he 
blcsside  hem. 

51  And  it  was  don,  while  he  blesside 
hem,  he  departide  fro  hem,  and  was 
borun  in  to  heuene. 

52  And  thei  worshippinge  wente  ajen 
in  to  Jerusalem  with  greet  ioye ; 

53  And  weren  euere  in  the  temple, 
Leryinge  and  blessinge  God. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


439 


Avi-itten,  and  thus  it  behoved  Christ  to 
suffre,  and  to  ryse  agayne  from  deeth 
the  thyrde  dayc ; 

47  And  that  repcntaunce  and  remissioa 
of  synnes  shuldc  be  preached  in  his 
name  amonge  all  nacions,  and  the  bc- 
gynnynge  must  be  at  Jerusalem. 

48  And  ye  arc  witnesses  of  these 
thynges. 

49  And  beholde,  I  wyll  sende  the  pro- 
mes  of  my  father  apon  you ;  butt  tary 
ye  in  the  cite  of  Jerusalen,  vntill  ye  be 
endowed  with  power  from  an  bye. 

50  And  he  ledde  them  out  into  Beth- 
any, and  lifte  vp  hys  hondcs,  and  blest 
them. 

51  And  it  cam  to  passe,  as  he  blessed 
them,  he  departed  from  them,  and  was 
caryed  vp  in  to  heven. 

52  And  they  worshipped  hym  and  re- 
turned to  Jerusalem  with  greate  ioye  ; 

53  And  were  continually  in  the  temple, 
praysynge  and  laudinge  God. 


AIWAGGELYO 


lOHANNEN. 


HER  ONGlNNEp 

BMT  GODSPELL 

^FTER 

JOHANNES  GERECEDNESSE. 


Chap.  I.  i  On  friiman'''  w?es  word, 
and  ttpet  word  wees  mid  Gode,  and  God 
wses  cttet  word. 

2  Dset  wees  on  fruman  mid  Gode. 

3  Ealle  J^ing  wseron  geworhte  ]mYh 
liyne,  and  nan  })ing  n^es  geworlit  butan 
liim. 

4  Dpet  wses  lif  de  on  him  geworht  wa3S, 
and  clset  lif  Avses  manna  leoht ; 

5  And  dtet  leoht  lyht  on  }iystrum,  and 
Jjystro  Ctset  ne  genomon. 

6  Man  AViss  fram  Gode  usend,  cites 
nama  wses  lohannes. 

7  Des  com  to  gewitnesse,  dcet  he  ge- 
witnesse  cyttde  be  ttam  leohte,  ctset  ealle 
men  Jjurh  hyne  gelyfdon, 

8  Npes  lie  leoht,  ac  c!a?t  he  gewitnesse 
for])-baere  be  ttam  leolite. 

9  Sojj  leoht  AVfes,  dset  onlyht  Eelcne 
cumendne  man  on  disne  middan-eard. 

10  He  wfes  on  middan-earde,  and  mid- 
dan-eard AV£fis  geworht  J)urh  hine,  and 
middan-eard  hine  ne  gecneow. 

11  To  his  agennm  he  com,  and  hig 
hyne  ne  underfengon. 

12  So})]ice  swii  hwylce  swa  liyne  nnder- 
fengon,  he  sealde  him  anweald  diet  hig 
wseron  Godes  beam,  dam  de  gelyfaj)  on 
his  naman ; 

13  Da  ne  synd  acennede  of  blodum, 
ne  of  flEesces  willan,  ne  of  weres  willan, 
ac  hig  synd  of  Gode  acennede. 

14  And  dfet  word  wses  flivsc  geworden, 
and  eardode  on  us,  and  we  gesawon  hys 
wuldor,  swylce   an-cennedes  wuldor  of 


HErUE  BIGYXXETU 


TIIF    GOSPEL 


THE    GO  SPELL 


OF 


OFF 


J  0  0  N. 


SANCTE   JHON. 


Chap.  I,  i  In  the  bigynnyn^c  was 
tlic  word,+  and  the  word  was  at  God, 
and  God  was  the  Avord. 

2  This  was  in  the  bigynnyiig-c  at  God. 

3  Alle  thins^is  ben  maad  by  hyni,  and 
Avith  outen  him  is  niaad  no5t,  that  thiny; 
til  at  is  maad. 

4  Was  lyf  in  him,  and  the  lyf  was  the 
li5t  of  men ; 

5  And  the  h*5t  schyneth  in  derknessis. 
and  derknessis  took  en  not  it. 

6  A  man  was  sent  fro  God,  to  whom 
the  name  was  Joon. 

7  This  man  cam  in  to  witncssinsfe, 
that  he  schulde  here  witne^siut;e  of  the 
li5t,  that  alle  men  schulden  bileue  bi 
him. 

8  He  was  not  tlie  li5t,  but  tliat  he 
schulde  here  witnessing  of  the  li5f. 

9  It  was  verri  li5t,  which  li5tncth  ech 
man  comynge  into  this  world. 

10  He  was  in  the  world,  and  tlie  world 
was  maad  bi  him,  and  the  world  knew 
him  not. 

1 1  He  cam  in  to  his  owne  thingis,  and 
hise  receyueden  not  him. 

12  Forsothe  hou  manye  euere  re- 
ceyueden him,  he  3af  to  hem  ])o\vcr  for 
to  be  maad  the  sones  of  God,  to  liem 
that  bilcucn  in  liis  name  ; 

13  Whiche  not  of  blodis,  nether  of  the 
will  of  flcisch,  nether  of  the  will  of  man, 
but  ben  born  of  God. 

14  And  the  word^  is  maad  fieisch,'"'  and 
hath  dwellid  in  vs,  and  we  han  seyn  the 
glorie  of  him,  the  gloric  as  of  the  con 


CiixVP.  I.  I  In  the  begynnynge  was 
that  worde,  and  that  worde  was  with 
God,  and  God  was  thatt  worde. 

2  The  same  Avas  in  the  begynnynge 
Avyth  God. 

3  All  thynges  were  made  by  it,  and 
Avitli  out  it  was  made  noo  thinge,  that 
made  was. 

4  In  it  was  lyfe,  and  lyfe  was  the  light 
of  men  ; 

5  And  the  light  shyneth  in  darcknes, 
and  "flai-cknes  comprehended  it  not. 

6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God, 
AA'hose  name  was  Jhon. 

7  The  same  cam  as  a  Avitnes,  to  beare 
Avitnes  of  the  light,  that  all  men  through 
him  myght  beleve. 

8  He  Avas  nott  that  light,  but  to  beare 
Avitnes  of  the  light. 

9  That  AA'as  a  true  light,  Avhich  lighten- 
eth  all  men  that  come  into  the  Avorlde. 

10  He  Avas  in  the  AA'orlde,  and  the 
Avorlde  by  him  Avas  made,  and  the  AA'orlde 
knewe  hym  not. 

1 1  He  cam  into  his  awne,  and  his 
receaA'ed  him  not. 

12  Vnto  as  meny  as  rcceaA-cd  him, 
gave  he  poAA'cr  to  be  the  sonnes  of  God, 
in  that  they  beleved  on  his  name  ; 

13  Which  Avcre  borne  not  of  blonde, 
nor  of  the  Avill  of  the  flesshe,  nor  yet  cf 
the  Avill  of  men,  but  of  God. 

14  And  that  Avorde  was  made  flesshe, 
and  dwelt  amonge  vs,  and  Ave  sawe  the 
glory  off  yt,  as  the  glory  off  the  only 


442 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Johx 

fodei",  dset  wses  ful  mid  glfe,  and  sojjfoest- 
nesse.'' 

15  loliannes  cy}>  gewitnesse  be  liim, 
and  clypajj,  dus  cweCtcnde,  Des  wa?s,  de 
ic  Sccde,  Se  cle  to  cumenne  is  fefter  me, 
wses  geworden  beforan  me,  fordam  be 
wses  Eei'  donne  ic ; 

16  And  of  bis  gefyllednesse  we  ealle 
onfengon,  gife  for  gife. 

17  Fordaiii  de  se  Avpes  geseald  ])urb 
Moysen  ;  and  gifu  and  s6)>fcestnes  is  ge- 
worden J)urb  Haelend  Crist. 

18  Ne  geseab  naefre  nan  man  God, 
biitan  se  an-cenneda  smiu  liit  cydde,  se 
is  on  bis  feeder  bearme. 

1 9  And  dset  is  lobannes  geAvitnes,'''  da 
da  ludeas  sendon  byra  sacerdas  and 
byra  diaconas  fram  lerusalem  to  bim, 
d£et  bi  acsodon  byne  and  dus  cwsedon, 
Hwtet  eart  du  1 

20  And  be  cydde,  and  ne  wid-s6c,  and 
dus  cwse|j,  Ne  eom  ic  na  Crist. 

21  And  big  acsodon  bine  and  dus 
cwsedon,  Eart  dii  Elias  1  And  be  cwse]' 
Ne  eom  ic  bit.  Da  cwsedon  lii,  Eart  du 
witega  1  And  be  andwyrde  and  cw£e]j, 
Nic. 

22  Hig  cwaedon  to  bim,  Hwtet  eart 
du  1  dset  we  andwyrde  bringon  dam  de 
us  to  de  sendon,  Hw^t  segst  du  be  de 
sylfum  1 

23  He  cwse]?,  Ic  eom  clypiendes  stefn 
on  westene,  GeribtaJ)  Dribtnes  weg,  swa 
se  witega,  Isaias,  cwaj]). 

24  And  da  de  dser  asende  wseron,  da 
Wseron  of  Sundor-balgon. 

25  And  big  acsodon  bine,  and  cwsedon 
to  bim,  Hwi  fullast  dii,  gif  du  ne  eart 
Crist,  ne  HeHas,  ne  witega  ] 

26  lobannes  bim  andswarode,  Ic  fulb'ge 
on  woetei'e,  to-middes  eow  stod,  de  ge 
ne  cunnon  ; 

27  He  is,  de  refter  me  toweard  is,  se 
wses  geworden  beforan  me,  ne  eom  ic 
wyrde,  dset  ic  unbinde  bis  sceo-])wang. 

28  Das  |)ing  wseron  gewordene  on 
Betbania  begeondau  lordanen,  dser  lo- 
bannes fullode."'' 


I.  15-28.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

bigetun  of  the  fadir,  the  sone  ful  of  grace, 
aud  of  treutlie. 

15  John  beritli  witnessing  of  him,  and 
crycth,  seyingc,  This  it  was,  whom  I 
seide.  He  that  comcth  aftir  me,  is  maad 
bifore  me,  for  he  was  the  formere 
than  I ; 

16  And  of  the  plcnte  of  him  we  alio 
ban  takun,  and  grace  for  grace. 

1 7  For  the  Lawe  is  5ouun  by  Moyses ; 
forsoth  grace  and  treuthc  is  maad  by 
Jhcsu  Crist. 

18  No  man  cucrc  syj  God,  no  but  the 
oon  bigctun  sone,  that  is  in  the  bosum 
of  tlie  fadir,  he  hath  tokl  ont. 

19  And  this  is  the  witnessing  of  John, 
whanne  Jewis  seuten  fro  Jerusalem 
prestis  and  dekenys  to  hym,  that  thei 
schulden  axe  him,  Who  art  thou  ? 

20  And  he  knowelechide,  and  denyede 
not,  and  he  kuowlechide.  For  I  am  not 
Crist. 

21  And  thei  axiden  him,  What  ther- 
fore  1  art  thou  Elye  1  And  he  seide,  I 
am  not.  Art  thou  a  prophete  ?  And 
he  answeride,  Nay. 

22  Therfore  thei  seyden  to  him,  "Who 
art  thou  ?  that  we  5yuc  answere  to  thes 
that  sente  vs.  What  seist  thou  of  thi 
silf? 

23  He  seith,  I  a  vois  of  the  crying  in 
desert,  Dresse  50  the  wey  of  the  Lord, 
as  Ysaye,  the  prophete,  seyde. 

24  And  thei  that  weren  sente,  weren 
of  the  Pharisees. 

25  And  thei  axiden  him,  and  seiden  to 
him,  What  therfore  baptysist  thou,  if 
thou  art  not  Crist,  nethir  Elye,  nether 
prophete 1 

26  John  answeride  to  hem,  seyinge,  I 
baptise  in  watir,  sothli  the  myddil  7nan 
of  50U  stood,  whom  je  knowen  not ; 

27  He  it  is,  that  cometh  aftir  me,  that 
is  maad  bifore  me,  of  whom  I  am  not 
Avorthi,  that  I  vnbynde  the  thwong  of 
his  schoo. 

28  Thes  thingis  ben  don  in  Bethany 
ouer  Jordan,  wher  John  was  baptisinge. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  443 

begotten    sonne    off   the   father,    which 
worde  was  full  of  grace,  and  verite. 

15  Jhon  bare  witnes  off  hym,  sayinge, 
Thys  is  he,  of  whonie  I  spake.  He  that 
commeth  after  me,  was  before  me,  be 
cause  he  was  ycr  then  I ; 

1 6  And  of  his  fulnes  have  all  we  re- 
ccaved,  even  favour  for  favour. 

1 7  For  the  lawc  was  gcvcn  by  Moses ; 
but  favour  and  vcritc  cam  by  Jesus 
Christ. 

18  No  man  sawe  God  at  eny  tyme,  the 
only  begotten  sonne,  Avhich  is  in  the 
fathers  bosum,  hath  declared  hym. 

19  Aud  this  is  the  rccorde  off  Jhon, 
when  the  lewes  sent  prestes  and  levites 
from  Jerusalem,  to  axe  hym,  What  arte 
thoul 

20  And  he  confessed,  and  denyed  nott, 
and  sayde  playnly,  I  am  nott  Christ. 

2 1  And  they  axed  hym,  "VMiat  then  ? 
arte  thou  Helias  1  And  he  sayde,  I  am 
nott.  Arte  thou  a  prophet?  And  he 
answered,  Noo. 

22  Then  sayd  they  vnto  hym.  What 
arte  thou  1  that  we  maye  geve  an  answer 
to  them  that  sent  vs.  What  sayest  thou 
of  thy  silfe  1 

23  He  sayde,  I  am  the  voyce  of  a  cryar 
in  the  wildernes.  Make  strayght  the 
waye  of  the  Lorde,  as  sayde  the  prophet, 
Esayas. 

2  4  And  they  which  were  sent,  wer  off 
the  Pharises. 

25  And  they  axed  hym,  and  sayde  vnto 
him.  Why  baptisest  thou  then,  yf  thou 
be  nott  Christ,  nor  Helias,  nether  a  pro- 
phet 1 

26  Jhou  answered  them,  sayinge,  I 
baptise  with  water,  butt  one  is  come 
amonge  you,  whom  ye  knowe  nott ; 

27  He  it  is,  that  commeth  after  me, 
whiche  was  before  me,  whose  shoue 
latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to  vnlose. 

28  These  thynges  were  done  in  Beth- 
abara  beyonde  Jordan,  where  Jhou  did 
baptise. 


444 

29 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Sai  !  sa  'isfc  wij)rus  Guj^s ;  saei 

afnimi])  frawaurht  pizos  manasedais.''' 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

29  O'dre  dse^e  lohannes  geseah  done 
Hselend  to  him  cumende,  and  cwtej', 
Her  is  Godes  lamb ;  lier  is  se  de  de]p 
aweg  middan-eardes  synna. 

30  Des  is,  be  dam  ic  saede,  JEher  me 
cym])  wer,  de  befoi'an  me  geworden  wses; 
fordan-  de  be  wses  ser  donne  ic. 

31  And  ic  byne  nyste,  ac  ic  com  and 
fullode  on  wfetere,  to  dam  d«t  be  Wcere 
geswutelod  on  Israbela  folce. 

32  And  lobannes  cydda  gewitnesse, 
cwedende,  Dret  ic  geseab  nyder-cumend- 
ne  gast  of  beofenum,  swa  swa  culfran, 
and  wunode  ofer  bine. 

33  And  ic  bine  ne  cude;  ac  se  de  me 
sende  to  fullianne  on  wi^tere,  be  c\vsej> 
to  me,  Ofer  done  de  du  gesylist  nyder- 
stigendne  Gust,  and  ofer  bine  wuniendne, 
dset  is,  se  de  fuHa})  on  Halgum  Gaste. 

34  And  ic  geseab,  and  gewitnesse 
cydde,  daet  des  is  Godes  sunn.^ 

35  Eft  odre  i]xge  st5d  lobannes,  and 
twegen  of  bis  leorning-cnibtmn  ; 

36  And  be  cwpe|?,  da  be  geseab  done 
Hselend  gangende,  Her  is  Godes  lamb. 

37  Da  gebyrdon  byne  twegen  leorning- 
cnibtas  specende,  and  fyligdon  dam 
Hcclende. 

38  D;1  beseab  se  Heeleud,  and  geseah 
big  bim  fyliende,  and  c\va3{?  to  bim, 
Hwset  sece  gyt  1  Hi  cweedon  to  bim, 
Rabbi,  dset  is  gecweden  and  gerebt, 
Lareow,  bwar  eardast  dtl  1 

39  He  cwse})  to  bim,  Cuma]?,  and  ge- 
seo]j.  Hig  comon,  and  gesawon  bwar 
be  wunode  ;  and  mid  bim  wunodon  on 
dam  dsege.     Hit  wtes  da  seo  teo|>e  tid. 

40  Andreas,  Simones  brcder  Petres, 
wfES  oder  of  dam  twam,  da  gebyrdon  set 
lobanne,  and  bim  fyligdon. 

41  Des  gemette  serest  Simonem  bis 
broder,  and  cwsef)  to  bim,  AVe  gemetton 
Messiam,  dset  is  gerebt  Crist ; 

42  And  big  gelseddon  bine  to  dam 
Hgelende.  Da  bebeold  se  Hselend  byne, 
and  cwje)?,  Du  eart  Simon,  lonan  sunu  ; 
dii  bist  genemned  Cepbas,  dset  is  gereht 
Petrus. 


I.  29-42.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

29  Another  day  John  sy5  Jhcsu  com- 
yni;e  to  him,  and  he  seith,  Lo !  the 
lonib  of  God  ;  lo  !  that  doith  a  wcy  the 
synncs  of  the  world. 

30  This  is,  of  whom  I  seide,  Aftir  me 
Cometh  a  man,  that  is  maad  bifore  mc  ; 
for  he  was  the  formcre  than  I. 

31  And  I  knewe  not  him,  but  that  he 
be  schewid  in  Israel,  therfore  I  cam 
baptisin^c  in  watir. 

32  And  John  bar  witnessing,  seyingc. 
For  I  si-;  the  spirit  comynge  doun,  as  a 
culnere  fro  heueue,  and  dwellinge  on 
him. 

33  And  I  knew  not  him ;  but  he  that 
seute  me  for  to  baptise  in  watir,  seydc 
to  me,  On  whom  thou  schalt  se  the 
Spirit  comynge  doun,  and  dwellinge  on 
him,  this  it  is,  that  baptisith  in  the 
Hooly  Gost. 

34  And  I  sy3,  and  bar  witnessing,  for 
this  is  the  sone  of  God. 

35  Another  day  John  stood,  and  tweyne 
of  his  diseiplis  ; 

36  And  he  biholdinge  Jhesu  walkynge, 
seith,  Lo  !  the  lomb  of  God. 

37  And  tweye  diseiplis  herden  him 
spekynge,  and  folwideu  Jhesu. 

38  Sothli  Jhesu  conuertid,  and  seynge 
hem  suwynge  him,  seith  to  hem,  ^Vhat 
seken  56  ]  Whiclie  seiden  to  him,  Raby, 
that  is  interpretid,  Maistir,  where  dwell- 
ist  thou  ? 

39  He  seith  to  hem.  Come  5e,  and  se 
56.  Thei  canicn,  and  sy5en  where  he 
dwelte  ;  and  thei  dweltcn  at  him  in  that 
day.     Sothli  the  our  was  as  the  tentlie. 

40  Forsothe  Andrew,  brother  of  Sy- 
mount  Petre,  was  oon  of  the  tweyne, 
that  herden  of  John,  and  hadde  sued 
him. 

41  This  fond  first  his  brother  Symount, 
and  he  seith  to  him,  We  han  founde 
Messias,  that  is  interpretid  Crist ; 

42  And  he  ledde  him  to  Jhcsu.  Sothli 
Jhcsu  bihohlinge  him,  seide.  Thou  ert 
Symount,  the  sone  of  Johanna  ;  thou 
schalt  be  clepid  Cepha.s,  that  is  inter- 
pretid Petre. 


TYNDALE,  1K26. 


445 


29  The  nexte  daye  Jhon  sawe  Jesus 
commynge  vnto  hym,  and  sayde,  13e- 
holde  !  the  lambe  of  God,  whych  takcth 
awayc  the  synne  off  the  worlde. 

30  This  is  he,  of  whom  I  sayde,  After 
me  commeth  a  man,  which  was  before 
mc ;  for  he  was  yer  then  I. 

3 1  And  I  knew  hym  nott,  butt  that  he 
shuld  be  declared  to  Israhell,  therfore 
cam  I  baptisyngc  with  water. 

32  And  Jhon  bare  recorde,  sayinge,  I 
sawe  the  sprete  dcscende  from  Iieven, 
lyke  vnto  a  dove,  and  it  aboode  apou 
hym. 

33  And  I  knewe  hym  not ;  but  lie  that 
sent  me  to  baptyse  in  Avater,  sayde  vnto 
me,  Apon  whom  thou  shalt  se  the  Sprete 
descend e,  and  tary  sty  11  on  hyn),  the 
same  is  he,  whych  baptiseth  wyth  the 
Holy  Goost. 

34  And  I  sawe  yt,  and  have  borne  re- 
corde, that  thys  ys  the  sonne  off  God. 

35  The  next  daye  after  Jhon  stode 
agayne,  and  two  off  hys  disciples  ; 

36  And  he  behelde  Jesus  as  he  walked 
by,  and  sayde,  Beholde  !  the  lambe  off 
God. 

37  And  the  two  disciples  herde  hym 
speake,  and  they  folowcd  Jesus. 

38  Jesus  turned  about,  and  sawe  them 
folowe,  and  sayde  vnto  them.  What  soke 
ye  ]  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Rabi,  which 
is  to  say  be  interprctacion,  Master, 
Avhere  dwellest  thou  1 

39  He  sayde  vnto  them.  Come,  and  se. 
They  cam,  and  sawe  where  he  dwelt ; 
and  abode  with  hym  that  daye.  For  it 
was  about  the  tenthe  houre. 

40  Won  off  the  two,  wliych  herde  Jhon 
sj)eake,  and  folowed  Jesus,  was  Andrew, 
Simon  Peters  brothei*. 

41  The  same  founde  hys  brother  Simon 
fyrst,  and  sayde  vnto  hym,  We  have 
founde  Messias,  whych  ys  be  interprc- 
tacion Announted ; 

42  And  l)rought  hym  to  Jesus.  And 
Jesus  behelde  hym,  and  sayde,  Thou  arte 
Simon,  the  sonnc  off  Jonas;  thou  shalt 
be  called  Cephas,  which  is  by  interprc- 
tacion, A  stone. 


446 


GOTHIC,  360. 


A:^TGL0-SAX0]^,  995.     [St.  John 

43  On  mergen  he  wolde  fai-an  on  Gali- 
lea,  and  lie  gemette  Philippus ;  and  se 
Hselend  c\Yse\>  to  him,  Fylig  me. 

44  S6[)lice  Philippus  Avees  fram  Beth- 
saida,  Andreas  ceastre  and  Petres. 

45  Philippus  gemette  Nathanahel,  and 
cwse])  to  him,  We  gemettou  Clone  Hsel- 
end,  losepes  sunu,  of  Nazareth,  Clone 
wrat  Moyses  and  da  witegan  on  dsere  se. 

46  And  Nathanahel  cwtej)  to  him,  Moeg 
senig  Jjing  godes  beon  of  Nazareth  1 
Philippus  cwpej>  to  him.  Cum,  and  ge- 
seoh. 

47  Da  geseah  se  Heelend  Nathanahel 
to  him  cumendne,  and  cwse])  be  hini; 
Her  is  Israhelisc  wer,  on  ttam  nis  nan 
facn. 

48  Da  cw£e|>  Nathanahel  to  him, 
Hwanon  cudest  du  me  1  Da  andswar- 
ode  se  Hselend,  and  cwsejj  to  him,  Ic 
geseah  de,  da  du  wjere  under  dam  fic- 
treCwe,  serdam  de  Philippus  de  clypode. 

49  Him  andswarode  da,  Nathan ahel,  and 
dus  cwse}?,  Ptabbi,  du  eart  Godes  sunu, 
and  du  eart  Israhela  cing. 

50  Da  cwfEJ)  se  Heelend  to  him,  Du 
gesyhst  mare  donne  dys  sy  ;  fordam  de 
dii  gelyfdest,  da  ic  cwse]?,  dset  ic  gesawe 
de  under  dam  fic-treowe. 

51  And  he  ssede  him,  Sojjic  secge  eow, 
ge  geseoj)  opene  heofenas,  and  Godes 
englas  up  stigende  and  nyder  stigende 
ofer  mannes  sunu. 


Chap.  H.  '''i  On  dam  pn'iddan  dsege 
wseron  gifta  gewordene  on  Chanaa  Ga- 
lilese  ;  and  da?s  Hselendes  modor  wses 
dser. 

2  So])lice  se  Hselend,  and  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  Avseron  geladode  to  dam  giftum. 

3  And  da  dset  Avin  geteorode,  da  cwa3|> 
dses  Hselendes  modor  to  him,  Hi  nabbaj> 
win. 

4  Da  cwse]?  se  Hselend  to  hyre,  La  wif, 
hwset  is  me  and  de  1  gyt  min  tima  ne 
com. 

5  Dii  cwse})  dses  Hselendes  modor  to 


1.43-11.5-]  WYCLIFFE.iaSp. 

43  Forsotlic  on  the  morwc  he  wolclc 
go  out  in  to  Oalilce,  and  lie  fond  Philip; 
and  Jhcsu  seith  to  him,  Sue  thou  me. 

44  Pliilip  "was  of  Bethsayda,  the  citee 
of  An(h-eu  and  Petrc. 

45  Philip  fond  Nathanael,  and  he  seith 
to  him,  Wo  han  founden  Jhcsu,  the  sone 
of  Joseph,  of  Xazarcth,  whoni  Moyscs 
■\vroot  in  the  lawe  and  prophotis. 

46  And  Xathanacl  seidc  to  him,  Of 
Nazareth  may  sum  p;ood  thing  be  1 
Philip  seith  to  him,  Come,  and  se. 

47  Jhcsu  sy5  Nathanael  comynge  to 
him,  and  he  seith  of  him,  Lo  !  verily 
a  man  of  Israel,  in  whieh  is  no  gile. 

48  Nathanael  seith  to  him,  "Wherof 
liast  thou  knowe  me  ]  Jhesu  answeride, 
and  seith  to  him,  Bifore  that  Philip 
clcpide  thee,  whanne  thou  were  vndir 
the  fyge  tree,  I  sy5  thee. 

49  Nathiinael  answeride  to  him,  and 
.'^eith,  Piabi,  thou  ert  the  sone  of  God, 
thou  ert  kyng  of  Israel. 

50  And  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide  to 
him,  For  I  seyde  to  thee,  I  sy3  thee 
vndir  the  fige  tree,  thou  bileuest ;  thou 
schalt  se  more  than  these  thingis. 

51  And  he  seide  to  hem,  Trculi  I  seic 
to  50U,  50  schulen  se  heuene  openyd,  and 
the  aungels  of  God  sti5yngc  vp  and 
comynge  doun  on  mannis  sone. 


TYNDALE,  1^26. 


44: 


Chap.  II.  i  And  the  thridde  day 
weddingis  ben  maad  in  the  Cane'''  of 
Galilee ;  and  the  modir  of  Jhesu  Avas 
there. 

2  Sothli  Jhesu  is  clepid,  and  his  dis- 
ciplis,  to  the  weddingis. 

3  And  Avyn  faylingc,  the  modir  of 
Jhesu  seide  to  him,  Thei  han  not  wyn. 

4  And  Jhesu  seith  to  hir,  "What  to  me 
and  to  thee,  thou  wommau  1  myn  our 
cam  not  3it. 

.^    The  modir   of   him    seith    to    the 


43  The  daye  folowyngc  Jesus  woldc 
goo  into  Galile,  and  founde  Philip ;  and 
sayde  vnto  hym,  Folowe  me. 

44  Philip  was  of  Petsaida,  the  cite  of 
Andrew  and  Peter. 

45  Philip  founde  Nathanael,  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  We  have  founde  hym,  off 
whom  Moses  wrote  in  the  lawe  and  the 
prophetes,  Jesus,  the  sonne  of  Joseph, 
of  Nazai'cth. 

46  And  Nathanacll  sayde  vnto  hym. 
Can  there  cny  goodc  thyiigc  come  out 
off  Nazareth  ]  Philip  sayde  to  liym. 
Come,  and  se. 

47  Jesus  sawe  Nathanael  commyngc 
to  hym,  and  sayde  of  hym,  Beholde  ! 
a  right  Hisrahelite,  in  whom  is  no  gyle. 

48  Nathanael  sayd  vnto  hym.  From 
whence  knewest  thou  me?  Jesus  an- 
swered, and  sayde  vnto  hym.  Before 
that  Philip  called  the,  when  thou  Avast 
vndcr  the  fygge  tree,  I  saAve  the. 

49  Nathanael  ansAvercd,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Rabi,  thou  arte  the  sonne  off  God, 
thou  arte  the  kynge  of  Israhcl. 

50  Jesus  ansAvered,  and  sayd  vnto 
hym.  Be  cause  I  sayde  vnto  the,  I  sawe 
the  vnder  the  fygge  tree,  thou  belevest  ; 
thou  shalt  se  greater  thynges  then 
these. 

51  And  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  Verely, 
A'crely  I  saye  vnto  you,  here  after  shall 
ye  se  hevcn  open,  and  the  angels  off 
God  ascendynge  and  dcscendynge  over 
the  sonne  off  man. 


Chap.  II.  i  And  the  thrydc  daye 
was  there  a  mariage  in  Cana,  a  eitie 
of  Galile  ;  and  Jesus  mother  Avas  there. 

2  Jesus  Avas  called  also,  and  his  dis- 
ciples, vnto  the  mariage. 

3  And  when  the  Avyne  fayled,  Jesus 
mother  sayde  vnto  hym,  They  have  no 
Avyne. 

4  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Woman,  what 
have  I  to  do  Avith  the  1  mync  houre  is 
not  yett  come. 

5  His  mother  sayde  vnto  the  ministers, 


448 


GOTHIC,  360, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

dam  |>enum,  T)6\>  swa  liwaet  swu,  he  eow 
secc,re. 

6  Da?r  wa'ron  s6|;lice  asefc  six  stsenene 
weeter-fatu,  sefter  ludea  geclBeiisunge,  aelc 
wa?s  on  twegra  sesti'a  gemete,  oclcte  on 
Jjveora. 

7  Da  bead  se  HEelend  doet  hig  da  futu 
mid  wfetere  gefyidon.  And  hig  gefyl- 
don  da,  od  done  brerd. 

8  Da  cwfej)  se  Heelend,  Hladaj?  nu,  and 
beraj;  dsere  drihte  ealdi'e.   And  hi  namon. 

9  Da  se  drihte  ealdor  dses  wines  on- 
byrgde  de  of  dam  wsetcre  geworden  wses, 
he  nyste  hwanon  hit  com,  da  })inas 
sdljlice  Aviston,  de  dset  wjeter  hlodon, 
se  drihte  ealdor  clypode  done  bryd- 
guman, 

10  And  cwpe])  to  him,  JE'lc  man  sylj) 
Eerest  god  win,  and  donne  hig  druncene 
beojj,  d.Tt  de  wyrse  by]? ;  da  geheolde 
da3t  gode  win  od  dis. 

1 1  Dis  wses  dpet  forme  tacn  de  se 
Haelend  worhte  on  Chanaa  Galilese,  and 
geswiitelode  his  wuldor ;  and  his  leorning- 
cnihtas  gelyfdon  on  hine.''' 

1 2  JEher  dysum  he,  and  hys  modor, 
and  his  gebrodru,  and  his  leorning- 
enihtas  foron  to  Capharnaum  ;  and  wun- 
edon  dar  feawa  daga. 

13  And  hit  w?es  neah  ludea  eastron, 
and  se  Hselend  for  to  Hierusalem. 

14  And  gemette  on  dam  temple  da  de 
sealdon  oxan,  and  sceap,  and  culfran, 
and  sittende  myneteras. 

15  And  he  worhte  swipan  of  streng- 
um,  and  hig  ealle  of  dam  temple  adri'f, 
ge  scenp,  ge  oxan  ;  and  he  ageat 
dara  niynetera  feoh,  and  towearp  hyra 
mysan. 

16  And  ssede  dam  de  da  culfran  cyp- 
ton,  DoJ)  das  \nng  heonon,  ne  wyrce 
ge  m'nes  feder  hus  to  mangung-huse. 

1 7  Da  gemundon  his  leorning-cnihtas, 
d{iet  do  awriten  is.  Dines  buses  anda 
me  a?t. 

18  Da  andswaredon  him  da  ludeas, 
and  cwsedon,  Hwylc  tacn  set-ywst  du 
us,  fordam  de  dii  das  fing  desti 


II.  6-i8.]   WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

mynystris,  What  eucre  thing  he  schal 
seie  to  3011,  do  je. 

6  Forsothe  ther  weren  put  sixc  stoonun 
pottis,  aftii*  tlie  clensinge  of  Jewis,  tak- 
ingc  cell  twcyue  or  tlirc  mesuris. 

7  Jhcsu  scitli  to  hem,  Fillc  ^e  the 
pottis  with  water.  And  thei  lillidcn 
hem,  til  to  the  hijestc  part. 

8  And  Jhcsu  seith  to  hem,  Drawe  je 
now,  and  here  56  to  architriclyn.^  And 
tliei  token. 

9  And  as  arcliitriclyn  tastide  the  watir 
niaad  wyn,  and  lie  wiste  not  wherof  it 
was,  sothli  the  mynystris  wisten,  that 
drowen  watir,  architriclyu  clepith  the 
spouse, 

10  And  seith  to  him,  Ech  man  puttith 
first  i^ood  wyn,  and  whanne  men  schulen 
he  tillid,  thanne  that  that  is  worse;  sothli 
thou  hast  kept  good  wyn  til  to  now. 

1 1  Jhesu  dide  this  the  bigynnynge  of 
signes  in  the  Cane  of  Galilee,  and  schewide 
his  glorie ;  and  his  discipHs  bileueden 
iu  to  him. 

12  Aftir  thes  thingis  he  cam  doun  to 
Capharnaum,  and  his  modir,  and  his 
britheren,  and  his  disciplis ;  and  thei 
dwelten  there  not  many  dayes. 

13  And  the  paske  of  Jewis  Avas  ny3, 
and  Jhesu  wente  vp  to  Jerusalem. 

14  And  he  fond  in  the  temple  men 
sellinge  scheep,  and  oxen,  and  culueris, 
and  chaungeris  sittinge. 

15  And  whanne  he  hadde  maad  as  a 
scourge  of  smale  coordis,  he  castide  out 
alle  of  the  temple,  and  oxen,  and  scheep ; 
and  he  schedde  out  the  moneye  of 
chaungeris,  and  turnede  vpsodoun  the 
bordis. 

16  And  he  seide  to  hem  that  selden 
culueris,  Take  a  wey  fro  hennis  thes 
thingis,  and  nyle  30  make  the  hous  of 
my  fadir  an  hous  of  marchaundise. 

17  Forsothe  his  disciplis  hadden  mynde, 
for  it  is  writun.  The  feruour  of  loue  of 
thin  hous  hath  etun  me, 

18  Therfore  the  Jewis  answeriden,  and 
seyden  to  him.  What  sjTigne^  schewist 
thou  to  vs,  for  thou  doist  thes  thingis  ? 


TYNDALE,  1526.  449 

Wliatsoever  he  sayeth  vnto  you,  do  itt. 

6  There  were  stondynge  sixe  water 
pottes  of  stone,  after  the  mancr  of  the 
purifyinge  of  the  lewes,  contaynynge 
two  or  thre  fyrkyns  a  pece. 

7  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Fyll  the 
water  pottes  with  water.  And  they 
fylled  them,  vp  to  the  harde  brym. 

8  And  he  sayde  vnto  them,  Drawe 
outt  nowe,  and  beare  vnto  the  governer 
of  the  feaste.     And  they  bare  itt. 

9  When  the  ruler  off  the  feast  had 
tasted  the  water  that  was  turned  vnto 
wyne,  nother  knewe  whence  it  was,  butt 
the  mynisters,  which  drue  the  water, 
knew,  he  called  the  brydegrome, 

10  And  sayde  vnto  hym,  All  men  att 

the  be  gynnynge  sett  forth  goode  wyne, 
and  when  men  be  dronke,  then  thatt 
which  is  worsse  ;  butt  thou  hast  kept 
backe  the  goode  wyne  hetherto. 

1 1  Thys  begynnynge  off  myracles  did 
Jesus  in  Cana  of  Galile,  and  shewed  his 
glory ;  and  his  disciples  beleved  on  hym. 

12  After  thatt  descended  he  in  to 
Capernaum,  and  hys  mother,  and  hys 
brethren,  and  his  disciples  ;  but  con- 
tinued not  longe  there. 

13  And  the  lewes  ester  was  even  at 
honde,  and  Jesus  went  vp  to  Jerusalem. 

14  And  founde  in  the  temple  those 
that  solde  oxen,  and  shepe,  and  doves, 
and  chaungers  of  money  syttynge. 

15  And  he  made  a  scourge  off  smale 
cordes,  and  drave  them  all  out  off  the 
temple,  bothe  shepe,  and  oxen ;  and 
powred  doune  the  changers  money,  and 
overthrue  their  tables. 

16  And  sayde  vnto  them  that  solde 
doves.  Have  these  thynges  hence,  and 
make  nott  my  fathers  housse  an  housse 
off  marcliandyse. 

17  Hys  disciples  remembred,  howe  that 
yt  was  written,  The  zele  of  thyne  housse 
hath  even  eaten  me. 

18  Then  answered  the  lewes,  and  sayde 
vnto  him,  What  token  shewest  thou  vnto 
vs,  seynge  that  thou  dost  these  thynges? 


4r»o 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Amen,  amen,  qi]'a  ])us,  niba 

saei  gabairada  'iupabro,  ni  mag  gasahvh- 
au  ))iu(langardya  Gujig.''' 

4  Wliaiwa 

niahts  1st  manna  gabairan,  aljjcis  Avis- 
ands  ?  ibai  mag  'in  waniba  aijjeins  seiii- 
aizos  aftra  galeijjan,  yaggabairaidau  1 


Amen,  amen,  qij)a  ])US,  niba 

saei  gabairada  iis  watin,  yah  Ahmin,  ni 
mag  anngalei|3an  in  jaudangardya  GuJ>s. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.Johx 

19  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  and 
cwpeji,  Toweorpa])  Ctis  tempel,  and  ic  hit 
arse  re  binnan  Jjrim  dagum, 

20  Da  ludeas  cwiCdon  to  liim,  Dis 
tempel  wa?s  getimbrod  on  six  and  feower- 
tigum  wintrum,  and  arserst  dil  hit  on 
|)rym  dagum  1 

2 1  S5]jlice  he  hyt  cwse]>  be  hys  lichaman 
temple. 

22  Da  ho  of  dea|?e  avas,  da  gemundon 
his  leorniug-cnihtas,  dset  he  hit  be  him 
sylfum  cvfie^  ;  and  hi  gelyfdon  hiilgum 
gewrite,  and  dsere  sprsece  de  se  H2elend 
spraec. 

23  Da  he  waes  on  Hierusalem  on  east- 
ron,  on  freols-dasge,  manega  gelyfdon 
on  his  naman,  da  hi  gesawon  da  tticna 
da  he  worhte. 

24  hSe  Hselend  ne  geswutelode  hine 
sylfue  him,  fordam  he  cude  hi  ealle  ; 

25  And  fordam  him  nses  nan  J^earf, 
dfet  cenig  man  SEede  gewitnesse  be  men, 
he  Aviste  Avitodlice  hwoet  wses  on  men. 


Chap.  III.  '''i  Sdjjlice  sum  Pharis- 
eisc  man  wses,  genemned  Nichodemus, 
se  wses  ludea  ealdor. 

2  Des  com  to  him  on  niht,  and  cwse]) 
to  him,  Eabbi,  dset  is  lareow,  we  Aviton, 
dset  dii  come  fram  Gode ;  ne  mteg  nan 
man  das  tacn  Avyrcan  de  du  Avyrcst, 
biiton  God  beo  mid  him. 

3  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  and 
cwse]>,  S5|),  ic  de  secge,  biiton  hwa  beo 
edniwan  gecenned,  ne  mseg  he  geseon 
Codes  rice. 

4  Da  cwse]?  Nichodemus  to  him,  Hii 
msee:  man  beon  eft  acenned,  donne  he 
bi})  eald?  cwyst  dii  mseg  he  eft  cumau 
on  his  moder  innojj,  and  beon  eft  acen- 
ned ? 

5  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode  and 
cwse}).  So}),  ic  de  secge,  biiton  Inva  beo 
ge-edcenned  of  wsetere,  and  of  Haligum 
Gaste,  ne  mseg  he  in-faran  on  Codes 
rice. 

6  Dset  de  acenned  is  of  flsesce,  dset  ys 


II.  I9.-TII.  6.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 9  JIicsu  auswerlde,  and  scyilc  to  hem, 
Vmlo  5c  this  temple,  and  iu  thrc  daycs 
I  sclial  reyse  it. 

0  Therfore  the  Jcwis  scydon  to  him, 
In  iourty  and  sixc  5ecris  this  temple  is 
byldid,  and  thou  in  thrc  daycs  schalt 
rcvsc  it  I 

1  Forsothe  he  scidc  of  the  temple  of 
his  body. 

22  Tlicrforc  whannc  he  hadde  rysun 
fro  deed  men,  his  disciplis  hadden  myndc, 
for  he  seydc  this  thing ;  and  thei  bilcuedcn 
to  the  scripture,  and  to  the  word  that 
Jhesu  scidc. 

3  Forsothe  whannc  Jhesu  was  at  Je- 
rusalem in  pask,  iu  the  fecste  day,  manye 
bilcuyden  in  his  name,  scynge  the  syngnes 
of  him  that  he  didc. 

24  Sothli  Jhesu  him  silf  bileuede  not 
Iiym  silf  to  hem,  for  that  he  knew  alle 
men ; 

25  And  for  it  was  not  nede  to  hym, 
that  eny  man  schulde  here  witnessing 
of  man,  sothli  he  wiste  what  was  iu 
man. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


451 


Chap.  III.  i  Forsothe  ther  was  a 
man  of  Pharisees,  Nicodeme  bi  name,  a 
prince  of  Jewis. 

2  He  earn  to  Jhesu  in  the  ny5te,  and 
seide  to  him,  Raby,  wc  witen,  for  of  God 
thou  hast  come  a  maistir  ;  sothli  no  man 
may  do  thcs  signes  that  thou  dost,  uo 
but  God  were  with  him. 

3  Jhesu  answcride,  and  seyde  to  him, 
Treuli,  treuli,  I  seye  to  thee,  no  but 
a  man  schal  be  born  a5en,  he  may  not 
se  the  kyngdom  of  God. 

4  Xycodeme  seide  to  him.  How  may  a 
man  be  born,  whanne  he  is  olde  ?  wher 
lie  may  entre  a5ea  in  to  his  modris 
wombc,  and  be  born  a3ein? 

5  Jhesus  answeride,  Treuli,  treuli,  I 
scie  to  thee,  no  but  a  man  schal  be 
born  a5en  oi  watir,  and  of  the  Hooly 
Gost,  he  may  not  entre  in  to  the  kyng- 
dom of  God. 

6  That  that  is  born  of  fleiscb,  is  fleiscli ; 


19  Jesus  answered,  and  said  vnto  them, 
Destroye  this  temple,  and  in  thrc  dayes 
I  will  rayse  it  v])pe  agayne. 

20  Then  saydc  the  lewes,  In  xlvj.  yeares 
this  temple  was  bilt,  and  wylt  thou  rayse 
it  vppe  in  thrc  dayes  ? 

2 1  Butt  he  spake  of  the  temple  off  hys 
boddy. 

22  As  sone  therfore  as  he  was  rysen 
from  deeth  agayne,  his  disciples  reraem- 
brcd,  that  he  thus  sayde  vnto  them ; 
and  they  belcved  tlie  scripture,  and  the 
wordcs  whych  Jesus  had  saydc. 

23  When  he  was  at  Jerusalem  at  ester, 
in  the  feaste,  many  beloved  on  his  name, 
when  they  sawe  the  signes  which  be 
did. 

24  But  Jesus  put  nott  hym  silfe  in 
their  hondcs,  be  cause  he  knewe  all 
men  ; 

25  And  neded  nott,  that  eny  man 
shuldc  testify  oft"  man,  for  he  knewe 
what  was  in  man. 


CiiAP.  III.  I  There  was  a  man  off 
the  Pharises,  named  Nicodcmus,  a  ruler 
amonge  the  lewcs. 

2  He  cam  to  Jesus  be  nyght,  and  sayde 
vnto  him,  Master,  Ave  knowe,  that  thou 
arte  a  teacher  whyche  arte  come  from 
God  ;  for  no  man  couldc  do  suche  mira- 
cles as  thou  doest,  except  God  were 
wyth  hym. 

3  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto  hym, 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  the,  except 
that  a  man  be  boren  a  newe,  he  cannot 
se  the  kingdom  of  God. 

4  Nicodemus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Howe 
can  a  man  be  boren,  when  he  is  olde? 
can  he  enter  into  hys  moders  body,  and 
be  boren  agayne  ? 

5  Jesus  answered,  Verely,  verely,  I  saye 
vnto  the,  except  that  a  man  be  boren 
of  water,  and  of  the  Sprcte,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kyngdom  of  God. 

6  That  whych  is  boren  of  the  flesshe, 

G  g  2 


■4.V2 


COTllIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

flsesc ;  and  dset  de  of  gaste  is  acenned, 
diet  is  gast. 

7  Ne  wundra  du,  fordam  de  ic  seede 
de,  Eow  gebyrajj  dtet  ge  beon  acennede 
edniwan. 

8  Gast  oredaj)  dar  he  Avile,  and  dii 
gehyrst  his  stefne,  and  du  nast,  hwanon 
he  cym)>,  ne  hwyder  he  gsej) ;  swa,  is  sele 
de  acenned  is  of  gaste. 

9  Da  andswarode  Nichodemus,  and 
cwse]),  Hu  magon  das  Jiing  dus  ge- 
weordan  1 

10  Se  Hselend  andswai'ode,  and  cwfej; 
to  him,  Du  eart  lareovv  Israhela  folce, 
and  du  nast  diis  Jjing  1 

1 1  Sop,  ic  de  secge,  dset  we  sprecaj^, 
dset  Ave  witon,  and  we  cyda|>,  dset  we 
gesclwon,  and  ge  ne  underfo]?  ure  cyd- 
nesse. 

12  Gif  ic  eow  eorjjlice  )?ing  saede,  and 
ge  ne  gelyfa)',  humeta  gelyfe  ge,  gif  ic 
eow  heofenlice  J^ing  secge  1 

13  And  nan  man  ne  astih]?  to  lieof- 
enum,  biiton  se  de  nydcr  com  of 
heofenum,  mannes  sunu  se  de  com 
of  heofenum. 

14  And  swa  swa  Moyses  da  naeddran 
up-ah5f  on  dam  westene,  swa  gebyraj) 
dtet  mannes  sunu  beo  up-iihafen, 

15  Dset  nan  dara  ne  forweorde,  de  on 
hyne  gelyfjj,  ac  hsebbe  dset  ece  lif.^ 

16  God  lufode  middan-eai'd  swa,  dset 
he  sealde  his  an-cennedan  sunu,  dset 
nan  ne  forweorde  de  on  hine  gelyfj), 
ac  hsebbe  dset  ece  lif. 

17  Ne  sende  God  his  sunu  on  middan- 
eard,  dset  he  demde  middan-earde,  ac 
dset  middan-eard  sy  gehseled  jjurh  hine 

18  Ne  h[\>  dam  gedemed,  de  on  hine 
gelyfjj;  se  de  ne  gelyfj?  him,  bi[)  gedemed, 
fordam  de  he  ne  gelyfde  on  done  naman 
dses  an-cennedan  Godes  suna. 

19  Dset  is  se  dom,  diet  leoht  com  on 
middan-eard,  and  menn  lufedon  Jjystro 
swydor  donne  dset  leoht  :  hyra  weorc 
waeron  yfele. 

20  ^'Ic  dara  de  yfele  dejj,  hataj)  dset 


III.  7-20.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

and  that  that  is  born  of  spirit,  is  spirit. 

7  Wondre  thou  not,  for  I  scye  to  thee. 
[t  behoucth  50U  for  to  be  boru  a5eiu. 

f  8  The  spirit  brctliith  wher  it  wolc,  and 
thou  hccrist  liis  vois,  but  thou  wost  not, 
fro  whennis  he  cometh,  or  whidir  he 
goth  ;  so  is  ech  man  that  is  borun  of 
the  spirit. 

I  9  Nycodeme  answeride,  and  seide  to 
him,  Hou  mown  thes  thingis  be  don  1 

10  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seyde  to  him, 
Art  thou  a  maistir  in  Israel,  and  knowist 

I  not  thes  thingis  1 

'  1 1  Treuli,  treuli,  I  seye  to  thee,  for 
that  that  we  witen,  we  speken,  and  that 
tliat  we  han  seyn,  we  witnesseu,  and  ^e 
taken  not  oure  witnessing. 

12  If  I  haue  seid  to  50U  ertheli  thingis, 
and  50  bileuen  not,  how  if  I  schal  seie 
to  50U  heuenli  thingis,  schulen  je  bileue? 

13  And  no  man  styeth  in  to  heuene, 
no  but  he  that  cam  doun  fro  heuene, 
mannis  sone  that  is  in  heuene. 

14  And  as  !Moyses  reride  vp  a  serpent 
in  desert,  so  it  bihoueth  mannus  sone 
for  to  be  areysid  vp, 

15  Tliat  ech  man  that  bileueth  in  to 
liim,  perische  not,  but  haue  euerelastinge 

i,  16  Forsothe  God  so  louede  the  world, 
that  he  5af  his  oon  bigctun  sone,  that 
ech  man  that  bileueth  in  to  him  perische 
not,  but  haue  euere  lasting  lyf. 

(  17  Sothli  God  sente  not  his  sone  in  to 
the  world,  that  he  iuge  the  world,  but 
that  the  world  be  sauyd  by  hym. 

18  He  that  bileueth  in  to  him,  is  not 
demyd  j^  forsothe  he  that  bileueth  not, 

I  is  now  denied,  for  he  bileueth  not  in 
the  name  of  the  oon  bigetun  sone  of 
God. 

19  Sothli  this  is  the  dom,  for  lijt  cam 
:  in  to  the  world,  and  men  louede  more 

derknessis  than  li3t ;  forsoth  her  workis 
weren  yuele. 

20  Sothli  ech   man  that  doth  yuele, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


4.i;i 


is  flc-:shc  ;  and  that  Avhich  is  boren  of 
the  si)icto,  is  sprcte. 

7  ^liirvayle  nott,  that  I  sayd  to  the. 
Ye  must  be  boren  a  ucwc. 

8  The  w}'nde  bloweth  where  he  listeth, 
and  thou  hoarcst  his  souiido,  butt  tliou 
canst  nott  tell,  whence  he  commeth,  and 
whether  he  goeth  ;  so  is  every  man  that 
is  boren  of  the  sprete. 

9  Nieodemus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
him,  Howe  can  these  thynges  be  1 

10  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Arte  thou  a  master  in  Israhell, 
and  knowest  nott  these  thynges  1 

I X  Verely,  verely,  I  sayc  vnto  the,  we 
speake  that  we  knowe,  and  testify  that 
we  have  sene,  and  ye  rcccave  not  oure 
witnes. 

1 2  YfFI  have  tolde  you  erthely  thynges, 
and  ye  have  not  beleved,  howe  shulde 
ye  beleve,  if  I  shall  tell  you  of  heveuly 
thynges  1 

13  And  noo  man  hath  ascended  vppe 
to  heven,  butt  he  that  cam  doune  from 
heven,  that  ys  to  saye  the  sonne  of  man 
which  is  in  heven. 

14  And  as  Moses  lifte  vppe  the  serpent 
in  wyldernes,  even  soo  must  the  sonne 
off  man  be  litte  vppe, 

15  That  noo  man  which  belcveth  in 
hym  perisshe,  but  have  etcrnall  lyfe. 

16  God  soo  loved  the  worlde,  that  he 
gave  his  only  sonne,  for  the  entent  that 
none  that  beleve  in  hym  shulde  perisshe, 
butt  shulde  have  everlastynge  lyfe. 

I  7  For  God  sent  not  his  sonne  into 
the  worlde,  to  condcmpnc  the  worlde, 
but  that  the  worlde  through  him  myght 
be  saved. 

18  He  that  beleveth  on  hym,  shall  not 
be  condempned  ;  but  he  that  beleveth 
nott,  is  condempned  all  rcdy,  be  cause 
he  beleveth  nott  in  the  name  off"  the 
only  Sonne  off  God. 

19  And  this  is  the  condcmpnacion, 
light  is  come  into  the  worlde,  and  the 
men  have  loved  darcknes  more  then 
light ;  be  cause  their  dedes  were  evyll. 

20  For   every  man  that  evyll  doeth, 


454 


GOTHIC,  360. 


23 


nac^a  wesun 

t 


yainar;  yah  qemun,  yah  daupitlai  wesun 

24  Ni  nauhjjanuh  galagl]js  was  in  kark- 
arai  lohannes. 

25  paln-oh  |)an  warjj  sokeins  us  sipon- 
yam  lohannes  mij)  ludaium,  hi  swikn- 
ein 

26 
....  Kabbei,  saei  was  mi)?  ])us  hindar 
Yaurdanau,  j^ammei  {ju  weitwodides,  sai ! 
sa  daupei]?,  yah  allai  gaggand  du  imma. 


29 


....  So  nu  fahe]3S  meina  usfullnoda.+ 

30  Yains  skal  wahsyan,  'i\>  ik  minznan, 

31  Sa  iupajjro  qimands,  ufaro  allaim 
i'st ; 

.  .  .  sa  us  himina  qumana,  ufaro  allaim 
'ist. 

32  Yah  ))atei  gasawh,  yag-gahausida, 
y-ata  weitwodeijj,  yah  ])0  weitwodida  is 
ni  ainshun  nimi]). 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

leoht ;  and  lie  ne  cyni))  to  leohte,  dset 
his  weorc  ne  syn  gerihtlcehte. 

21  Witodlice  se  de  wyrcj?  sojjfestnesse, 
cym)?  to  (Jam  leohte,  da?t  his  weorc  syn 
geswutelode,  forcJam  de  hig  synd  on 
Gode  gedone. 

22  ^fter  dyssum  com  se  Hselend,  and 
his  leorniug-cuihtas,  to  ludea  lande,  and 
wunode  dser  mid  him,  and  fullode. 

23  And  lohannes  fullode  on  Enon,  wid 
Salim,  fordam  de  dter  weeron  manega 
wEetro  ;  and  hi  togsedere  comon,  and 
wseron  gefullode. 

24  Da  gyt  uses  lohannes  gedon  on 
cwearternj 

25  Da  smeadon  lohannes  leorning- 
cnihtas  and  da  ludeas,  be  dsere  cleens- 
uuge. 

26  And  comon  to  lohanne,  and  cwa?don 
to  him.  Rabbi,  se  de  mid  de  wa3S  be- 
geondan  lordanen,  be  dam  dii  cyddest 
gewitnesse,  nii  !  he  fuUajj,  and  ealle  hig 
cuma}>  to  him, 

27  lohannes  and\vyrde,  and  cwte]?,  Ne 
mteg  mann  nan  Jjing  vmderfLn,  buton 
hit  beo  hym  of  heofenum  geseald. 

28  Ge  sylfe  me  synd  to  gewitnesse, 
dset  ic  SEede,  Ne  eom  ic  Crist,  ac  ic 
eom  asend  beforan  bine. 

29  Se  de  bryde  hsef^',  se  ys  brydguma; 
se  de  is  dses  brydguman  freond,  and 
stent,  and  gehyr\>  hyne,  mid  gefean  he 
geblissa|',  for  dtes  brydguman  stefne. 
Des  min  gefea  is  gefylled. 

30  Hit  gebyraj)  dset  he  weaxe,  and 
dset  ic  Avanige. 

31  Se  de  ufenan  com,  se  is  ofer  ealle; 
se  de  of  eor|3au  is,  .  .  .  se  spryc[)  be 
eor])an ;  se  de  of  heofone  com,  se  is 
ofer  ealle. 

32  And  he  cf]>,  dast  he  geseah,  and 
gehyrde,  and  nan  man  ne  underfehjj  his 
cydnesse. 

33  S6|)lice  se  de  his  cydnesse  under- 
M\\>,  he  getacnajj  dset  God  is  s6|)foestnes. 

34  Se  de  God  sende,  spryc]>  Godes 
word ;  ne  syl])  God  done  gast  be  gc- 
mete. 


III.  21-34.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

hatith  li5t  ;  ai«l  lie  comctli  not  to  tlic 
li5t,  that  liis  workis  be  not  rcprouccl.+ 

21  Sotlili  he  that  cloth  trouthe,  cometh 
to  the  li5t,  that  his  workis  be  schcwid, 
for  thci  ben  dou  in  God. 

22  Aftii*  thes  thingis  Jhcsu  cam,  and 
his  disciplis,  in  to  the  lond  of  Judec, 
and  there  he  dwellide  with  hem,  and 
baptiside.'*' 

23  Sothli  John  was  baptisynge  in  En- 
non,  bisydis  Salym,  for  many  watris 
were  there  j  and  thei  camen,  and  weren 
baptisid. 

24  Sotlili  John  was  not  5it  sent  in 
to  prisonn. 

25  Sothli  a  qnestioun'''  is  maad  of 
Johiiis  disciplis  with  the  Jewis,  of  the 
purificacioun'''. 

26  And  thei  camen  to  John,  and  seyde 
to  him,  Eabi,'''  he  that  was  Avith  thee 
ouer  Jordan,  to  wbom  thou  hast  born 
witnessinge,  lo  !  he  baptyseth,  and  alle 
}ncn  comen  to  him. 

27  John  answeridc,  and  seyde,  A  man 
may  not  take  ouy  thing,  no  but  it  be 
jouun  to  him  fro  heuene. 

28  5e  50U  silf  beren  witnessing  to  me, 
that  I  seyde,  I  am  not  Crist,  but  for  I 
am  sent  bifore  him. 

29  He  that  hath  a  spousesse^  is  the 
spouse  ;■•■  forsothc  a  frend  of  the  spouse, 
that  stondith,  and  heerith  him,  ioyeth 
in  ioye,  for  the  vois  of  the  spouse. 
Thcrfore  in  this  thing  my  ioye  is  fillid. 

30  It  bihoueth  him  for  to  wexe,  for- 
soth  me  to  be  menusid.''' 

31  He  that  cam  fro  aboue,   is  aboue 
alle  ;  he  that  is  of  the  crthe,     . 
spekith   of  the  ertlie  ;  he   that  comith 
fro  heuene,  is  aboue  alle. 

32  And  this  thing  that  he  sy5,  and 
hcrde,  he  wituessith,  and  no  man  takith 
his  witnessing. 

33  Forsoth  he  that  hath  takun  his  wit- 
nessing, hath  markid  that  God  is  soth- 

•fast. 

34  Forsoth  he  whom  God  sente,  spekith 
the  wordis  of  God ;  forsothe  not  to 
mesure  God  5yueth  the  spirit. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


453 


hatcth   the   light :   nether  commcth   to 
light,  lest  his  dedes  shuldo  be  reproved. 

2 1  Eutt  he  that  doth  the  trueth, 
commcth  to  the  light,  that  his  dedes 
niyght  be  knowcn,  howe  that  they  arc 
wroght  in  God. 

22  After  that  cam  Jesus,  and  his  disci- 
ples, into  the  lewes  londe,  and  there 
abode  with  them,  and  baptised. 

23  And  Jhon  also  baptised  in  Enon, 
besydes  Salim,  because  there  was  moche 
water  there ;  and  they  cam,  and  were 
baptised. 

24  For  Jhon  was  not  yet  cast  into 
preson. 

25  There  a  rose  a  question  bitwenc 
Jlions  disciples  and  the  Icwcs,  a  bout 
purifiynge. 

26  And  they  cam  vnto  Jhon,  and  saydc 
vnto  hym,  Master,  beholde  !  he  that  was 
with  the  beyonde  lordan,  to  whom  thou 
barest  witnes,  baptyseth,  and  all  men 
come  to  hym. 

27  Jhon  answered,  and  sayde,  A  man 
can  receave  nothynge  at  all,  except  it 
be  geven  hym  from  heven. 

28  Ye  youre  selves  are  witnesses,  howe 
that  I  sayde,  I  am  nott  Christ,  butt  am 
sent  before  hym. 

29  He  that  hath  the  bryde  is  the 
brydegrome  ;  but  the  frende  off  the 
brydcgrome,  which  stondeth  by,  and 
hearctli  hym,  reioyseth  greately,  of  the 
brydgromes  voyce.  Thcrfore  this  my 
ioye  is  fulfilled. 

30  He  must  incrcace,  and  I  music  dc- 
creaee. 

31  He  that  comraeth  from  an  hye,  is 
above  all ;  he  that  is  off  the  erth,  is  of 
the  erth,  and  speakcth  off  the  erth  ; 
he  that  commeth  from  heven,  is  above 
all. 

32  And  tcstlfyeth  that  he  hath  senc, 
and  hcrde,  and  his  testimony  noo  man 
receaveth. 

33  Whosoever  reccavith  his  witnes,  the 
same  hath  sealed  that  God  is  true. 

34  For  he  whom  God  hath  sent,  speak- 
cth the  wordes  off  God  ;  for  God  gevcth 
nott  the  sprete  by  measure. 


456 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

35  Feeder  lufaj?  done  sunu,  and  sealde 
ealle-  ]>ing  on  his  hand. 

36  Se  die  ge\jf\>  on  sunu,  se  hsefj?  ece  lif ; 
se  cle  dam  suna  is  ungeleaffull,  ne  ge- 
syhj)  he  lif,  ac  Godes  yire  wuna}>  ofer 
hine. 


Chap.  IV.  i  Da  se  Hselend  wyste, 
cl^et  da  Pharisei  gehyrdon,  dset  he  hsef- 
de  ma  leorning-cnihtas  .  .  .  doune  lo- 
hannes, 

2  Deah  se  Hselend  ne  fuUode,  ac  his 
leorning-cnihtas, 

3  Da  forlet  he  ludea  land,  and  for  eft 
on  Galilea. 

4  Him  gebyrode  dset  he  sceolde  faran 
|)urh  Samaria  land. 

5  Witodlice  he  com  on  Samarian  ceastre, 
de  is  genemned  Sichav,  neah  dam  tune, 
de  lacob  sealde  losepe,  his  suna. 

6  Dser  wees  lacobes  wyll  ;  "''se  Hselend 
sset  i3et  dam  wylle,  da  he  wees  wei'ig 
gegan.     And  hit  wass  mid-dseg. 

7  Da  com  dser  an  wif  of  Samaria, 
woldc  wseter  feccau.  Da  cwsej)  se  Hael- 
end  to  hyre,  Syle  me  drincan. 

8  His  leorning-cnihtas  ferdon  da  to 
dsere  ceastre,  woldon  him  mete  bicgan. 

9  Da  cwpe)>  dset  Samaritanisce  wIf  to 
him,  Humeta  bitst  du  fet  me  drincan, 
donne  dii  eart  ludeisc,  and  ic  eom  Sa- 
maritanisc  wif?  ne  bruca]?  ludeas  and 
Samaritanisce  metes  cetgsedere. 

10  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend,  and 
cweejj  to  hyre,  Gif  dii  wistest  Godes 
gyfe,  and  hwset  se  is,  de  cwyj'  to  de, 
Syle  me  drincan,  witodlice  du  baede 
hine,  daet  he  sealde  de  lifes  wseter. 

1 1  Da  cwse})  dset  wif  to  him,  Leofne, 
dii  nsefst  nan  }>ing  mid  to  hladenne,  and 
des  pytt  is  de5p  ;  hwanon  hoefst  dii 
lifes  waiter  1 

12  Cwyst  du  dset  du  si  mserra  donne 


III.  35.-IV.  12.]  WTCLIFFE,  13S9. 

35  Tlie  fadir  loueth  the  sonc,  and  he 
hath  50uun  alio  thin<:jis  in  his  hond. 

36  He  that  bileucth  in  to  the  sone, 
hath  euere  lastinge  lyf ;  forsothc  he  that 
is  vnbilcnefid  to  the  sonc,  schal  not  se 
euercListing  lyf,  but  the  wraththe  of  God 
dwellith  on  hym. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


457 


CiiAP.  IV.  I  Tlierfore  as  Jhcsu  knew, 
that  Pharisees  herden,  that  Jhcsu  makith 
mo  disciphs  and  baptysith,  than  John, 


2  Thou3  Jhesu  baptiside  not,  but  his 
disciplis, 

3  He  lefte  Judee,  and  wente  a5cn  in  to 
Galilee. 

4  Sothli  it  bihofte  him  to  passe  bi  Sa- 
marie. 

5  Tlierfore  Jhesu  cam  in  to  a  citee  of 
Samarie,  that  is  seyde  Sycar,  bisydis  the 
mauere,^  that  Jacob  jaf  to  Joseph,  his 
sone. 

6  Forsoth  the  welle  of  Jacob  was  there; 
sothli  Jhesu  maad  wery+  of  the  iurney, 
sat  thus  on  the  welle.  Sothli  the  our 
was,  as  the  sixte.''' 

7  A  womman  cam  of  Samarie,  for  to 
drawe  watir.  Jhesu  seith  to  hir,  j}'^^ 
to  me  for  to  drynke. 

8  Forsoth  his  disciplis  hadden  gon  in 
to  the  citee,  that  thei  schulden  bye 
metis. 

9  Thcrforc  the  ilke  womman  of  Sa- 
marie seith  to  him.  How  thou,  whanne 
thou  ert  a  Jew,  axist  of  me  for  to 
drynke,  which  am  a  womman  of  Sa- 
marie ?  forsothe  Jewis  vsen  not  with 
Samaritans. 

10  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide  to  hir. 
If  thou  wistist  the  5ifte  of  God,  and 
who  it  is,  that  seith  to  thee,  5y"6  to 
me  for  to  drynke,  thou  perauenture 
schuldest  haue  axid  of  him,  and  he 
schuldc  haue  jouun  to  thee  quyk  watir. 

1 1  The  womman  seith  to  him,  Sire, 
nether  thou  hast  in  what  thing  thou 
schalt  drawe,  and  the  pitt  is  deep ;  ther- 
fore  whei-of  hast  thou  quyk  watir  ? 

12  Wher   thou  art  more   than   oure 


35  The  father  loveth  the  sonne,  and 
hath  geven  all  thynges  into  his  honde. 

36  He  that  beleveth  on  the  sonne,  hath 
everlastyng  lyfe  ;  and  he  that  belevetli 
nott  the  Sonne,  shall  nott  sc  lyfe,  but  the 
wrathe  of  God  bydeth  on  hym. 


CiiAP.  IV.  I  As  sone  as  the  Lorde 
had  knoweledge,  howe  that  it  was  come 
to  the  cares  oif  the  Pharises,  that  Jesus 
made  and  baptised  moo  disciples,  then 
Jhon, 

2  Though  that  Jesus  hym  silfc  baptised 
not,  butt  his  disciples, 

3  He  lefte  lewry,  and  departed  agayne 
into  Galile. 

4  And  it  was  soo  that  he  must  ncdes 
goo  thorowe  Samaria. 

5  Then  cam  he  to  a  cite  of  Samaria, 
called  Sichar,  besydcs  the  possession, 
that  Jacob  gave  to  his  sonne,  Joseph. 

6  And  there  was  Jacobs  well ;  Jesus 
then  weried  in  his  iorney,  sate  thus  on 
the  well.  Hit  was  about  the  sixte 
houre. 

7  There  cam  a  woman  of  Samaria,  to  • 
drawe   Avater.     Jesus    sayde    vuto    her, 
Geve  me  drynke. 

8  For  his  disciples  wer  gone  awaye 
vuto  the  toune,  to  beye  meate. 

9  The  woman  off  Samaria  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Howe  is  itt  thatt  thou,  beinge  a 
lewe,  axest  drynke  of  me,  which  am 
a  Samaritane  1  for  the  lewes  medle  not 

with  the  Samaritans. 

10  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto  her. 
If  thou  knewest  the  gyfte  of  God,  and 
who  it  is,  that  sayeth  to  the,  Geve  me 
drynke,  thou  woldest  have  axed  of  hym, 
and  he  wolde  have  geven  the  water  of 
lyfe. 

1 1  The  woman  sayde  vnto  hym,  Sjt, 
thou  hast  noo  thynge  to  drawe  it  with 
all,  and  the  well  is  depe ;  from  whence 
then  hast  thou  that  water  off  lyfe  1 

1 2  Arte  thou  jirrctter  then  oure  father 


458  GOTHIC,  360. 


A^nTGLO-SAXON",  995.    [St.  John 

urc  feeler  lacob,  se  cte  us  ctisne  pytt 
sealde  1  and  lie,  and  his  beam,  and  his 
nytenu  of  dam  druncon. 

13  Da  andswnrode  sc  Hcelend,  and 
cwxp  to  hyre,  iE'Icne  dara  j^yrst  eft,  de 
of  clysum  wreterc  drincj) ; 

14  AVitodHce  tele  dara  tte  drincj?  of 
clam  WEetere  de  ic  liim  sylle, 


bl]j  on  him  will,  forjj-rEesendes  ■waeteres 
on  ece  lif. 

15  Da,  cwfej)  dast  wif  to  him,  Hlaford, 
syle  me  dset  "wreter,  da^t  me  ne  I'yrste, 
ne  ic  ne  Jjurfe  her  feccan. 

16  Da  cwi3e]j  se  Hfvlend  to  hyre,  Ga, 
clypa  dinne  ceorl,  and  cum  hider. 

1 7  Da  andwyrde  dajt  ^vif,  and  cwseji, 
ISTiebbe  ic  nanne  ceorh  Da  cwjejj  se 
Hffilend  to  hjTe,  Wei  du  cwa?de,  da:t  du 
nsefst  ceorl ; 

18  Witodlice  du  hajfdesfc  fif  ceorlas, 
and  se  de  du  mi  hfefst,  nis  din  ceorl. 
^t  dam  du  ssedest  s6]>. 

19  Da  cwjb])  dtet  wif  to  him,  Leof,  dpes 
de  me  })inc}?,  dii  eart  Avitcga. 

20  U're  fsederas  hig  gebsedon  on  dis- 
sere  diine,  and  ge  secga];,  diet  on  Ilieru- 
salem  sy  seo  stow,  dtet  man  on-gcbidde. 

21  Da  cw0ej>  se  Hjclend  to  hyre.  La 
"wif,  gelyf  me,  dtet  seo  tid  cymjj,  donne 
ge  ne  gebiddaj)  fa^der,  iie  on  dissere 
dune,  ne  on  Hierusalem. 

2  2  Ge  gebiddaj)  diet  ge  nyton  ;  we  ge- 
bidda))  dset  Ave  Aviton ;  fordam  de  hsel 
is  of  ludeum. 

23  Ac  seo  tid  cym]',  and  ml  is,  donne 
s6\)e  gebed-men  gebidda}?  freder  on  gaste 
and  on  sojifaestnesse ;  Avitodhce  fodder 
sec})  SAvylce,  de  hyne  gebiddon. 

24  Gast  is  God,  and  dam  de  hytie  ge- 
biddaj?, gebyraj)  dset  hig  gebiddon  on 
gaste  and  on  s6}'f?estncsse. 

25  Dset  Avif  cwse])  to  him,  Ic  Avat  dtet 
Messias  cym]',  de  is  genemned  Crist ; 
donne  he  cym}?,  he  cy|j  us  ealle  j'ing. 

26  Se  Hselend  CAA'fe})  to  hyre,  Ic  hit 
eom,  de  Avid  de  sprece. 


IV.  13-26.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

fiidir  Jacob,  that  jaue  to  vs  this  pitf! 
and  he  ch*ank  therof,  and  his  sones,  and 
his  becstis. 

13  Jhesu  answeridc,  and  seide  to  hir, 
Ech  man  that  drynkith  of  this  watir, 
schal  thirste  eftsoone  ; 

14  Forsothc  he  that  schal  drynkc  of 
the  wativ  that  I  schal  5yue  to  him,  schal 
not  thirste  in  to  with  outcn  cndo  ;  bnt 
the  watir  that  I  schal  5yne  to  him,  schal 
be  maad  in  him  a  wellc  of  watir,  spryng- 
}nige  vp  in  to  cuerclastingc  lyf. 

15  The  womman  seith  to  him,  Sire, 
;;yue  to  me  tliis  watir,  that  I  thirste  not, 
nether  come  hidir  for  to  drawe. 

16  Jhesu  seith  to  hir.  Go,  clepe  thin 
hosebonde,  and  come  hidur. 

1 7  The  womman  answeride,  and  seide, 
I  haue  not  an  liosebonde.  Jhesu  seith 
to  hir,  Thou  seidist  wel.  For  I  haue  not 
an  hosebonde  ; 

18  Forsoth  thou  hast  had  fjiie  hose- 
bondis,  and  he  wliom  thou  hast,  is  not 
thin  hosebonde.  This  thing  thou  seidist 
sothli. 

19  The  womman  seith  to  him,  Lord, 
I  se,  for  thou  art  a  pi'ophete. 

20  Oure  fadris  worschipiden  in  this 
hil,  and  ■^e  seyn,  for  at  Jerusalem  is  a 
place,  wher  it  bihoueth  for  to  worschipe. 

2 1  Jhesu  seith  to  hir,  "Womman,  bileue 
to  me,  for  the  our  schal  come,  whanne 
nether  in  this  hil,  nether  in  Jerusalem, 
50  schulen  prcye^  the  fadir. 

22  3e  worschipcn  that  that  50  wlten 
not  ;  we  worschipcn  that  that  we  witen  j 
for  heelthe  is  of  Jewis. 

23  But  the  our  cometh,  and  now  it  is, 
whanne  trewe  worschiperis  schulen  wor- 
schipe the  fader  in  spirit  and  treuthc ; 
forwhi  and  the  fadir  sekith  suche,  that 
schulen  worschipe  him. 

24  God  is  a  spirit,  and  it  bihoueth  hem 
that  worschipcn  him,  for  to  worschipe 
in  spirit  and  treuth. 

25  The  womman  seith  to  him,  I  woot 
for  Messias  is  comen,  that  is  seid  Crist ; 
therfore  whanne  he  schal  come,  he  schal 
telle  to  vs  alle  thingis. 

■26  Jhesu  seith  to  hir,  I  am,  that  speke 
with  thee. 


TYNDALE  i-,2  6. 


4.v:> 


Jacob,  which  gave  vs  this  well  1  and  he 
hym  silfc  dranke  there  of,  and  his  chyl- 
dren,  and  his  cattell. 

13  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
lier,  AVhosoever  drynketh  of  this  water, 
shall  thurst  agayne ; 

14  But  whosoever  shall  drynke  of  the 
water  that  I  shall  gcvc  hym,  shall  never 
be  moare  a  thyrst ;  but  the  water  that 
I  shall  geve  hym,  shalbe  in  hym  a  well 
of  water,  spryngynge  vp  in  to  evcrlast- 
ynge  l}^"e. 

15  The  woman  sayde  vnto  hym,  Syr, 
geve  me  of  that  water,  that  I  thyrst  not, 
nether  come  hcdder  to  drawe. 

16  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her.  Go,  and  call 
thy  husband,  and  come  liyddcr. 

17  The  woman  answered,  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  I  have  no  husband.  Jesus 
sayde  to  her.  Thou  hast  well  sayd,  I 
have  no  husband  e  ; 

18  For  thou  haste  had  five  husbandcs, 
and  he  whom  thou  nowe  hast,  is  not 
thy  housband.   That  saydcst  thou  truely. 

19  The  woman  sayde  vnto  hym,  Syr, 
I  perceave,  that  thou  arte  a  pi'ophet. 

20  Oure  fathers  worshipped  in  this 
mountayne,  and  ye  saye,  thatt  in  Jeru- 
salem is  the  place,  where  men  ought  to 
praye. 

2 1  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Woman,  trust 
me,  the  houre  cometh,  when  ye  shall 
nether  in  this  mountayne,  nor  yet  att 
Jerusalem,  worshii)pe  the  father. 

22  Ye  worshippe  ye  wot  neare  what  ; 
we  knowe  what  we  worshippe  ;  for  sal- 
vacion  commeth  of  the  lewes. 

23  But  the  houre  commeth,  and  nowe 
is,  when  the  true  worshippers  shall  wor- 
shippe the  father  in  sin'ete  and  in  verite  ; 
for  verily  suche  the  father  requyreth,  tC 
woishippe  hym. 

24  God  is  a  sprcte,  and  they  that  wor- 
shippe hym,  must  honoure  hym  in  sprcte 
and  verite. 

2,-,  The  woman  sayde  vnto  hym,  I  wot 
well  Messias  shall  come,  which  is  called 
Christ ;  when  he  is  once  come,  he  will 
tell  vs  all  thynges. 

26  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  I  thatt  speake 
vnto  the,  am  he. 


460 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

27  And  dser-rihte  comon  his  leorning- 
cnihtas,  and  hig  wundredon,  dret  lie  wid 
dpet  vvif  sprsec  ;  deah  hyra  nan  ne  cwse]), 
Hwset  secst  du,  odde,  Hwset  sprycst  du 
wid  hig  1 

28  AVitodlice  dset  wif  forlet  hyre  wseter- 
fset,  and  code  to  dsere  byrig,  and  cwaej) 
to  dam  m  annum, 

29  Cumajj,  and  geseo]>  done  man,  de 
me  ssede  ealle  da  Jjing  de  ic  dyde ; 
cwede  ge  is  he  Crist  1 

30  Da  eodon  hi  ut  of  dsere  byrig,  and 
comon  to  him. 

3 1  On  gemang  dam  his  leorning-cnihtas 
hine  bccdon,  and  dus  cwsedon,  Lareow, 
et. 

32  Da  cwse})  he  to  him,  Ic  hsebbe  done 
mete  to  etanne,  de  ge  nyton. 

33  Da  cwcedon  his  leorning-cnihtas 
him  betwynan,  Hwseder  eenig  man  him 
mete  brolite  1 

34  Da  cwsel?  se  Haelend  to  him,  Min 
mete  is,  dset  ic  wyrce  dass  willan  de  me 
sende,  dset  ic  fullfremme  his  weorc. 

35  Hu  ne  secge  ge,  dffit  mi  gyt  synd 
feower  m6n)>as,  ser  man  ripan  msege  1 
Nu  !  ic  eow  secge,  hebba]?  upp  eowre 
eagan,  and  geseojj  das  eardas,  dset  hig 
synd  scire  to  ripanne. 

36  And  se  de  rip])  nim))  mede,  and 
gadera})  Avaestm  on  ecum  life  ;  da^t  a^t- 
gsedere  geblission  se  de  ssew]',  and  se  de 

37  On  dyson  is  "witodlice  s6\>  word, 
fordam  oder  is  se  de  ssewjj,  5der  is  se 
de  rip]). 

38  Ic  sende  eow  to  rTpanne,  dset  doet 
ge  ne  beswuncon ;  odre  swuncon,  and 
ge  eodon  on  hyra  geswinc. 

39  Witodlice  manige  Samaritanisce  of 
dsere  ceastre  gelyfdon  on  hine,  for  dses 
wifes  wordum  de  be  him  cydde,  Dset  he 
ssede  me  ealle  da  Jjing,  de  ic  dyde. 

40  Da  da  Samai'itanlscan  comon  to 
him,  hig  gebsedon  hine,  dset  he  wunode 
dser  :  and  he  wunode  dser  twec^en  dao-as. 

41  And  mycele  ma  gelyfdon  for  his 
sprsece, 

42  And  cwsedon  to  dam  wife,  Ne  ge- 


IV.  27-42.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

27  And  anon  his  clisciplis  camen,  and 
wondrideii,  for  he  spak  with  a  woninian  ; 
iictholos  no  man  soido,  What  schist 
tliou,  or,  AVhat  spikist  thou  with  hir  1 

28  Tlierfore  the  woniman  Icfte  the 
■watir  pott,  and  wentc  in  to  the  citee, 
and  seith  to  tho  men, 

29  Come  30,  and  se  50  the  man,  that 
seide  to  nie  alle  thiugis  what  cucre 
thingis  I  haue  don  ;  wher  he  is  Crist  1 

30  And  thai  wonten  out  of  the  citee, 
and  thci  camcn  to  hym. 

31  In  the  mene  while  his  disciplis 
preieden  him,  seyingc,  Eaby,^  etc. 

32  Sothli  lie  seide  to  hem,  I  haue  mete 
for  to  cte,  that  56  witen  not. 

33  Tlierfore  the  disciplis  seiden  to 
gidere,  AVher  ony  man  broujte  to  him 
for  to  ete  ? 

34  Jhesu  seith  to  hem.  My  mete  is, 
that  I  do  the  will  of  him  that  sente  me, 
and  that  I  performe  the  Avork  of  him. 

35  Wher  5e  seyn  not,  for  5it  foure 
monethis  ben,  and  rype  corn  cometh  1 
Lo  !  I  seie  to  50U,  lift  vp  5oure  y5en, 
and  se  ^e  the  regiouus,'''  for  now  thei 
ben  white  to  ripe  corn. 

36  And  he  that  repith  takith  hyre,''' 
and  he  that  gcderith,  fruit  in  to  euere- 
lasting  lyf;  that  and  he  that  sowith 
haue  ioye  to  gidere,  and  he  that  repith. 

37  In  this  thing  sothli  the  W'ord  is 
trewe,  for  another  is  that  sowith,  and 
another  that  repith. 

38  I  sente  50U  for  to  repe,  that  that  ^e 
traueliden  not ;  othere  men  traueliden, 
and  36  entriden  in  to  her  trauelis. 

39  Forsoth  of  the  citee  many  Samari- 
tans bileueden  in  to  him,  for  the  word 
of  the  wonnnan  beringe  witnessing,  For 
he  seide  to  me  alle  thingis,  what  euere 
thingis  I  dide. 

40  Tlierfore  whanne  Samaritans  camcn 
to  him,  thei  preieden  him,  that  lie 
schulde  dwelle  there  ;  and  he  dwelte 
there  twey  daycs. 

41  And  many  mo  bileueden  for  his 
■word, 

42  And  seyden  to  the  womman,  For 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


461 


27  And  even  at  that  poynte  cam  hi.9 
disciples,  and  marvelled,  that  he  talked 
Avith  the  woman  ;  yet  no  man  sayde 
vnto  hym,  What  meanest  thou,  or.  Why 
talkest  thou  with  her? 

28  The  woman  Icftc  her  water  pott 
bchynde  her,  and  went  her  waye  into 
the  cite,  and  sayde  to  the  men  there, 

29  Come,  se  a  man,  wliiche  tolde  me 
all  thynges  thatt  ever  I  dyd ;  is  not  he 
Christ  1 

30  Then  they  went  out  off  the  cite,, 
and  cam  vnto  hym. 

31  In  the  meane  whyle  his  disciples 
prayed  hym,  saynge.  Master,  eate. 

32  He  sayde  vnto  them,  I  have  meate 
to  eate,  that  ye  knowe  nott  off. 

33  Then  sayd  the  disciples  bitwene 
them  selves,  Hath  eny  man  brought 
hym  meate  1 

34  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them.  My  meate 
ys,  to  fulfill  the  will  off  hym  that  sent 
me,  and  to  fynnysshe  hys  worcke. 

35  Saye  not  ye,  there  are  yett  foure 
monethes,  and  then  commeth  harvest  l 
Beholde !  I  saye  vnto  you,  lyfte  vppe 
youre  eyes,  and  loke  on  the  regions,  for 
they  are  whyte  allredy  vnto  harvest. 

36  And  he  that  repeth  receaveth  re- 
Avarde,  and  gaddereth  frute  vnto  lyfe 
eternall  ;  that  bothe  he  that  soweth 
myght  reioyce  also,  and  he  thatt  repeth. 

37  And  here  in  ys  the  sayinge  true, 
that  Avon  soAveth,  and  another  repeth. 

38  I  sent  you  to  repe,  that  AA'heron  ye 
bestowed  no  laboure ;  other  men  la- 
boured, and  ye  are  entred  into  their 
labours. 

39  Many  off  the  Samaritans  off  the 
cite  beloved  on  hym,  for  the  Avomans 
sayinge  Avliych  testifyed.  He  tolde  me 
all  thynges,  that  ever  I  did. 

40  Then  Avhcn  the  Samaritans  Avcre 
come  vnto  hym,  they  besought  hym, 
that  he  Avolde  tary  Avyth  them ;  and  he 
aboode  there  two  dayes. 

4 1  And  many  moo  beleved  because  off 
hys  awne  Avordes, 

42  And  sayde  vnto  the  Avoman,  NoAve 


4G2 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

lyfe  we  na  for  clinre  sprEecc  ;  we  sylle 
gehyrdoii,  and  Ave  witou,  clast  he  is  s6j) 
niiddan-eardes  hEeleud. 

43  Sojjlice  refter  twain  dagum  he  ferde 
danone,  and  for  to  Galilea. 

44  Se  Hseleud  sylf  cydde  gewitnesse, 
(3a3t  nan  witega  iia^f})  iiaune  wui'})scipe 
on  hys  agenum  carde. 

45  Da  he  com  to  Galileam,  eta  undev- 
fengon  hi  Iiine,  cla  hi  gesawon  ealle  da 
I  iug  cle  he  worhte  on  Hierusalem,  on 
freols-dfege  ;  and  hi  comon  to  duni 
freols-daege. 

46  And  he  com  eft  to  Chanaa  Galilea, 
doer  he  worhte  dset  win  of  wtetereJ 
Sum  under-cyning  woes,  dees  sunn  wtes 
gesyclod  on  Capharnaum. 

47  Da  da  se  gehyrde,  doet  se  Hoelend 
iCr  frani  ludea  to  Galilea,  he  com  to 
him,  and  bied  hiue,  djet  he  f5re,  and  ge- 
haelde  his  suuu  ;  s6])lice  he  la^g  oet  forf)- 
fore. 

48  Da  cwjejj  se  Hoelend  to  him,  Biiton 
ge  tacna  and  fore-beacna  geseon,  ue 
gelyfe  ge. 

49  Da  cwsejj  se  under-cing  to  him, 
Drihten,  far,  ser  mia  sunu  swelte. 

50  And  se  Hselend  cwoe}),  Ga,  din  sunu 
lyfaj).  Da  eode  he,  and  gelyfde  da?re 
spraece,  de  se  Htelend  him  saede. 

5 1  Da  he  for,  da  urnon  his  );eowas  on- 
gean  hyne,  and  seedon,  Doet  his  sunu 
lyfode. 

52  Da  acsode  he,  to  hAvylcum  timan 
him  bet  wsere.  And  hi  SEedon  him, 
Gyrstan-dteg  to  dtere  seofejjau  tide  se 
fefer  hine  forlet. 

53  Da  ongeat  se  fasder,  doet  hit  woes 
on  doere  tide,  de  se  Hoelend  cwoeJ>,  Din 
sunu  leofaj) ;  and  he  gelyfde,  and  call 
his  hiw-rjedden. 

54  Se  Haelend  worhte  dis  tacen  eft 
odre  side,  da  he  com  fram  ludea  laude 
to  Galilea. 


Chap.    Y.      ^i   JEher   dyssum   woes 


IV.  43--V.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

now  not  fur  tlii  spcche  wc  bilcucn  ;  for- 
soth  wo  hail  herd,  and  avo  witeii,  for 
this  is  verily  the  sauyour  of  the  world. 

43  Forsoth  aftlr  twei  daycs  he  wentc 
tlicnnis,  and  wente  in  to  Galilee. 

44  Sothli  Jhosu  bar  witnessing,  for  a 
proiihete  in  his  owuc  cuntrcc  liath  not 
honour.^ 

4",  Therforc  whanne  he  cam  in  to 
Galilee,  men  of  Galilee  rcceyneden  him, 
Avhanne  tliei  hadden  seyn  allc  tliini;is 
that  he  liaddc  don  in  Jernsalom,  in  the 
feeste  day  ;^  and  sothli  thei  hadden 
come  to  the  feeste  day. 

46  Therfore  he  cam  eftsoone  in  to 
Cana  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the 
watir  wyn.  And  sum  litil  king  was, 
whos  sone  was  syk  at  Caiiharnaum. 

47  Whanne  this  hadde  herd,  for  Jhesu 
.schuldc  come  fro  Judee  in  to  Galilee, 
lie  wente  to  him,  and  preiede  liim,  that 
he  schulde  come  doun,  and  heele  his 
sone  ;  forsoth  he  bigan  to  deye. 

48  Therforc  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  'No 
but  ;e  schulen  se  tokenes  and  gretc 
wondris,  50  bileuen  not. 

49  The  litil  kyng  seith  to  him,  Loi'd, 
come  doun,  bifore  my  sone  dcye. 

50  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  Go,  thi  sone 
lyueth.  The  man  bileuede  to  the  word, 
that  Jhesu  seide  to  hym,  and  he  wente. 

51  Sothli  now  him  comynge  doun,  tlie 
seruauntis  camen  a3cns  him,  and  teldcn 
to  him,  seyinge.  For  his  sone  lyucde. 

52  Therfore  he  axide  of  hem  the  our, 
in  whiche  he  hadde  betere.  And  thei 
seidcn  to  him,  For  5istirday  in  the 
seuenthe  our  the  feuere  lefte  him. 

53  Therfore  the  fadir  knew,  that  the 
ilke  our  it  was,  in  which  Jhesu  seide  to 
liim,  Thi  sone  lyueth ;  and  he  bileuede, 
and  al  liis  hous. 

54  Jhesu  dide  eft  this  secundc  tokene, 
whanne  he  cam  fro  Judee  in  to  Galilee. 


Chap.  V.     i  Aftir  thes  thingis  was 


TYNDALE,  152C.  4G3 

wc  boleve  nott  be  cause  off  thy  sayinge  ; 
for  wc  liave  hcrde  hym  oiirc  selves,  and 
knowe,  tliatt  tliys  ys  even  in  dede  Christ, 
the  savioure  off  the  worldc. 

43  After  two  daycs  he  departed  thence, 
and  went  awaye  into  Galile. 

44  And  Jesus  hym  silfc  testifycd,  that 
a  prophet  hath  none  honouro  in  hy.s 
awne  countrc. 

45  Then  as  sone  as  he  was  come  into 
Galile,  the  Galileans  reccavcd  hym, 
which  had  senc  all  thyngcs  that  he  did 
at  Jerusalem,  on  the  feast ;  for  they 
went  also  vnto  the  feast  daye. 

46  And  Jesus  cam  agayne  into  Cana 
of  Galile,  where  he  tourned  water  into 
wync.  And  there  was  a  certayne  rucler, 
whose  Sonne  was  sycke  at  Capernaum. 

47  As  sone  as  he  herde,  that  Jesus  was 
come  out  of  lewi-y  into  Galile,  he  went 
vnto  hym,  and  besought  him,  that  ho 
wolde  descende,  and  heale  his  sonne  ; 
for  he  was  even  redy  to  deye. 

48  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  hym,  Ex- 
cepte  ye  se  signcs  and  wonders,  ye 
bcleve  not. 

49  The  I'ueler  sayde  vnto  hym,  Syr, 
come  awaye,  or  ever  that  my  chylde 
deye. 

50  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him,  Goo  thy 
wayc,  thy  sonne  liveth.  And  the  man 
beloved  the  Avoixles,  tliat  Jesus  had 
spoken  vnto  hym,  and  went  his  waye. 

51  And  anon  as  he  went  on  liis  wayc, 
his  servauntes  mett  hym,  and  tolde  hym, 
sayinge.  Thy  sonne  liveth. 

52  Then  cnqup'cd  he  of  tliem  the 
houre,  when  he  began  to  amende.  And 
they  sayde  vnto  h}-m,  Tester  daye  the 
scventhe  houre  the  fever  lefte  hym. 

53  And  the  father  knew,  that  it  was 
the  same  houre,  when  Jesus  sayde  vnto 
liym.  Thy  sonne  liveth  ;  and  he  beloved, 
and  all  his  lioushold. 

54  Thys  ys  agayne  the  secondc  myraclo 
that  Jesus  did,  after  he  cam  out  of  lewry 
into  Galile. 


CiiAP.  Y.     I  After  that  there  was  a 


464 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

ludea  freols-dseg,  and  se  Hselend  for  to 
Hierusalem. 

2  On  Hierusalem ys  an  mere, 

se  is  genemned  on   Ebreisc  Betbzaida, 
se  mere  hsefj?  fif  porticas. 

3  On  dam  porticon  Iseg  mycel  menigeo 
ge-5dledra,  blindra,  and  healtra,  and 
forscruncenra,  and  ge-anbidedon  ctses 
wssteres  styrunge. 

4  Dribtenes  engel  com  to  his  timan  on 
done  mere,  and  da't  Avseter  wees  astyred  ; 
and  se  de  radost  com  on  done  mere, 
sefter  dses  WEeteres  styrunge,  wear])  ge- 
heeled  fram  swa  bwylcere  untrumnesse 
swa  be  on  wtes. 

5  Dser  wses  sum  man,  eabta  and  Jjrittig 
■wintra  on  bis  untrumnesse. 


6  Da  se  Haelend  geseab  dysne  began, 
and  wiste,  dset  be  lange  bwyle  dar  wses, 
da  cwse])  be  to  bim,  Wylt  dii  bal  beon  1 

7  Da  andswarode  se  seoca  bim,  and 
cwpe}),  Dribten,  ic  ntebbe  uanne  man 
diet  me  do  on  done  mere,  donne  dset 
wseter  astyred  bi])  ;  donne  ic  cume, 
donne  h\\>  oder  beforan  me. 

8  Da  c\\se]>  se  Haelend  to  bim,  Aris, 
nim  din  bed,  and  ga. 

9  And  se  man  wses  sona  bal,  and  he 
nam  bis  bed,  and  code.  Hit  wses  reste- 
dseg  on  dam  dsege. 

10  Da  cwBedon  da  ludeas  to  dam  de 
dar  gebseled  wses,  Hit  is  reste-daeg,  nis 
de  alyfed,  dset  du  din  bed  bere. 

1 1  He  andswarode  bim  and  cw*]),  Se 
de  me  gebselde,  se  cwse])  to  me,  Nim 
din  bed,  and  ga. 

1 2  Da  acsedon  hi  bine,  Hwset  se  man 
wsere,  de  de  seede,  Nim  din  bed,  and 
gd?  ^ 

13  Se  de  dser  gebseled  wass,  nyste  bwa 
bit  wses.  Se  Haelend  soj^lice  beab  fram 
dsere  gegaderunge. 

14  ^Efter  dam  se  Hselend  bine  gemette 
on  dam  temple,  and  cwsej)  to  bim,  Nu  ! 
dii  eart  bal  geworden ;  ne  synga  du, 
de-lses  de  de  on  sumum  J)ingum  wyrs 
getide.  ^ 


V.  2-14-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

a  fooste  day  of  Jewis,  and  Jhcsu  wentc 
vp  to  Jorusalcm. 

2  Forsotli  in  Jcru^salem  is  a  stondinj; 
Avatir  of  boestis,  that  in  Khrow  is  named 
Bethsaytla,  liauyn;j;e  fine  litle  ;atis. 

3  In  tiios  lay  a  greet  niultitnde  of  lan- 
jfwiseliinge  men,  blynde,  kiukid,  drye, 
abidinye  the  stiring  of  the  watir. 

4  Foi-sothe  the  aungel  of  the  Lord 
altir  tyme  cam  doun  in  to  the  stonding 
watir,  and  the  watir  was  moiied  ;  and 
he  that  first  cam  doun  in  to  the  sisterne, 
aftir  the  monyng  of  the  watir,  was  maad 
liool  of  what  euere  sikucsse  he  was 
hohUni. 

,",  Foisothe  sura  man  was  there,  hau- 
ynge  ei5te  and  thritti  5eeris  in  his  syk- 
nesse. 

6  Whanne  Jhesu  hadde  seyn  him  ligg- 
ynge,  and  hadde  knowe,  for  now  he 
hadde  moche  tyme,  he  seith  to  him,  Wolt 
tliou  be  maad  hool  1 

7  The  syke  man  answeride  to  him, 
Lord,  I  haue  not  a  man  that  whanne 
the  water  schal  be  troublid,  he  sende 
me  in  to  the  sisterne  ;  forsoth  tiie  while 
I  com,  another  goth  down  bifore  me. 

8  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  Ryse  vp,  taak 
till  bed,  and  wandre. 

9  xVnd  a  non  the  man  is  maad  hool, 
and  took  vp  his  bed,  and  waudride. 
And  saboth  was  in  that  day. 

iQ  Therfore  the  Jewis  seyden  to  him 
that  was  maad  hool.  It  is  saboth,  it  is 
not  leefl'ul  to  thee,  for  to  take  thi  bed. 

1 1  lie  answeride  to  hem,  He  that 
maade  me  hool,  seide  to  me,  Taak  thi 
bed,  and  wandre. 

12  Theifore  thei  axiden  him,  Who  is 
that  man,  that  seide  to  thee,  Taak  thi 
Led,  and  wandre  ? 

13  Sothli  he  that  was  maad  hool,  wiste 
not  who  it  was.  Forsothe  Jhesu  bowide 
him  fro  the  cumpany  ordeyned^  in  the 
place. 

14  Aftirward  Jhesu  fond  him  in  the 
temple,  and  seide  to  him,  Lo  !  thou  ert 
maad  hool  ;  now  nyle  thou  do  synne, 
lestc  ony  thing  worse  bifalle  to  thee. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


46: 


feast  off  the  lewes,  and  Jesus  went  vjipe 
to  Jerusalem. 

2  There  is  at  Jerusalem  by  the  slangh 
tcr  housse  a  pole,  called  in  the  Ebruc 
tonge  Bethcsda,  havynge  five  porches. 

3  In  them  laye  a  greate  multitude  off 
sicke  folkc,  off  blynde,  halt,  and  wyd- 
dercd,  waytynge  for  the  movynge  off 
the  wathcr. 

4  For  an  angcll  went  doune  at  a  ccr- 
tayne  ceason  into  the  pole,  and  stered  the 
water ;  whosoever  then  fyrst,  after  the 
sterynge  off  the  water,  stepi)ed  doune, 
was  made  whoale  of  what  soever  disease 
he  had. 

5  And  a  certayne  man  was  there,  which 
had  bene  disieased  .xxxviij.  y cares. 

6  When  Jesus  sawe  hym  lye,  and 
knewe,  that  he  nowe  longe  tyme  had 
bene  diseased,  he  sayde  vnto  hym,  "Wilt 
thou  be  whoale  1 

7  The  syke  answered  hym,  Syr,  I  have 
no  man  when  the  water  is  moved,  to 
put  me  into  tlie  pole  ;  butt  in  the  meane 
tyme  whill  I  am  about  to  come,  an- 
other steppeth  doune  before  me. 

8  Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Eyse,  take  vp 
thy  beed,  and  walke. 

9  And  immediatly  that  man  was  whole, 
and  toke  vp  his  beed,  and  went.  And 
the  same  daye  was  the  saboth  daye. 

10  The  lewes  therfore  sayd  vnto  hym 
that  was  made  whole.  It  is  the  saboth 
daye,  it  is  notfc  laufuU  for  the  to  cary 
thy  beed. 

11  He  answered  them,  He  that  made 
me  whole,  sayde  vnto  me,  Take  vp  thy 
beed,  and  gett  the  hence. 

12  Then  axed  they  hym.  What  man  is 
tliat,  which  sayd  vnto  the,  Take  vp  thy 
beed,  and  walke  ? 

13  And  he  that 'was  healed,  wist  not 
who  yt  was.  For  Jesus  gatt  hym  silfe 
awaye,  be  cause  that  there  was  preace 
of  people  in  the  place. 

14  After  that  Jesus  founde  hym  in  the 
temple,  and  sayd  vnto  hym.  Beholde  ! 
thou  arte  made  whole ;  se  thou  synne 
no  moore,  lest  a  worsse  thinge  happen 
vnto  the. 

nh 


4CG 


GOTHIC.  0,60. 


21  S^vas■wc  auk  atta  urraisci})  clau|)ans, 
yah  lil;an  gatauyi)?,  swa  yah  sunus  })auzei 
will  liban  gatauyi]?.''' 

2  3  Nih  Jjan  atta  ni  stoyi])  ainobun,  ak 
staua  alia  atgaf  sunau, 

23  El  allai  sweraina  sunu,  swaswe 
swerand  attan 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

t5  Da  for  se  man,  and  cyddc  hit  dam 
Indeuni,  djet  hit  wsere  sc  Hselend  de 
hyne  hselde. 

J  6  Fordam  da  ludeas  ehton  done  Hsel- 

end, fordam  de  he  dyde  das 

))iug  on  reste-dsege."'' 

1  7  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend  lilm  and 
cw£ej),  'Mm  fseder  wyrc])  od  djs  nu  gyt, 
and  ic  wyrce. 

18  Dses  de  ma  da  ludeas  s'hton  hino 
to  ofslcanne,  nsES  na  fordam  anum  de  he 
done  reste-dseg  brsec,  ac  fordam  de  he 
c\v?ej>  da^t  God  wjere  his  fa^der,  and  hinc 
sylfiie  dyde  Gode  gelicne. 

19  Witodlice  se  Hselend  andswarode, 
and  cwfe])  to  him,  S6|:>,  ic  eow  secge,  ne 
mseg  se  sunu  nan  J>ing  d5n,  buton  dset 
he  gesyhji  his  fseder  don  ;  da  ]ing  de  he 
Avyrc)>,  se  sunu  wyrcj)  gelice. 


20  Se  feeder  lufa]?  done  sunu,  and  ge- 
swutela])  him  ealle  da  )>ing  de  he  wyrc}) ; 
and  milran  weorc  donne  das  syn  he  ge- 
swutela])  him,  dset  ge  wundrion. 

2 1  Swa  se  fasder  awecj)  da  dcadan,  and 
geliffajst,  swil  eac  sc  sunu  geliffest  da 
de  he  wyle. 

22  Ne  se  feeder  ne  demj)  nanum  menn, 
ac  he  sealde  jelcne  dom  dam  suna, 

23  Dset  ealle  ar-wurl^ion  done  sunu, 
swil  swa  big  arwur})ia]5  done  feeder.  Se 
de  ne  arwurj^a)?  done  sunu,  nc  arwurj^a)) 
he  done  feeder  de  bine  sende. 

24  So]),  ic  secge  eow,  deet  se  de  min 
word  gehyrj),  and  dam  gelyf})  de  me 
sende,  se  h8ef|)  ece  Hf,  and  ne  cymj)  a?t 
dam  dome,  ac  fser])  fram  dea|)e  to  life. 

25  Sof),  ic  secge  eow,  dset  seo  tid  cymj), 
and  mi  is,  donne  da  deadan  gehyra|> 
Godes  suna  stefne,  and  da  ]ybba]>,  de 
hig  gehyra]). 

26  Swa  se  feeder  hsefj)  lif  on  him  sylf- 
um,  swa  he  sealde  dam  suna  dset  he 
ht«fde  lif  on  him  sylfum  ; 


V.  15-^6.]   ^YYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

15  The  ilke  man  wcnto.  and  telilc  to 
the  Jcwis,  foi'  it  was  Jliesu  that  nuiad 
him  hool. 

16  Therfore  the  Jcwis  pursucilen  Jhesu, 

for  he  tlide   this  thing  in  the 

saboth. 

1 7  Fovsoth  Jhesu  answeride  to  hem, 
!My  fadir  worchith  til  now,  and  I  worche. 

18  Therfore  thannc  the  Jewis  soujten 
more  for  to  sloe  liym,  for  not  oonly 
he  brak  the  saboth,  but  and  he  seide 
his  fadir  God,  makinge  him  cucue  to 
God. 

19  And  so  Jhcsu  answeride,  and  seide 
to  hem,  Trculi,  trculi,  I  scie  to  50U,  the 
sone  may  not  of  him  silf  do  ony  thing, 
no  but  that  thing  that  lie  schal  se  the 
fadir  doynge  ;  what  cucre  thingis  sothli 
he  doitli,  thes  thingis  and  the  sone  also 
doith. 

20  Forsothe  the  fadir  loueth  the  sone, 
and  sclicwith  to  him  alle  thingis  that  he 
doith  :  and  he  schal  schewe  to  h'nn  more 
workis  than  thes,  that  50  wondre. 

2  I  Forsothe  as  the  fadir  rcysith  deede 
men,  and  quykencth,  so  and  the  sone 
quykeneth  whiche  he  wole. 

22  Sothli  neither  the  fader  iugeth  ony 
man,  but  bath  jouun  al  the  dom  to  the 
sone, 

23  That  alle  men  lionoure  the  sone, 
as  thei  honouren  the  fadir.  He  that 
lionourcth  not  the  sone,  honoureth  not 
the  fadir  that  sente  him. 

24  Treuli,  treuli,  I  scye  to  5on,  for  he 
that  heerith  my  word,  and  bilcueth  to 
him  that  sente  me,  hath  euere  lasting 
lyf,  and  cometh  not  in  to  dom,  but 
passith  fro  decth  in  to  lyf. 

25  Treuli,  treuli,  I  scye  to  ;ou,  for  the 
our  cometh,  and  now  it  is,  whanne  deede 
men  schulen  heere  the  vois  of  Goddis 
sone,  and  thei  that  schulen  heere,  schulen 
lyue. 

26  Sothli  as  the  fader  hath  lyf  in  liim 
silf,  so  he  5af  and  to  the  sone  for  to 
haue  lyf  in  him  silf ; 


TYNDALE, 


'.C. 


40- 


15  The  man  departed,  and  tolde  the 
lewes,  that  yt  was  Jc-sus  the  whychc 
had  made  hym  whole. 

16  And  therfore  the  lewcs  did  perse- 
cute Jesus,  and  sou-ht  the  meancs  to 
slee  hym,  be  cause  he  had  done  these 
thynges  on  the  saboth  daye. 

17  Jesus  answered  them,  My  father 
worketh  biddcrto,  and  I  worke. 

18  Therfore  the  lewes  sought  the  moore 
to  kill  hym,  not  only  be  cause  he  had 
broken  the  saboth,  but  saydc  alsoo  that 
God  was  his  father,  and  made  hym  silfe 
equall  with  God. 

19  Then  answered  Jesus,  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Yercly,  verely,  I  saye  vnto 
you,  the  sonne  can  do  noo  thynge  of 
hym  silfe,  but  that  he  seyth  the  father 
do  ;  for  whatsoever  he  doeth,  that  doeth 
the  Sonne  also. 

20  For  the  father  loveth  the  sonne, 
and  sheweth  hym  all  thynges  whatsoever 
he  him  silfe  doeth ;  and  he  will  shewe 
hym  gretter  thynges  then  these,  be  cause 
ye  shoulde  marvayle. 

21  For  lykwyse  as  the  father  raysctli 
vppe  the  deed,  and  quyckeneth  them, 
even  soo  the  sonne  quyckeneth  whom 
he  woll. 

22  Xether  iudgeth  the  father  eny  man, 
but  hath  committed  all  iudgment  vnto- 
the  sonne, 

23  Be  cause  that  all  men  shulde  honoure 
the  sonne,  even  as  they  honoure  the 
father.  He  that  honoureth  nott  the 
sonne,  the  same  honoureth  not  the  father 
which  hath  sent  hym. 

24  Vyrely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  he 
that  heareth  my  wordes,  and  belevcth 
on  hym  that  sent  mc,  hathc  everlast- 
ynge  lyfe,  and  shall  not  come  in  to  dam- 
nacion,  but  is  sca])ed  from  deth  vnto  lyfe. 

25  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  the 
tyme  shall  come,  and  nowe  ys,  when  the 
deed  shall  heare  the  voyce  oft"  the  sonne 
of  God,  and  they  that  heare,  shall  live. 

26  For  as  the  father  hath  life  in  hym 
silfe,  soo  lyke  wyse  hath  he  geven  to 
the  sonne  to  have  lyfe  in  hym  silfe ; 

U  h  2 


468 


GOTHIC,  360. 


35  Yains  was  lukarn  brinnando  yali 
liuhtyando  ;  'i\>  yus  wildedu})  swignyan 
du  wlieilai  in  liuhada  is.''' 

36  A})))an  ik  haba  weitwodilja  maizein 
]>amma  lohanne,  Jjo  auk  waurstwa  Jjoei 
atgaf  mis  atta  ei  ik  tauyau  I'o,  j^o  waurst- 
wa  J)oei  ik  tauya  weitwodyand  bi  mik, 
|)atei  atta  mik  sandida. 

37  Yab  saei  sandida  mik  atta,  sab 
■vveitwodeij)  bi  mik.  Nih  stihna  is  wban- 
bun  gabausidedu]),  nili  siun  is  gasewbujj. 

38  Yab  waurd  is  ni  babai})  wisando  ii) 
izwis  ;  j^ande  j^anei  iiisandida  yains,  J)am- 
mub  yus  ni  galaubeij'. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

27  And  seakle  bim  anweakl  d»t  be 
mcste  deman,  forctam  de  be  is  maunes 
sunu. 

28  Ne  wundrion  ge  ctres,  tlset  seo  ttd 
cymjj,  dset  ealle  gehyra])  bis  stefne,  de 
on  l)yrgenum  synd. 

29  And  da  de  god  worbton,  faraj)  on 
I'fes  sereste  ;  and  da  de  yfel  dydon,  on 
domes  aereste.''' 

30  Ne  m£Bg  ic  nan  [ing  don  frara  me 
sylfum,  ic  deme,  swa  swa  ic  geliyre,  and 
min   dcm  is    rylit,  fordam    ic   ne    sece 

mlnne  willan,  ac dses  de  me 

sende. 

31  Gif  ic  gewitnesse  be  me  cyde,  min 
gewitnes  nis  so)) ; 

32  O'der  is  se  de  cf\>  gewitnesse  he 
me,  and  ic  wat  daet  seo  cydues  is  soj), 
de  be  cy])  be  me. 

33  Ge    sendon    to    lobanne,    and   be 

cydde  s6|jfestnesse  gewitnesse. 

34  Ic  ne  onf5  gewitnesse  fram  menn  ; 
ac  das  |)ing  ic  secge,  daet  ge  syu  hale. 

35  He  W0es  byi-nende  leobt-fet  and 
lylitende  ;  ge  woklon  sume  bwile  geblis- 
sian  on  bis  leolite. 

36  Ic  btebbe  maran  gewitnesse  donne 
lobannes,  witodlice  da  weoi-c  de  fa^der 
me  seakle  daet  ic  big  fullfremme,  da 
weore  de  ic  wyrce  cydajj  gcAvitnesse  be 
me,  daet  faeder  me  flsende. 

37  And  se  feeder  de  me  sende,  cy\>  ge- 
witnesse be  me.  Ne  ge  nsefre  bis  stefne 
ne  geliyrdon,  ne  ge  bis  hiw  ne  ges.iwon. 

38  And  ge  nabba))  liis  word  on  eow 
wunigende ;  foi'dam  de  ge  ne  gelyfajj, 
dam  de  be  sende. 

39  Smeageaj)  lialige  gewritu,  fordam 
de  ge  wenaf)  daet  ge  babbon  ece  Hf  on 
dam  ;  and  big  synd,  de  gewitnesse  cyda|) 
be  me. 

40  And  ge  nellaj?  cuman  to  me,  daet 
ge  babbon  lif. 

41  Ne  underfo  ic  uane  beorbtnesse  aet 
mannum  ; 

42  Ac  ic  gecneow  eow,  daet  ge  nabba); 
Godcs  lufe  on  eow. 


V.  27-4-^]  AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

27  Aiul  lie  jaf  to  liiin  powei*  for  to 
make  doni,  for  lie  is  niannis  sonc. 

28  Nylc  ^c  woiulre  tins  tliin,<:j,  for  tlic 
our  conietli,  in  wliioh  alle  men  that  bon 
in  buriels,  sohulon  hcerc  the  vois  of 
CioiUlis  sone. 

29  Anil  thei  that  lian  do  goode  thingis, 
sehulen  come  forth  in  to  rysinge  a5cn  of 
lyf ;  forsothe  thei  that  han  don  yucle 
thingis,  in  to  rysinge  a^en  of  dom. 

30  I  may  not  of  mysilf  do  ony  thing, 
but  as  I  hecre,  I  iuge,  and  my  dom  is 
iust,  for  I  sekc  nut  my  wille,  but  the 
will  of  the  fadir  that  scute  me. 

31  If  I  here  ■witnessing  of  my  silf,  my 
Avitncssing  is  not  trewe  ; 

32  Another  is  that  bcrith  -witnessing 
(if  me,  and  I  woot  for  his  witnessing  is 
trewe,  that  he  berith  of  me. 

33  5e  senten  to  John,  and  he  bar  wit- 
nessing to  the  treuthe. 

34  iSothly  I  take  not  witnessing  of 
man  ;  but  I  seie  thes  thingis,  that  50 
be  saf. 

35  Sothli  he  was  a  lanterne  brennynge 
and  schynynge  ;^  forsothe  je  woldeu 
ghide  at  oon  our  in  his  li5t. 

36  Sothli  I  hane  more  witnessing  than 
John,  forsoth  the  workis  that  my  fadir 
5af  to  me  that  I  performe  hem,  the  ilke 
workis  that  I  do  beren  witnessyng  of 
me,  that  the  fadir  sentc  me. 

37  And  the  fadir  that  scnte  me,  he  bar 
witnessing  of  me.  Netliir  50  hcrden 
eucie  his  vois,  ncthir  say5en  his  licnesse.''' 

38  And  5e  han  not  his  word  dwellinge 
in  50U  ;  for  jc  bilcueu  not  to  him,  whom 
he  scute. 

39  Soke  50  scripturis,  in  whiche  -^e 
gtsscn  to  hane  euorlastinge  lyf ;  and  the 
it  ben,  that  bcren  witnessing  of  me. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


4G0 


40  And  50  wolen  not  come  to  me,  that 
2  hauc  lyf. 

41  I  take  not  clernesse  of  men  ; 


42  lint  I  haue  knowcn  50U,  for  50  lian 
not  the  loue  of  God  in  ^ou. 


27  And  hath  gevcn  hyni  power  alsoo 
to  iudge,  in  that  he  is  the  sonnc  off 
man. 

28  jMarvaylc  nott  at  this,  that  the 
houre  shall  come,  in  the  wliych  all  that 
are  in  the  graves,  shall  heare  his  voice, 

29  And  shall  come  forthe,  they  that 
have  done  goode,  vnto  the  resurreccion 
off  life ;  and  they  that  have  done  cvyll, 
vnto  the  resurreccion  of  dampnacion. 

30  I  can  of  mync  awne  silfe  do  noo 
tliynge  at  all,  as  1  licare,  I  iudge,  and 
my  iudgment  ys  iust,  be  cause  I  seke 
nott  myne  awne  wyll,  butt  the  will  off 
the  father  which  hath  sent  mc. 

3 1  Yf  I  bcare  witnes  off  my  silfe,  my 
witnes  ys  nott  true  ; 

32  There  ys  another  tliatt  bcareth 
witnes  off  me,  and  I  am  sure  that  the 
Avitnes  whychc  he  beai'cth  of  me,  is 
true. 

33  Y^e  sent  vnto  J  lion,  and  he  bare 
Avitnes  vnto  the  trueth. 

34  But  I  rcccave  no  recorde  of  man  ; 
nevertlielcsse  these  thynges  I  saye,  that 
ye  myght  be  safe. 

35  He  was  a  burnynge  and  a  shynynge 
light ;  and  ye  wolde  for  a  season  have 
reioysed  in  his  light. 

36  But  I  have  gretter  Avitnes  then  the 
Avitnes  off  Jhon,  for  the  Avorkes  Avhych 
my  father  hath  geven  me  to  fynnysshe, 
the  same  Avoikes  Avhych  I  do  beare  Avit- 
nes off  me,  tliatt  my  father  sent  me. 

37  And  my  father  liym  silfe  Avhich 
hath  sent  me,  beareth  Avitnes  off  me. 
Y''e  liave  nott  herde  hys  voice  att  eny 
tyme,  nor  yett  have  sene  hys  shape. 

38  And  his  Avordcs  have  ye  nott  abyd- 
yngc  in  you  ;  for  ye  beleve  not  hym, 
Avliom  he  hath  sent. 

39  iSearche  the  scriptures,  for  in  them 
ye  thynke  ye  have  eternal  lyfe ;  and 
they  are  they,  Avhych  testify  ofi  me. 

40  And  yett  Avill  ye  nott  come  to  me, 
that  ye  myght  have  lyfe. 

4 1  I  rccevc  nott  prayse  off  men  ; 

42  Butt  I  knowe  you,  that  ye  have  nott 
the  love  off  (Jod  in  you. 


4/0 


GOTHIC.  ■''50. 


45 Ipate'i  ik  wroliidedyau 

izwis  du  att'iii ;    ist  saei  wroliida  izwis 
Moses,  du  ])animei  yus  weiiei)).''" 

46  Yabai  allis  Mose  galaubidedeij^,  ga- 
])au-lau1)idedei|?  mis ;  bi  mik  auk  yains 
gamelida. 

47  pande  nu  yainis  melam  ni  galaub- 
eij?,  Avhaiwa  meinaim  waurdani  galaub- 


Chap.  VI.      i  Afar  j^ata  galai})  lesus 
ufar  mareiu  ]>o  Galeilaie,  yah  Tibah-iade. 

2  Yah  laistida  ina  manageins  filu  ;  unte 
gasewhua  taikniiis,  jjozei  gatawida  bi 
siukaim. 

3  Us'i'ddya  j^au  ana  fairguni  Icsus,  yah 
yainai"  gasat  mij?  sij^onyam  seinaim. 

4  Wasuh  J)an  ncAvha  pascha,  so  duljjs 
ludaie. 

5  pai'uh  ushof  augona  lesus,  yah  ga- 
umida,  Jjammei  manageins  fihi  iddya  du 
inima,  qajjuh  du  Filippau,  Whajn'o  bug- 
yam  hlaibans,  ei  matyaina  Jjai  ? 

6  patuh  }ian  qa]?,  fraisands  ina ;  i']) 
silba  Avissa  Jjatei  habaida  tauyan. 

7  Andbof  imma  Filippus,  Twaim  hund- 
am  skatte  lilaibos  ni  ganohai  sind  Jjaim, 
jjci  nimai  wharyizuh  leitil. 

8  Qaj)  ains  ])ize  siponye  "is,  Andraias, 
broj'ar  Paitraus  Seimonaus, 

9  1st  magu'a  ains  her,  saei  habai])  .e. 
hlaibans  barizeinans  yah  .b.  fiskans  ;  akei 
Jjata  wha  'ist  du  swa  nianagaim  1 

10  Ij)  lesus  qaJ),  WauvkeiJ)  pans  mans 
anakumbyan.     Wasuli  {^an  hawi  manag 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Johx 

43  Ic  com  on  mines  feeder  naman,  and 
ge  me  ne  underfengon.  Gyf  oCter  cymj? 
on  liis  ageuuni  naman,  hyne  ge  under- 

f6|5. 

44  Hu  mage  ge  gelyf^m,  cle  eow  be- 
tweonan  wuUlor  undeif6|',  and  ne  seca]) 
dset  wuklor  tte  is  fram  Gode  sylfum  1 

45  Ne  wene  ge,  dset  ic  eow  wrege  to 
faeder ;  se  is  de  eow  wreg})  Moyses,  on 
clone  ge  gehyhta|). 

46  Witodlice  glf  ge  gelyfdon  Moyse, 
ge  gelyfdon  eac  me ;  s6|;h'ce  he  wrat 
be  me. 

47  Gif  ge  his  stafum  ne  gelyfa)),  hu 
gelyfe  ge  minum  Avordum  1 


Chap.  VI.  '•'i  ^fter  dyssum  for  se 
Heelend  ofer  da  Galilciscan  see,  seo  is 
Tiberii'dis. 

2  And  him  fylide  mycel  folc ;  fordam 
de  hig  gesawon  da  tacna,  de  he  Avorhte 
on  dam  de  Avseron  ge-untrumode. 

3  Witodlice  se  Hselend  ast'h  on  anne 
munt,  and  sast  dar  mid  his  leorning- 
cnihturn. 

4  Hit  wtes  gehende  eastron,  ludea 
freols-dtege. 

5  Da  se  Hcclcnd  his  eagan  up-ahof, 
and  geseah,  da?t  micel  folc  com  to  him, 
he  cwse)'  to  Philippe,  Hwser  bicge  we 
hlafas,  dset  das  eton  ? 

6  Dret  he  cwse'p,  his  fimdigende ;  he 
wiste  hwset  he  den  wolde. 

7  Da  andwyrde  him  Philippus  and 
cwsej),  Nabba})  hi  gen5h  on  twegra  bund- 
red  penega  weorj^e  hlufes,  da^t  selc  sumne 
dsel  nyme. 

8  -Dl  andwyrde  him  an  his  leorning- 
cnibta,  Andreas,  Simones  bioder  Petres, 

9  Her  is  jin  cnapa,  de  href]?  fif  berene 
hlafas  and  twegeu  fixas  ;  ac  hwset  synd. 
da  J^ing  betweox  swa  manegum  man- 
num  1 

10  Da  cwoejj  se  Hselend,  D6J)  dset  das 
men  sitton.     On  dsere  stowe  wses  mycel 


V.  43-^^^.  lo.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

4  "5  I  cam  ill  the  name  of  my  fadir,  ami 
;o  token  not  me.  If  anotlur  selial  come 
in  liis  ownc  name,  5e  sfliulcn  receyue 
liim. 

44  How  mown  ^e  bilouo,  that  rcceynou 
glorie  ech  of  other,  and  5c  seken  not  the 
glorie  that  is  of  (Joil  aloone  ? 

45  Xyle  50  gesse,  that  I  am  to  accus- 
inge  50U  anemptis  the  fadir  ;  it  is  Moyses 
tliat  accusith  50U,  in  whom  50  liopcu. 

46  Forsoth  if  5e  bileueden  to  Moyses, 
perauentnre  50  schuklen  bileue  and  to 
me  ;  sothli  he  wroot  of  me. 

47  Sotldi  if  5e  belenen  not  to  liis  let- 
tris,  Iiow  schulon  50  bileue  to  my 
woidis  I 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


47 1 


Chap.  VI.  i  Aftir  thes  thingis  Jhesu 
wcnte  oner  the  se  of  Galilee,  that  is 
Tibcriadis. 

2  xVnd  a  gi-eet  midtitude  suede  him  ; 
for  thei  sy5en  the  tokenes,  that  he  dide 
on  hem  that  wereu  syke. 

3  Therfore  Jhesu  wente  in  to  an  hil, 
and  there  he  sat  with  his  disciplis. 

4  Forsoth  pask  was  ful  ny5,  a  fecste 
day  of  Jewis. 

5  Tlierfore  whanne  Jhesu  hadd  lyft  vp 
the  y;en,  .and  hadde  seyn,  for  a  greet 
jnultitude  cam  to  him,  he  seith  to  Philip, 
"Wherof  schulen  we  bie  loues,  that  thes 
men  ete  1 

6  Sothli  he  seide  this  thing,  temptinge 
him ;  forsoth  he  wiste  what  he  was  to 
doynnje. 

7  Philip  answeride  to  him.  The  looues 
of  two  hundrid  pens  suffysen  not  to 
hem,  that  ccli  man  take  a  litle  what. 

8  Oon  of  his  disciplis,  Andrew,  the- 
brother  of  .Symouiit  Petre,  seith  to  him, 

9  O  child  is  Iicre,  that  hath  fyue  barley 
looues  and  tweye  fysclics  ;  but  what  ben 
thes  thingis  among  so  many  men  ? 

10  Therfore  Jhesu  seith,  !Make  5e  men 
for  to  sitte  at  the  mete.     Fonsoth  there 


43  I  am  come  in  my  fathers  name,  and 
ye  receave  me  not.  Yfi'  another  shall 
come  in  hys  awne  name,  hym  wyll  ye 
receave. 

44  Howe  can  ye  beleve,  whyeh  receave 
prayse  won  of  another,  and  seke  not  the 
jn-ayse  which  commeth  of  Gotl  only  1 

45  Suppose  nott,  that  I  wyll  accuse 
you  to  my  father ;  there  is  won  that 
accuseth  you,  verely  Moses  in  whom  ye 
truste. 

46  For  had  ye  beleved  !Moscs,  ye  wolde 
have  beleved  me  ;  for  he  wrote  of  me. 

47  But  when  ye  beleve  not  hys  writt- 
ynge,  howe  shall  ye  beleve  my  wordes  1 


Chap.  VI.  i  After  that  went  Jesus 
his  waye  over  the  see  of  Gallic,  nye  to 
a  cite  called  Tiberias. 

2  And  a  greate  multitude  folowed 
hym  ;  because  they  hadde  sene  the  mp-- 
acles,  that  he  did  on  them  which  were 
diseased. 

3  Jesus  Avent  vji  into  a  mountayne, 
aud  there  he  sate  with  his  disciples. 

4  And  ester,  a  feast  of  the  lewes,  was 
nye. 

5  Then  Jesus  lifte  vppe  hys  eyes,  and 
sawe  a  greate  company  come  vnto  hym, 
and  sayde  vnto  Phillip,  Whence  shall 
we  bye  breed,  that  these  might  eate  1 

6  This  he  saj-de,  to  prove  hym  ;  for  he 
hym  sylfe  knewe  what  he  wolde  do. 

7  Philip  answered  him.  Two  hondred 
peny  worthe  of  breeil  are  not  sufficient 
for  them,  that  evei'y  man  have  a  litcll. 

S  Then  sayde  vnto  hym  won  off  hys 
disciples,  Andrew,  Simon  Peters  brother, 

9  There  ys  a  ladde  here,  whych  hath 
fyve  barly  loves  and  two  fisshes ;  butt 
what  ys  that  amonge  so  many  1 

10  Jesus  sayde.  Make  the  people  to  sifc 
doune.     There  was  moche  f'l'assc  in  the 


472 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ana  J^amma  stada.  paruh  anakumLi- 
tledun  wairos,  vajiyon  swaswe  fimf  ]jus- 
undyos. 

11  Namuli  )jan  |ans  lilaibans  losus, 
yah  awiliudonds,  ....  gadailida  ))aim 
anakunibyandaui,  samaleiko  yah  );ize 
fiske,  swa  fiki  swe  wildcdun. 

12  panuli  h\]>e  sadai  "waurliun,  qa}?  du 
siponyam  seiiiaim,  Galisij)  |)0S  aflil'iiand- 
eins  drauhsnos,  ]jei  waihtai  ni  fraqistnai. 

13  panuh  fralesun,  yah  gafuUidedun  .ib. 
tainyons  gabruko  us  fimf  hlaibam  }iaim 
baiizeinain,  jjatei  aflifnoda  ]jaim  mat- 
yaiidam. 

14  paruh  Jiai  mans,  gasaiwliandans 
])Oei  gatawida  taikn  lesus,  qe{)un,  patei 
sa  1st  bi  sunyai  praufetus,  sa  qimanda  in 
])0  manase}). 

1 5  ijj  lesus  kunnands,  j^atel  niunai- 
dedun  usgaggan  yah  wilwan,  ei  tawide- 
deina  lua  du  jjludaua,  afiddya  aftra  in 
fairguni  is  ains. 

1  6  I|'  swe  seijju  war)?,  atiddyedun  sip- 
onyos  is  ana  niarein. 

17  Yah  usstigun  'in  skip,  iddyedunuh 
ufar  marein  in  Kafarnauni.  Yah  riqis 
yu}ian  war]?,  yah  ni  atiddya  nauhjmn  du 
im  lesus. 

18  I|)  marei,  winda  mikilamma  Avai- 
andin,  urraisida  was, 

19  paruh  ftuyandans  swe  spaurde  .k. 
yah  .e.  aij^Jiau  .1.  gasaiwhand  lesu  gagg- 
andan  ana  niarein,  yah  newha  skipa 
qimaudan  ;  yah  ohtedun  sis. 

20  paruh  is  qaji,  Ikim  ;  ni  ogei|)  izwis. 

21  paruh  wildcdun  ina  niman  in  skip, 
yah  suusaiw  jjata  skip  warj)  ana  aiij)ai 
ana  Jjoei  eis  iddyedun. 

22  Iftumin  daga  managei,  sei  sto|) 
hindar  niarein,  sewhun,  |)atei  skip  an- 
jar  ni  was  yainar  alya  ain,  yah 
j'atei  niijj  ni  qam  siponyam  seinaim 
lesus  in   jiata  skip,  ak  ainai   siponyos 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 
gpers.     Dicr  ssetou  da,  swylce  fif  J)usend 


11  Se  Hselend  nam  da  hhlfas,  and 
)anc-wur|)lice  dyde,  ....  and  hig  to 
dttlde  dam  sittendum,  and  eallswa  of 
dam  fixum,  swa  mycel  swd  hig  woldon. 

1 2  Da  hig  fulle  wseron,  da  cw£e|)  he  to 
his  leorning-cnihtum,  Gaderiaj)  da  bryt- 
sena  de  dar  tolafe  wseron,  dset  hig  ne 
losion. 

13  Hig  gegaderodon,  and  fyldon  twelf 
wylian  fulle  dsera  brytsena  of  dam  de 
da  Isefdon,  de  of  dam  fif  berenan  hlafon 
seton. 

14  Da  men  cwsedon,  da  hig  gesawon 
daet  he  dset  tacen  Avoi-hte,  Dpet  des  is  sC\>- 
lice  w.tega,  de  on  middan-geard  cym}\ 


15  Da  se  Halend  wiste,  da?t  hig  wohl- 
on  cuman  and  hiiie  gelseccan,  and  to 
cynge  don,  da  fleah  he  ana  uppon  done 
nmnt. 


16 


17  And  da  hig  eodon  on  scyp,  hi 
comon  ofer  da  sse  to  Capharnaum.  Hit 
wearjj  da  ]>ystre,  and  se  Hseleiid  ne  coin 
to  him. 

18  "Mycel  wind  bleow,  and  hit  wa'S 
hrcoh  sse. 

19  Witodlice  da  hig  hsefdon  geroweu 
swylce  twentig  fui-langa  odde  jjrittig,  da 
gesawon  hig  done  Hselend  uppan  da;ie 
see  gan,  and  d?et  he  wais  gehende  dam 
scype  ;  and  lii  him  ondredon. 

20  He  cwjej)  da  to  him,  Ic  hit  eom  ; 
ne  ondrseda})  eow, 

21  Hig  woldon  hyne  niman  on  da?t 
scyp,  and  sona  dset  scyp  wses  tet  dam 
lande  de  hig  woldon  to  faran. 

22  Sojjlice  odre  djBge  seo  menigeo,  de 
stod  begcondan  dam  mere,  geseah,  dait 
dter  uses  buton  an  scyp, 

and  dset  se  Hselend  ne  code  on  scyp  mid 


VI.  11-2-^.]  WYCLIFFE.isSp. 

Avas  niydie  licy  in  the  place.  Tlierfore 
men  saten  at  the  mete,  in  noumbre  as 
fyue  thousamlis. 

II  Thcrfore  JIicsu  took  fvue  looucs, 
and  whanuo  ho  haikle  do  thaukiiii^is,  .  . 
.  .  .  he  do])aitido  to  nion  sittingc  at 
mete,  also  and  of  the  fischis,  as  m}'che 
as  thei  woKleii. 

I  2  Forsothe  as  thei  ben  fillid,  he  sride 
to  liis  disi-iplis.  Gcdere  5c  the  lelyfs  that 
ben  left,  that  thei  perischeu  not. 

13  Therfore  thei  gedriden,  and  fiHodcn 
twelue  codyns  jf  relyfs  of  the  fyue 
barly  loones  and  tweye  fischis,  that  leften 
to  hem  that  haddun  etun. 

14  Therfore  tho  men,  whanne  thei 
hadden  seyn  the  tokcne'''  that  he  hadde 
don,  seyden.  For  this  is  verily  the  ])ro- 
]>hete,  tliat  is  to  comynge  in  to  the 
World. 

1 5  Therfore  ■vvhanne  Jlicsu  hadde 
kiiowun,  for  thei  weren  to  comynge  tliat 
thei  schulden  rauysclie  him,  and  make 
liim  kyng,  he  aloone  tledde  eft  in  to  an 
hi). 

16  Sothli  as  ciientyd  was  maad,  his 
disciplis  wenten  doun  to  the  see. 

17  And  whanne  thei  liaddcu  sti5ed  vp 
in  to  the  boot,  thei  camen  ouer  the  see 
in  to  Capharnaum.  And  derkiiessis 
■\veren  now  maad,  and  Jhesu  hadde  not 
conien  to  hem. 

1 8  Forsothe  a  greet  wynde  blowynge, 
the  see  roos  vp. 

19  Therfore  whanne  thei  liadden  rowid 
as  fyue  and  twenty  furlongis  or  thritty, 
thei  seen  Jhesu  walkinge  on  t!ie  see, 
and  to  be  maad  next  to  the  boot ;  and 
thei  dredden. 

20  Sothli  he  scyde  to  hem,  I  am  ;  nyle 
50  drcde. 

21  Therfore  thei  wolden  take  him  in 
to  the  boot,  and  anon  the  boot  was  at 
the  lond  in  to  which  thei  wenten. 

22  On  the  tothir  day  the  cumpanye, 
that  stood  ouer  the  see,  sy3,  for  there 
was  non  othir  boot  there  no  but  oon, 
and  for  Jhesu  entride  not  with  his  dis- 
ciplis  in  to  the  boot,  but  his  disclplis 


TYNDALK,  1526. 


473 


place.  And  the  men  sate  doune,  in 
nombre  about  five  thousaiide. 

'  1 1  Jesus  toko  the  breed,  and  gave 
tliankos,  and  gave  to  his  disciples,  anil 
his  disciples  to  them  that  were  sett 
douue,  and  likwyse  of  tlic  fysshes,  as 
moche  as  they  wolde. 

1 2  When  they  had  ctcn  ynough,  he 
sayde  vnto  his  disciples.  Gadder  vppe 
the  broken  meatc  that  remayncth,  that 
nothinge  be  loost. 

13  They  gaddered  it  togedder,  and 
filled  twelve  basketes  wyth  the  broken 
meate  of  the  five  baidy  loves,  which 
broken  meate  remayncd  vnto  them  that 
had  eaten. 

14  Then  those  men,  Avhen  they  had 
sene  the  myracle  that  Jesus  did,  sayde. 
This  is  off  a  trueth  the  same  prophet, 
which  shall  come  into  the  worlde. 

15  Jesus  knew  wele  ynough,  that  they 
wolde  come  and  take  hyni  vppe,  to 
make  hym  kynge,  and  tlierfore  dej)arte<.l 
he  agayne  into  a  mountayne  hymsilfe 
a  lone. 

16  When  even  was  come,  his  disciples 
went  vnto  the  see. 

17  And  entred  into  a  shyppe,  and 
went  over  the  see  vnto  Capernaum. 
And  anon  it  was  darcke,  and  Jesus  wtis 
not  come  to  them. 

18  And  the  see  arose,  with  c  greate 
wynde. 

19  When  they  had  rowed  aboute  a 
XXV.  or  a  xxx.  furlonges,  they  sawe 
Jesus  walke  on  the  see,  and  to  drawc 
nye  vnto  the  shyppe ;  and  they  were 
afrayed. 

20  He  sayd  vnto  them,  Itt  is  I ;  be 
nott  a  frayde. 

21  Then  wolde  they  have  reccaved 
hym  into  the  shii»pe,  and  the  shipixi 
was  by  and  by  at  the  londe  whythcr 
they  went. 

22  The  daye  folowynge  the  ])C()ple, 
which  stode  on  the  other  syde  of  the 
see,  sawe,  that  there  was  none  other 
shyppe  there  save  that  won  wlier  in  his 
disciples  were  entred,  and    that   Jesus 


474  GOTHIC,  3^0. 

'is  galijjun. 


23  Anj^ara  ))an  skipa  qemun  us  Tibai- 
riadau  newha  ];amuia  stada,  l^arei  inat- 
idedun  hlaif,  ana  };ammei  awiliudoda 
Frauya. 

24  paruh  |;an  gasawli  managei,  J'atei 
lesus  nist  yainar,  iiih  siponyos  i's,  ga- 
stigun  in  skipa,  yah  qemun  in  Kafar- 
naum,  sokyandans  lesu. 

25  Yah  bigetun  ina  liindar  marein, 
qe}ninuh  du  imma,  Rabbei,  whan  her 
qamt  1 

26  Andhof  im  lesus,  yah  qa]?,  Amen, 
amen,  qijia  izwis,  sokeij)  mik,  ni  |iatei 
sewhuj)  taiknins  yali  fauratanya,  ak  |:atei 
matidedul>  ]>ize  hlaibe,  yali  sadai  Avaurjj- 

27  ^^aul•kyaiJJ  nl  };ana  mat  J^ana  frahis- 
anan,  ak  mat  J^ana  wisandan  du  libaiuai 
aiweinon,  J^anei  sunus  mans  gibi]j  izwis  j 
Jjanuh  auk  atta  gasiglida  Gujj. 


28  pai-uh  qejjun  du  imma,  Wha  tau- 
yaima,  ei  waurkyaima  AvaurstAva  Gu])S  1 

29  Andhof  Icsus,  yah  qa})  du  im,  pat- 
ist  Avaurstw  Gu})S,  ei  gakuibyai|i,  })ammci 
insandida  yains. 

30  Qe})un  du  imma,  Aj^jjau  wha  tauyis 
)m  taikne,  ei  saiwliainia,  yah  gahiub- 
yaima  ))us  ?   wha  waurkeis'? 

31  Attans  unsarai  manna  matidcdun 
ana  au}>idai,  swaswe  ist  gameli)>,  Hlaif  us 
himina  gaf  im  du  matyan. 

32  paruh  qa)j  im  lesus,  Amen,  amen, 
qijja  izwis,  ni  Moses  gaf  izwis  hlaif  us 
himina,  ak  atta  meins  gaf  izwis  hlaif 
us  himina  jjana  sunyeinan  ; 

33  Sa  auk  hlaifs  Gul)s  ist  saei  atstaig 
us  himina,  yah  gaf  libain  ))izai  man- 
asedai. 

34  panuh  qejmn  du  imma,  Frauya, 
framwigis  gif  unsis  })ana  hlaif. 

35  Yah  qa})  du  im  lesus,  Ik  im  sa 
hlaifs  libainais  ;  f;ana  gaggandan  du  mis, 
ni  huggreij) ;  yah  |)ana  galaubyaudan  du 
mis,  ni  jjaurseijj  whanhun. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

his  leorning-cnihtum,   ac    his    leorning- 
cnihtas  sylfe  ana  fcron. 

23  O'dre  scypu  comon  fram  Tiberiade 
wi(1  eta  stowe,  ctar  big  done  hlaf  seton, 
Drihtne  [janciende. 

24  Da  seo  menigeo  geseah,  dset  se 
Hselend  tlar  npes,  ne  his  leoi'ning-cniht- 
as,  ctti  eodon  big  on  scipu,  and  comon 
to  Capharnaum,  sobton  done  Hselend. 

25  And  tta  big  gemetton  byne  be- 
geondan  ctam  mere,  big  cwaedon  to  him, 
Lareow,  h\va3nne  com  du  bider  1 

26  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  and 
cwre}),  Sg}>,  ic  secge  eow,  ne  sece  ge  me, 
fordam  de  ge  tacnu  gesawon,  ac  fordaiii 
de  ge  leton  of  dam  bblfon,  and  synd 
fulle.t 

27  Ne  wyrcajj  asfter  dam  mete  de  fur- 
wyrj),  ac  fefter  dam  de  |)urh-wuna|j  on 
ece  lif,  done  mannes  sunu  eow  sylj; ; 
done  God  fiseder  uetacuode. 


28  Hig  cwEedon  to  him,  Hwret  do  avc, 
dtet  we  wyrceon  Godes  weorc  1 

29  Da  andswarode  se  Hselend,  and 
cwiejj  to  him,  Dait  is  Godes  weorc,  dait 
ge  gelyfon  on  done,  de  be  sende. 

30  Da  cwsedon  big,  Hwset  dest  du  to 
tacne,  d?et  we  geseon,  and  gelyfon,  dajt 
du  hit  wyrce  1 

31  U're  foederas  seton  beofonlicne  mete 
on  westene,  swa  bit  awriten  is,  He 
sealde  him  etan  hlaf  of  beofone. 

32  Se  Hcelend  cw?e})  to  him,  S6)>,  ic 
secge  eow,  ne  sealde  Moyses  eow  hlaf 
of  beofenum,  ac  min  fasder  eow  sylj) 
s6[)ne  hlaf  of  beofenum  ; 

33  Hit  is  Godes  hlaf  de  of  heofene 
com,  and  sylj?  middan-earde  bf. 

34  Hig  cwsedon  to  him,  Drihten,  syle 
us  dysne  bb'if. 

35  Se  Hselend  cwfej)  to  him,  Ic  eom 
bfes  hlaf;  ne  bingraj)  done,  de  to  me 
cymj) ;  and  ne  j^yi'st  done  nsefre,  de  on 
me  gelyf{>. 


VI.  ::,-:,:>.]  wycliffe,  1389. 

alooiic  AYcntcn. 


23  Forsotlie  otlicrc  bootis  camcu  fro 
Tiberiailc  bisydis  the  jtlaco,  whoro  thei 
ceteu  broeil,  doviiLre  thiinkiuiris  to  God. 

24  Thcrfore  wliannc  tlic  cuinpany 
liaddou  seyn,  for  Jhesu  was  not  there, 
nothoro  his  diseiplis,  thei  sti5edeu  in 
to  bootis,  and  cameu  to  Capluirnaum, 
sekinge  him. 

25  And  whanne  thei  hadden  founden 
liini  oner  the  sec,  thei  seyden  to  him, 
Raby,  hou  hast  thou  com  hidur  1 

26  Jiicsu  answei'ide  to  hem,  and  scyde, 
Treuh,  treuli,  I  seie  to  50U,  50  seUen  me, 
not  for  5e  sy3  the  tokenis,^"  but  for  30 
eeten  of  looues,  and  beu  fiUid. 

27  Worche  ;e  not  mote  tliat  perischith, 
but  tiiat  dwellitli  in  to  euerlastinge  lyf, 
wliich  mete  mannis  sone  sclial  5yue  to 
50U  ;  forsothe  God  the  fadir  bitokeuede^ 
him. 

28  Thcrfore  thei  seiden  to  liini,  "What 
schulen  wo  do,  that  we  worche  the 
work  is  of  God? 

29  Jhesu  answerlde,  and  seide  to  hem, 
This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  50  bileue 
in  to  him,  whom  he  sente. 

30  Tliercfore  thei  seiden  to  him,  Thcr- 
fore wliat  tokene  doist  tliou,  that  we  se, 
and  bileue  to  thee  ]  what  Avorchist  thou  1 

31  Oure  fadris  eeten  manna  in  desert, 
as  it  is  writun,  He  jaf  to  hem  breed  fro 
heuene  for  to  etc. 

32  Thcrfore  Jhesu  seith  to  hem,  Treuli, 
treuli,  I  seie  to  30U,  not  Moyses  5af  to 
50U  very  breed  fro  licucne,  but  my  fadir 
3yucth  to  50U  verri  breed  fro  heuene  ; 

33  Sothli  it  is  verri  breed  that  cometh 
doun  fro  heuene,  and  5yucth  lyf  to  the 
world. 

34  Thcrfore  thei  seiden  to  him.  Lord, 
cucre  ;yue  to  vs  this  breed. 

35  Sothly  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  I  am 
breed  of  lyf;  he  that  cometh  to  me, 
schal  not  huiijifrc  ;  lie  that  bileucth  in 
me,  schal  neuere  thirstc. 


TYNDALE,i526. 


t/^ 


went  uott  in  with  them  into  the  sliippe, 
butt  that  hys  disci])Ies  were  gone  awayo 
alone. 

23  There  cam  other  shippes  from  Ti- 
berias nye  vnto  the  place,  where  they 
ate  breed,  when  the  Lorde  had  blessed. 

24  Then  when  the  people  sawe,  that 
Jesus  was  not  there,  nether  hys  dis- 
ciples, they  also  toke  shipi)ynge,  and 
cam  to  Caparnaum,  sekinge  for  Jesus. 

25  And  when  they  had  founde  hym  on 
the  other  syde  of  the  see,  they  sayd 
vnto  hym,  Master,  when  earnest  thou 
bidder? 

26  Jesus  answered  them,  and  sayde, 
Vcrely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  ye  seke 
me,  nott  be  cause  ye  sawe  the  myracles, 
but  be  cause  ye  ate  of  the  breed,  and 
were  filled. 

27  Labourc  not  for  the  meate  which 
perissheth,  but  for  the  meate  that  en- 
durcth  vnto  everlastynge  lyfe,  whiche 
meate  the  sonne  of  man  shall  geve  vnto 
you  ;  for  hym  hath  God  the  father 
sealed. 

28  Then  sayde  they  vnto  hym,  What 
shall  we  do,  that  we  myght  worke  the 
workes  of  God  ] 

29  Jesus  answered,  and  sayd  vnto 
them.  This  is  the  worke  of  God,  that  ye 
beleve  on  him,  whom  he  hath  sent. 

30  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  What  signe 
shewest  thou  then,  that  we  maye  se,  and 
beleve  the  1  what  doest  thou  worke  1 

31  Oure  fathers  did  eate  manna  in  the 
desert,  as  yt  ys  written,  He  gave  them 
breed  from  heven  to  eatc. 

32  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Verely, 
verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  Closes  gave  you 
not  breed  from  heven,  but  my  father 
geveth  you  the  true  breed  from  licven ; 

33  For  he  is  the  breed  of  God  which 
commeth  dounc  from  heven,  and  geveth 
lyfe  vnto  tlie  worlde. 

34  Then  sayde  they  vnto  hym,  Master, 
ever  moore  geve  vs  this  breed. 

35  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  I  am 
that  breed  of  lyfe  ;  he  that  commeth  to 
me,  shall  not  lionger  ;  and  he  that  be- 
leveth  on  me,  shall  never  thurst. 


476 


GOTHIC,  360. 


36  Akel  qa])  izwis,  j^atei  gasewlui))  mik, 
3'ali  ui  <;aUuibei[). 

37  All,  l^atei  gaf  mis  atta,  tlu  mis 
qimij) ;  yali  J;ana  gaggaiiclaii  du  mis,  id 
uswairpa  ut. 

38  Unte  atstaig  us  himina,  nih  ];eei 
taiiyau  Avilj-an  mciuaua,  ak  wilyuu  J;is 
samlyaudius  luik. 

39 


40  patuh  jjan  i'st  wilya  ):is  sandyandins 
mik,  ei  whazuli  saei  saiwhij)  {jana  suini, 
yah  galaubeij)  du  imma,  aigi  libaiu 
aiweinon  ;  yah  urraisya  iua  ik  111  sped- 
istiu  daga. 

41  Birodidedmi  )mn  ludaleis  hi  i'na, 
unite  qa}',  Ik  iin  hlaifs  sa  atsteigauds  us 
himina. 

42  Yah  qe|jun,  Niu  sa  i'st  lesus,  sa 
suiuis  lusefis,  J)izei  weis  kuii)5edum  attan 
yah  aij'ein?  Whaiwa  nu  qij  i]j  sa,  patei 
us  himiua  atstaig  1 

43  Andhof  ])an  lesus,  yah  qaj)  du  "im, 
Ni  birodei];  mi];  izwis  misso. 

44  Ni  manna  mag  qiman  at  mis,  nibai 
atta  saei  sandida  mik,  at])insi|j  i'lia  ;  yah 
ik  uiTais}a  iua  iu  )  amma  spedistin  daga. 

45  1st  gameli))  ana  praufetum,  Yah 
■\vair})aud  allai  laisidai  Gu})S.  AVliazuh 
nu  sa  gahausyands  at  attin,  yah  ganam, 
gaggi|)  du  mis. 

46  Ni  I  atei  attan  sewhi  whas,  nibai 
saei  Avas  fram  attin,  sa  sawh  attan. 

47  Amen,  amen,  qi|a  izwis,  saei  ga- 
laubei])  du  mis,  aih  libain  aiweinon. 

48  Ik  im  sa  hlaifs  libainais. 

49  Attans  izwarai  matidedun  manna  in 
aujiidai,  yah  gaswultun. 

50  Sa  ist  hlaifs  saei  us  himina  atstaig, 
ei  saei  j  is  matyai,  ni  gadau}.nai. 

51  Ik  im  hlaifs  sa  hbanda,  sa  us  himina 
qumana.  Yabai  whas  matyij)  ("is  hlaibis, 
libai])  in  ayukduj).     Yah  ]an  sa  hlaifs 


ANGLO-SAXON,  99.^     [St.  John 

36  Ac  ic  eow  sXde,  cla't  ge  gesawon 
me,  and  ne  gelyfdon. 

37  Eall,  daet  feeder  me  syljj,  cymj)  to 
me ;  and  ic  ne  "weoi'pe  ut  clone,  tie  to 
me  cym}). 

38  Fordam  de  ic  ne  com  of  heofcnum, 
(1a.'t  ic  minne  Avillan  d5,  ac  dies  -willau 
de  me  sende. 

39  Da^t  is  dfes  fieder  willa  de  me  sende, 
da;t  ic  nanjnng  ne  forleose  of  dam,  de 
he  me  sealde,  ac  aAvecce  dcet  on  dara 
yteniestan  dsege. 

40  Dis  is  mines  fteder  willa  de  me 
sende,  dset  Belc  de  done  sunn  gesyh|», 
and  on  hine  gelyfj),  hsebbe  ece  Hf ;  and 
ic  hine  awecce  on  dam  ytemestan  dsege. 

41  Dii  mui'cnodon  da  ludeas  be  him, 
fordam  de  he  cwse]?,  Ic  eom  hlaf  de  of 
heofenuni  com. 

43  And  hig  cwsedon,  Hii  nis  dis  S3 
Htelend,  losepes  sunu,  we  cunnon  his 
f-xdev  and  his  moder  1  Hiimeta  segj)  des, 
Ic  com  of  heofenum  1 

43  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  and 
cwte)'  to  him,  Ne  murcniajj  eow  be- 
tweonan.''' 

44  Ne  ma^g  nan  man  cuman  to  me, 
biiton  se  fieder  de  me  sende,  hyne  teo ; 
and  ic  hine  arsere  on  dam  ytemestan 
dfege. 

45  On  dajra  wltegena  bocum  is  ilwi-iten, 
Ealle  eadlsere  beo]?  Godes.  ^'Ic  de  ge- 
hyrde  set  feeder,  and  leornode,  cymjj  to 
me. 

46  Ne  geseah  nan  man  fteder,  buton 
se  de  is  of  Gode,  se  gesyh]?  feeder. 

47  Sojj,  ic  secge  eow,  se  hosfj^  ece  lif, 
de  on  me  gelyfjj. 

48  Ic  eom  lifes  hlaf. 

49  U'l-e  feedei-as  seton  hcofenlicne  mete 
on  Avestene,  and  hig  synd  deade. 

50  Dis  is  se  hlaf  de  of  heofenum  com, 
d«t  ne  swelte,  se  de  of  him  ytt. 

5  I  Ic  eom  lybbende  hl'f,  de  of  heofcmmi 
com.  Swa  hwa  swfi  ytt  of  dyson  hlafe, 
he  leofaj)  on  ecnysse.     And  se  hlaf  de 


Yl.  3  ,-:,i.]    AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

3;)  I'.ut  1  Slide  to  50U,  fur  aiul  5c  liau 
soya  me,  ami  50  bileueileii  not. 

37  Al  tliiiiLr.  that  tlie  ladir  jyucth  to 
nie,  sehal  come  to  me  ;  aiitl  I  sclial  not 
caste  out  liim,  that  coinoth  to  me. 

38  For  1  cam  doun  fro  hcuene,  not 
that  I  do  my  wille,  but  the  wille  of  him 
that  scute  me. 

39  Forsothe  this  is  tlic  wille  of  him 
that  sente  me,  the  fadris,  tliat  al  thiu!::^ 
that  the  fadir  5af  to  me,  I  leese  not  of 
it,  but  a5cu  reise  it  iu  the  laste  day. 

40  Sothly  this  is  the  wille  of  my  fadir 
that  sente  me,  that  ech  man  that  secth 
the  sone,  and  bileueth  in  to  liim,  haue 
ouorlastiui^f  iyf;  and  I  schal  a5eu  reyse 
him  in  the  laste  day. 

41  Therfore  Jewis  grucchiden  of  him, 
for  he  hadde  seyd,  I  am  breed  that  cam 
(loun  fro  heuene. 

42  And  thei  seiden,  Wher  this  is  not 
Jhesu,  the  sone  of  Joseph,  whos  fadir 
and  modir  we  han  knowun  ]  Therfore 
hou  seith  this,  I  cam  doun  fro  heuene  1 

43  Therfore  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide 
to  hem,  Nyle  50  grucche  to  gidere. 

44  No  man  may  come  to  me,  no  but 
the  fadir  that  sente  me,  schal  drawe 
him  ;  and  I  schal  a3en  reyse  him  in  the 
laste  day. 

45  It  is  writun  in  prophetis.  And  alle 
men  schulen  ben  able  to  be  tau5t  of 
God.  Ech  man  that  herde  of  the  fadir, 
and  lernede,  cometh  to  me. 

46  Not  for  ony  man  syj  the  fadir, 
no  but  this  that  is  of  God,  this  sy3 
the  fadir. 

47  Sothli,  sothli,  I  seye  to  50U,  he  that 
bileueth  in  me,  hath  euerlasting  Iyf. 

4  8  I  am  the  breed  of  Iyf. 

49  3ourc  fadris  eeten  manna  in  desert, 
and  ben  deede. 

50  This  is  breed  comynge  doun  fro 
heuene,  that  if  ony  man  schal  ete  thcrof, 
he  deyeth  not. 

51  I  am  quyk  breed,  that  cam  doun 
fro  heuene.  If  ony  man  schal  ete  of 
this  bred,  he  schal  lyuc  with  outen  ende. 


TYNDALE,  1526.  477 

36  Butt  I  sayc  vnto  you,  that  ye  have 
sene  me,  and  yctt  belcve  ye  not. 

37  .Ml,  that  my  fatlior  gcveth  me,  com- 
meth  to  me  ;  and  hyin  that  comnieth 
to  inc,  cast  I  not  out  at  the  dores. 

38  For  I  cam  doune  from  hevcn,  no'.t 
to  do  myne  awne  will,  butt  his  will 
whiche  bathe  sent  me. 

39  And  this  IS  my  fathers  will  which 
hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath 
gevcn  me,  I  shulde  loose  noo  thyngc, 
but  shulde  rayse  it  vp  agayne  at  the 
last  daye. 

40  And  this  is  the  Avyll  off  hym  tliat 
sent  me,  that  every  man  whych  seith 
the  Sonne,  and  belevetli  on  hym,  have 
everlastjnige  lyfe  ;  and  I  wyll  rayse 
hym  vp  att  the  last  daye. 

41  The  lewes  murmured  att  itt,  be- 
cause he  sayde,  I  am  thatt  breed  whicli 
is  come  doune  from  heven. 

42  And  they  sayde,  Is  nott  this  Jesus, 
the  Sonne  of  Joseph,  whose  father  and 
mother  we  knowe  1  Howe  ys  yt  then 
thatt  he  sayetli,  I  cam  doune  from 
heven  1 

43  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  Murmur  not  betwene  youre  selves. 

44  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except 
my  father  which  hath  sent  me,  drawe 
hym  ;  and  Y  will  rayse  hym  vp  at  the 
last  daye. 

45  Hit  is  written  in  the  prophetes. 
And  they  shall  all  be  taught  of  God. 
Every  man  Avhich  hath  herde,  and 
learned  of  the  father,  commeth  vnto  me. 

46  Not  that  eny  man  hath  sene  the 
father,  save  he  which  is  off  God,  the 
same  hath  sene  the  father. 

47  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  he 
that  belcveth  on  me,  hath  cvcrlastynge 

lyfe. 

48  I  am  that  breed  of  lyfe. 

49  Youre  fathers  did  catc  manna  in 
the  wildernes,  and  are  deed. 

50  This  is  that  breed  which  commeth 
from  heven,  that  he  wich  off  it  catcth, 
shulde  also  not  deye. 

51  I  am  that  livynge  breed,  which  cam 
doune  from  heven.  Yf  eny  man  eate 
of  this  breed,  he  shall   live  for   ever. 


478 


GOTHIC,  360. 


jianel  ik  giba,  leik  mein  "ist,  jiatei  ik  giba 
an  j^izos  raanasedais  libainais. 

52  panuh  sokun  mijj  sis  misso  ludaieis, 
qi[)andans,  Whaiwa  nuig  sa  unsis  leik 
giban  du  matyan  1 

53  paruh  qa|)  du  iin  lesus,  Amen, 
amen,  qij^a  izwis,  nibai  matyij>  leik  }iis 
siinaus  mans,  yah  driggkaij)  is  bio]?,  ni 
habai[)  libain  in  izwis  silbam. 

54  Saei  matyi]'  mein  leik,  yali  driggki}) 
mein  blo|5,  aih  libain  aiweinon,  yah  ik 
urraisya  ina  in  }iamma  spedistin  daga. 

55  pata  auk  leik  meinata  bl  sunyai  ist 
mats,  yah  pata  blo|)  mein  bi  sunyai  ist 
draggk. 

56  Saei  matyij)  mein  leik,  yah  driggkijj 
mein  bio]',  in  mis  wisij',  yah  ik  in  inima. 

57  Swaswe  insandida  mik  libands  atta, 
yah  ik  liba  in  attins,  yali  saei  matyi}; 
mik,  yah  sa  libaijj  in  meiua. 

58  Sa  ist  hlaifs,  saei  us  himina  atstaig. 
Ni  swaswe  matidedun  attans  izwarai 
manna,  yah  gadaufmodedun  ;  ij>  saei 
matyi})  Jjana  hlaif,  libaijj  in  ayukdujj. 

59  pata  qa]>  in  swnagoge,  laisyands  in 
Kafarnaimi. 

60  panuh  managai  gahausyandans  }>ize 
siponye  is,  qejjun,  Hardu  ist  Jjata  waurd, 
Avhas  mag  jjis  hausyon  1 

61  I])  witands  lesus  in  sis  silbin,  ]'atei 
birodidedun  |iata  J)ai  sij^onyos  is,  qa|)  du 
im,  pata  izwis  gamarzeij)  1 

62  Yabai  nu  gasaiwhi}>  sunu  mans 
ussteigan,  ]}adei  Avas  faui-jjis? 

63  Ahma  ist  saei  liban  tauyi}),  Jjata 
leik  ni  botei[)  waiht ;  Jjo  waurda  }ioei 
ik  rodida  izwis,  ahma  ist  yah  libaius 
ist. 

64  Akei  sind  izwai-a  sumai  Jiaiei  ni 
galaubyand.  Wissuh  jjan  us  frumist- 
ya  lesus,  wharyai  sind  Jjai  ni  galaub- 
yandans,  yah  whas  ist  saei  galeiweij) 
ina. 

65  Yah  qa}7,  Du|5e  qaj?  izwis,  Jjatei  ni 
ainshun   mag  qiman   at  mis,  nibai  ist 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Joiix 

ic  sjlle,  is  min  fleesc  for  middan-eavdes 
life. 

52  Da  ludeas  fliton  him  betweonan, 
and  cwEedon,  Hu  mteg  cles  his  flttsc 
us  syllan  to  etanne  1 

53  Da,  cwse]?  se  Htelend  to  him,'''  S5)?, 
ic  secge  eow,  nrebbe  ge  lif  on  eow,  biiton 
ge  eton  mannes  suna  flttsc,  and  his  blod 
drincon. 

54  Se  h£ef[?  ece  lif,  de  ytt  min  fltesc, 
and  drincl)  min  blod,  and  ic  hine  lircere 
on  dam  ytemestan  dsege. 

55  S5]jlice  min  fleesc  is  mete,  and  min 
blod  ys  drinc. 

56  Se  cte  j'tt  min  flaesc,  and  di-inc]'  min 
blod,  he  wunaj)  on  me,  and  ic  on  him. 

57  Swil  swa  lybbende  feeder  me  sende, 
and  ic  lybbe  |)urh  fneder,  and  se  de  me 
ytt,  he  leofaj)  Jjurh  me. 

58  Dis  is  se  hlaf,  dc  of  heofenum  com. 
Na  swa  swa  lire  ftederas  ccton  heofen- 
licne  mete,  and  deade  wseion  ;  se  de 
ytt  dysne  hlaf,  he  leofaj)  on  ecnysse. 

59  Das  jjing  he  ssede  on  gesamnunge, 
da  he  Iserde  on  Capharnaum. 

60  Manega  his  leorning-cnihta  cwsedon, 
da  hig  dis  gehyrdon,  Heard  is  deos 
sprgec,  hwa  maeg  hig  gehyran  1 

6x  Da  wiste  se  Htelend,  da^t  his  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas  murcnedon  betweox  him 
sylfum  be  dysum,  and  he  cwa;}?  to  him, 
Dset  eow  beswicj?  1 

62  Gif  ge  geseoj)  mannes  sunu  astig- 
endne,  dser  he  eer  wies  ? 

63  Gast  is  se  de  geliiRest,  flaesc  ne 
frema]?  nanj^ing  ;  da  word  de  ic  eow 
SBede,  synd  gast  and  lif. 

64  Ac  sume  ge  ne  gelyfa]?.  Witodlice- 
se  Hselend  Aviste  fram  fruman,  hwKt  da 
gelyfendan  Avseron,  and  liAva  hine  belsew- 
an  Avolde. 

65  And  he  cwsejj,  Fordig  ic  eoAv  ssede, 
daet  niin  man  ne  maeg  cuman   to   me, 


Vr.  52-65]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

And  the  breed  tliat  I  schal  jyuc,  is  my 
lleisch  for  lyf  of  the  world. 

52  Therfore  the  Jewis  chidden  to  _£;i- 
(lore,  scyinp^e,  llou  may  this  jyue  to  vs 
li:s  flcisch  for  to  ete  1 

.",3  Therfore  Jhcsu  scith  to  hem,  Trciily, 

trouli,  I  scye  to  50U,  no  but  ;e  sclmlen 

oto    the    fleisch    of    mannis    sone,    and 

I.  (h-ynke  his  blood,  50  schulcn  not  haue 

lyf  in  50U. 

54  He  that  etith  my  fleisch,  and  drynl<- 
eth  my  blooil,  hath  euerlastinii;  lyf,  and 
I  schal  a5en  reysc  him  in  the  laste  day, 

55  Forsoth  my  fleisch  is  verily  mete, 
and  my  blood  is  verily  drynke. 

56  He  that  etith  my  fleisch,  and  drynk- 
ith  my  blood,  dwellith  in  me,  and  I  in 
him. 

57  As  my  fadir  lyuynge  sente  me,  and 
I  1)^16  for  the  i'adir,  and  he  that  etith 
me,  schal  hue  for  me. 

58  This  is  breed,  that  cam  doun  fro 
lieuene.  Not  as  5oure  fadris  eeten 
manna,  and  ben  deed  ;  he  that  etith 
this  breed,  schal  lyue  with  outen  ende, 

59  He  seide  thes  thingis  in  the  syna- 
goge,  tcehinge  in  Capharnaum. 

60  Therfore  manye  of  his  disciplis 
heeringe,  seyden,  This  word  is  hard, 
who  may  heere  him  ] 

61  Forsoth  Jhesu  witynge  anemptis 
him  silf,  for  his  disciplis  grucchideu  of 
this  thing,  seide  to  hem.  This  thing 
sclaundrith  50U  1 

62  Therfore  if  56  schulen  se  mannis 
sone  sti3ynge  vp,  wher  he  was  bifore  1 

6^  It  is  the  spirit  that  quykencth,  the 
floysch  profitcth  nothing  ;  the  wordis 
that  I  haue  spokun  to  50U,  ben  spirit 
and  lyf. 

64  But  thcr  ben  summe  of  50U  that 
l)ilcuen  not.  Sothli  Jhesu  wiste  at  the 
bigynnyngc,  wdiiclie  weren  bileuynge, 
and  who  was  to  bitrayinge  him, 

65  And  he  seide,  Therfore  I  seide  to 
30U,  that  no  man  may  come  to  me,  no 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


47f> 


And  the  breed  that  I  will  gevc,  is  my 
flesshc,  which  I  will  gevc  for  the  lyl'c 
of  the  woi'lde. 

52  The  lewes  strove  amongc  then) 
selves,  sayinge,  Howe  can  this  felowo 
geve  vs  his  ilesshe  to  eate  1 

53  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Verely, 
verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  except  ye  eate 
the  flesshc  off"  the  sonnc  of  man,  and 
drynke  his  bloude,  yc  shall  not  have 
lyfe  in  you. 

54  Whosoever  eatcth  my  flesshc,  and 
drynkcth  my  bloudde,  the  same  hath 
eternall  lyfe,  and  I  will  rayse  hym  vp 
at  the  last  daye. 

55  For  my  flesshe  is  meate  in  dcde^ 
and  my  bloudde  is  drynke  in  dcde. 

56  He  thatt  eateth  my  flesshe,  and 
drynketh  my  bloudde,  dwelleth  in  me, 
and  I  in  hym. 

57  As  my  lyvynge  father  hath  sent 
me,  even  soo  lyve  I  by  my  father,  and 
he  that  eatcth  me,  shall  live  by  me. 

58  This  is  the  breed,  which  cam  from 
hevcn.  ISTott  as  youre  fathers  have  eaten 
manna,  and  are  deed ;  he  that  eateth 
of  this  breed,  shall  live  ever. 

59  These  thinges  sayd  he  in  the  siua- 
goge,  as  he  taught  in  Capernaum. 

60  Many  of  his  disciples  when  tlicy 
had  herde  this,  sayd.  This  is  an  hcrde 
sayinge,  who  can  abyde  the  hearynge 
of  it? 

6r  Jesus  knew  in  hym  silfe,  that  his 
disciples  murmured  at  hit,  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Doth  this  offende  you  1 

62  "What  and  if  ye  shall  sc  the  sonne 
off"  man  ascende  vp,  where  he  was  be- 
fore ? 

63  It  is  the  sprcte  that  quyckeneth, 
the  flesshe  proff'eteth  nothynge ;  the 
wordes  that  I  speake  vnto  you,  ai-e 
sprcte  and  lyfe. 

64  But  there  are  some  off"  you  that 
beleve  not.  For  Jesus  knewe  from  the 
begynnynge,  which  they  were  that  be- 
leved  not,  and  who  shulde  betraye  hym. 

65  And  he  sayde,  Therfore  sayd  I  vnto 
you,  that  no  man  can  come  vnto  me, 


480  GOTHIC,  360. 

atgiban  "imma  fram  attin  nieinamma. 

66  Uzuli  |)ainma  mela  managai  gali}iuu 
siponye  is  ibukai,  yah  J5anasei{).s  iiiij) 
'iinina  ni  kldyedun. 

67  paruli  qaj)  lesus  du  ])aim  twalibim, 
ibai  yah  yus  wilei);  galeil'an  1 

68  panuh  audhofimma  Seimon  Paitrus, 
Frauya,  du  wliarama  galei|)aima?  Waurda 
libainais  aiweinons  habais  ; 

69  Yah  weis  galaubideduni,  yah  iif- 
kun)e(hini,  ])atei  J>u  is  Christus,  suiuis 
Gu))S  libaudiiis. 

70  Andhof  im  lesus,  Niu  ik  izwis  Ab. 
gawalida,  yah  izwara  ains  diabaulus  ist  1 

71  Qa|mh  )an  |)ana  ludau  Seiinonis, 
Iskaviutu,  sa  auk  habaida  i'lia  galewyau, 
ains  wisands  jjize  twalibe. 


Chap.  VII.  i  Yah  wharboda  lesus 
afar  jjata  in  Galeilaia,  ni  auk  wikhi  in 
ludaia  gaggan,  unte  sokidedun  ina  jjai 
ludaieis  usqiman. 

2  Wasuli  );an  newha  dulj  s  ludaie,  so 
Hle))rastakeins. 

3  panuli  qe|5un  du  imma  bvoj^ryus  is, 
Uslei})  |;a]>ro,  yah  gagg  in  ludaian,  ei 
yah  |?ai  siponyos  saiwliaina  waurstwa 
Jjeina  Jjoei  \)U  tauyis  ; 

4  Ni  manna  auk  lu  analaugnein  wlia 
tauyij?,  yali  sokei[j  sik  uskunjjana  wisan. 

.  Yabai   j'ata  tauyis,  bairhtei  ];uk  silban 
jjizai  manasedai. 

5  Ni  auk  }iai  bro|)ryus  is  galaubidedun 
iiinma. 

6  paruh  qa|)  im  lesus,  Mel  mein  ni 
nauh  ist,  iy  mel  izwar  sinteino  ist  manwu. 

7  Ni  mag  so  manase]js  fiyan  izwis,  i[) 
mik  fiyai}^ ;  unte  ik  weitwodya  bi  ins, 
jjatei  waurstwa  ize  ubila  sind 

8  Yus  galei}>i|)  in  dul|>  Ipo,  'ip  ik  ni 
nauh  galeifia  in  J)0  duljj,  unte  meiuata 
mel  ni  nauh  usfullij)  ist. 

9  patuli  |)an  qa]?  du  im,  wisands  in 
Galeilaia. 

10  I])   bi})e   galijjun   jai   bro})ryus   is, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 
buton  min  feeder  liit  him  sylle. 

66  Sycldan  manega  his  leon;'ng-cnihta 
cyrdon  onbajc,  and  ne  eodon  mid  him. 

67  Da  cwsejj  se  Hselend  to  (lam  twelfum, 
Cwecle  ge  wylle  ge  fram  mel 

68  Da  andwyrde  him  Simon  Petriis 
and  cwfe}>,  Driliten,  to  hwam  ga  we  ? 
Du  lisefst  eces  lifes  word  ; 

69  And  we  gelyfaj),  and  witon.  cti^t  du 
cart  Crist,  Godes  sunu. 

70  Se  Haelend  liim  andswarode  and 
cwoe)),  Hii  ne  geceas  ic  eow  twe'.fe,  and 
eower  an  is  deoful  ] 

7  I  And  he  hyt  cw£e|?  be  luda  Scariofjc, 

ties  liine  belcEwde,  da  he  wxis 

un  dara  twelfa. 


Chap.  VII.  "''i  Syddan  for  se  Heel- 
end  to  Galilea,  he  nolde  farau  to  ludea, 
fordam  de  da  ludeas  hine  sohton  and 
woldon  hyne  ofslean. 

2  Hit  wees  gehende  ludea  freols-dsege. 

3  His  brodro  cwsedon  to  him.  Far 
heonon,  and  ga  on  ludea  land,  daet  dine 
leoruing-cnihtas  geseon  da  weorc  de  du 
wyrcst  ; 

4  Ne  de|j  nan  man  nan})ing  on  d'glum, 
ac  sec])  diet  hit  open  sy.  Gif  du  das 
))ing  dcst,  geswutela  de  sylfne  middan- 
earde. 

5  Witodlice  ne  his  magas  ne  gelyfdou 
on  liine. 

6  Da  cwse)>  se  Hselend  to  him,  Gyt 
ne  com  min  tid,  eower  tiJ  is  symlo 
gearu. 

7  Ne  maeg  middan-eard  eow  hatian,  ac 
he  hata])  me  ;  fordam  ic  cyde  gcAvitnesse 
be  him,  dset  his  weorc  synd  yfele. 

8  Fare  ge  to  disum  freols-dfege,  ic  ne 
fare  to  disum  freols-dsege,  fordam  min 
tid  nis  gyt  gefylled. 

9  He  wunode  on  Galilea,  da  he  das 
jjing  SEede. 

10  Eft  da   his  brodrv.   foron,  da  for 


YI.  66.-VII.  lo.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
but  it  were  50UUU  to  him  of  my  fiulir. 

66  Fro  this  tynie  manye  of  liis  ilis- 
ciplis  wentcn  a  buk,  and  now  wcntcn 
not  with  him. 

67  Thcrforc  Jhesu  seiile  to  the  twcluc, 
,      "Where  and  50  wolen  go  awey  ] 

68  Therfore  Symount  Potre  answeride 
to  him,  Lord,  to  whom  s^hulen  we  go  1 
Thou  hast  wordis  of  euerelnsting  lyf ; 

69  And  we  lian  bileuyd,  and  kiiowun, 
for  tliou  art  Crist,  the  soue  of  God. 

70  Therfore  Jhesu  answeride  to  hem, 
AVher  I  checs  not  50U  twelue,  and  oon 
of  50U  is  a  deuel  1 

7  1  Forsothe  lie  seide  ot  Judas  of  Sy- 
mount, of  Scarioth,  forsoth  this  was  to 
hltraiynge  him,  whanuc  he  was  oon  of 
twelue. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


481 


Chap.   VII.       1   Forsothe   aftir  thes 
I     thingis  Jhesu  walkide  in  to  Galilee,  for 
he  wolde  not  walke  in  to  Judee,  for  the 
Jewis  sou^ten  for  to  sle  him. 

2  Sothli  ther  was  in  the  nexte  a  feeste 
tlay  of  Jewis,  Scenofegia.''' 

3  Forsothe  his  bretheren  seiden  to  him. 
Passe  fro  hcnnis,  and  go  in  to  Judee, 
that  and  thi  disciplis  se  thi  werkis  that 
thou  doist ; 

4  Forsothe  no  man  dotb  ony  thing  in 
hid  place,^  and  he  sekitli  to  be  in  to  o})yn. 
If  thou  dost  thes  thingis,  schewe  thi  silf 
to  the  world. 

5  Forsothe  nether  his  britheren  bi- 
leueden  in  to  him. 

6  Therfore  Jhesu  seith  to  hem,  My 
time  cam  ni)t  jit,  but  joure  tyme  is 
euermore  reily. 

7  The  world  may  not  haue  hatid  50U, 
sothli  it  hatith  me ;  for  I  here  witness- 
ing therof,  for  the  worlds  of  it  ben 
yuele. 

8  Stije  5e  vp  at  this  feeste  day,  but 
I  sehal  not  stije  vp  at  this  feeste  day, 
for  my  tyme  is  not  jit  fillid. 

9  "Whanne  he  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
he  dwelte  in  Galilee. 

10  Forsothe  as  his  britheren  stijcden 


except  it  were  geven  vnto  hym  of  my 
father. 

66  From  that  tyme  many  of  his  dis- 
eiplcs  went  a  waye  from  him,  and  cora- 
panyed  no  moore  witli  hym. 

67  Then  sayde  Jesus  to  the  twelve, 
Will  ye  alsoo  goo  awaye  1 

68  (Simon  Peter  answered  hym.  Master, 
to  whom  shall  we  goo  1  Thou  haste  the 
wordes  off  ctcrnall  lyfe  ; 

69  And  we  have  beleved,  and  knowen, 
that  thou  arte  Christ,  the  sonne  off  the 
lyvynge  God. 

70  Jesus  answered  them.  Have  not  I 
chosen  you  twelve,  and  yett  one  off  you 
is  the  devyll  ? 

7 1  He  spake  it  off  Judas  Iseariot,  the 
Sonne  oi  Simon,  for  be  itt  was  that 
shulde  betraye  hym,  and  was  one  of  the 
twelve. 


Chap.  VII.  i  After  that  Jesus  went 
about  in  Galile,  and  wolde  not  goo 
about  in  lewry,  for  the  lewes  soughtt 
to  kyll  hym. 

2  The  lewes  Tabernacle  feast  was  at 
honde. 

3  His  brethren  therfore  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Gett  thy  silfe  hence,  and  goo  into 
lewry,  that  thy  disciples  maye  se  thy 
workes  that  thou  doest ; 

4  There  is  no  man  that  doeth  eny 
thynge  secretly,  and  he  hym  silfe  seketh 
to  be  knowen.  Yf  thou  do  soche  thynges, 
shewe  thy  silfe  to  the  worlde. 

5  For  as  yet  his  brethren  beleved  not 
in  hym. 

6  Then  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them.  My 
tyme  is  not  yett  come,  youre  tyme  is 
all  waye  redy. 

7  The  worlde  can  not  hate  you,  me  it 
hateth  ;  be  cause  I  testyfy  off  hitt,  thatt 
the  workes  off  itt  are  evyll. 

8  Goo  ye  vppe  vnto  this  feast,  I  will 
nott  goo  vppe  yett  vnto  this  feaste,  for 
my  tyme  is  nott  yett  full  come. 

9  These  wordes  he  sayde  vnto  them, 
and  aboode  still  in  Galile. 

10  As  sone  as  his  brethren  were  goone 

I  i 


482 


GOTHIC,  360. 


{;anuh    yali    is    galai})   'in    })0    duljj,    ni 
audaugyo,  ak  swe  analaugniba. 

11  panuli  luclaieis  sokidedun  "ina  'in 
})lzai  dulj)ai,  yah  qej^un,  Whar  ist  yains  ? 

12  Yah  birodcins  mikila  was  in  man- 
agein.  Sumaih  qejjun,  patei  sunyeins 
ist ;  an))arai  qejjun,  ISTe,  ak  airzei]?  [10 
managein  ; 

13  Nih  ]jan  alusauu  swej^auh  baljjaba 
rodida  bi  ina,  iu  agisis  ludaie. 

14  ijj  yuj'an  ana  midyai  duljj,  usstaig 
lesus  in  alh,  yah  laisida. 

1 5  Yah  sildaleikidedun  manageins,  qi))- 
andans,  Whaiwa  sa  bokos  kann,  uuus- 
laisijjs  1 

16  Andhof  ])an  lesus,  yah  qa]?,  So 
meina  laiseuis  nist  meina,  ak  Jjis  sand- 
yandins  mik. 

17  Yabai  whas  will  wilyan  is  tau)'an, 
ufkunnaijj  bi  ]>o  laisein,  framuh  Gu)ja 
siyai,  |)au  iku  fram  mis  silbin  rodya. 

18  Saei  fram  sis  silbin  rodei[',  hauhijja 
seina  sokei}) ;  ijj  saei  sokeijj  hauhijja  |)is 
saudyandius  sik,  sah  sunyeins  ist,  yah 
inwindi])a  in  imma  nist. 

19  Kiu  Moses  gaf  izwis  wito]?,  yah  ni 
ainshun  izwara  tauyif)  jjata  wito|>  1  Wha 
mili  sokei})  usqlman  1 

20  Andhof  so  managei,  yah  qe]5un, 
UnhulJ)on  habais ;  whas  })uk  sokei})  us- 
qiman  1 

2 1  Andhof  lesus,  yah  qa})  du  im,  Ain 
waurstw  gatawida,  yah  allai  sildaleikeij). 

22  Du})})e  Moses  atgaf  izwis  bimait ; 
ni  J'atei  fram  Mose  siyai,  ak  us  attam  ; 
yah  in  sabbato  bimaiti})  mannan. 

23  Yabai  bimait  uimij)  manna  in  sab- 
bato, ei  ni  gatairaidau  wito})  };ata  Mo- 
sezis,  ij)  mis  hatizo}),  unte  allaua  mannan 
hailana  gatawida  in  sabbato  1 

24  M  stoyai})  bi  siunai,  ak  ]>o  garaihton 
staua  stoyai}). 

25  Qel^unuh  })an  sumai  })ize  lairu- 
saulwmeite,  Niu  sa  ist,  })ammei  sokyand 
•usqiman  1 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

he    eac    to    dam    freols-dsege,    nses    na 
openlice,  ac  dygoUice. 

I T  Da  ludeas  hine  sohton  on  dam 
freols-drege,  and  cwaedon,  Hwar  is  lie  1 

12  And  mycel  gehlyd  wtes  on  d?ere 
menigeo  be  him.  Sume  cwsedon.  He 
ys  g5d  ;  odre  cwsedou,  Nese,  ac  he 
beswic})  dis  folc ; 

13  Deali  hw£edere  ne  sp?ec  nan  man 
openlice  be  him,  for  dpera  ludea  egeJ 

14  Da  hit  Avass  mid-dpeg  dses  freols- 
daeges,  da  code  se  Hcelend  into  dam 
temjile,  and  Istrde. 

15  And  da  ludeas  wundredon,  and 
cwiedon,  Hiiineta  can  des  stafus,  donne 
he  ne  leoniode  ? 

16  Se  Htelend  him  andswarode,  and 
c\vse]>,  Min  liir  nis  na  min,  ac  dses  de 
me  sende. 

1 7  Gyf  hwii  wyle  his  willan  don,  he 
gecnsew})  be  d?ere  ];ire,  hwseder  heo  si 
of  Gode,  hwseder  de  ic  be  me  sylfum 
spece. 

18  So  de  be  him  sylfum  spryc]),  sec]) 
his  ageii  wuldor ;  se  de  sec}>  dees  wuldor 
de  hyne  sende,  se  is  s5})fa3st,  and  nis 
nan  unrihtwisnys  on  him. 

19  Hii  no  sealde  Moyses  eow  se,  and 
eower  nan  ne  healt  da  se  ?  Hwi  sece 
ge  me  to  ofsleanne  1 

20  Da  andswai'ode  seo  menigeo,  and 
cw?e}),  Dcofol  de  stica})  on ;  liwa  sec}) 
de  to  ofsleanne  1 

21  Da  andswai'ode  se  Hselend,  and 
cwpe})  to  him,  An  weorc  ic  wovhte,  and 
ealle  ge  Avundria}). 

22  Fordy  Moyses  eow  sealde  ymb- 
snydenysse  ;  nses  na  fordi  de  heo  of 
]\Ioyse  sy,  ac  of  fsederon  ;  and  on  reste- 
dsege  ge  ymb-snyda})  mann. 

23 

....  dset  Moyses 
Ee  ne  sy  toworpen,  and  ge  belga})  wid 
me,  fordani  de  ic  gehselde  anne  man  on 
reste-dsege  1 

24  Ne  deme  ge  be  ansyne,  ac  dema}) 
rihtne  d5m. 

25  Sume  cwsedon  da  de  wseron  of 
Hierusalem,  Hu  nis  dis,  se  de  hi  seca}) 
to  ofsleanne  1 


Vir.  11-23.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

vp,   tliaunc   and    lie    sti^cdc  vp    at    the 
I'costo  day,  not  opynli,  but  as  in  piyiici. 

1 1  Tliertorc  the  Jcwis  sou;;tcn  him  in 
the  fet-'ste  day,  and  seiden,  Whcr  is  he  1 

12  And  moehe  gniechin<^  was  of  him 
in  tlie  cumpany  of  jieple.  Forsoilie 
summe  seiden,  For  he  is  good  ;  forsoth 
otiiere  seiden,  Nay,  but  he  disceyucth 
the  eumpanyes  ; 

13  Netheles  no  man  spak  opynly  of 
him,  for  the  dredc  of  Jcwis. 

14  Forsothe  now  the  feeste  day  mod- 
lingc,^  Jhesu  wcntc  vp  in  to  the  temple, 
and  tau^te. 

If,  And  the  Jewis  wondriden,  seyinge, 
Hon  kan  this  man  lettris,  sitheu  he  hath 
not  leniyd  I 

16  Jhesu  answeridc  to  hem,  and  scide, 
My  ductiine  is  not  myn,  but  his  that 
sente  me. 

17  If  ony  man  schal  wilne  to  do  his 
willc,  he  schal  knowe  of  the  techinge, 
whcr  it  be  of  God,  whcr  I  speke  of 
my  silf. 

18  He  that  spckith  of  himself,  sekith 
Ills  owne  glorie  ;  forsoth  he  that  sekith 
the  glorie  of  liim  that  sente  him,  this 
is  sothfast,  and  vuri5tfulnesse  is  not  in 
him. 

19  Wher  Moyscs  5af  not  to  50U  a  lawc, 
and  no  man  of  50U  doth  the  lawc  ?  AYliat 
beken  5e  to  sic  me  1 

20  The  cumpany  answeridc,  and  scidc, 
Thou  hast  a  deuyl  ;  who  sekith  for  to 
sle  thee  1 

2 1  Jhesu  answeridc,  and  scide  to  hem, 
I  haue  don  o  work,  and  alle  56  wondren. 

22  Therfore  Moyses  jaf  to  50U  circum- 
cisioun  ;  not  for  it  is  of  Moyses,  but  of 
fadris  ;  and  in  the  saboth  50  circum- 
sididen  a  man. 

23  If  a  man  takith  circumcisioun  in 
the  saboth,  that  the  lawc  of  Moyses  be 
not  brokun,  ban  5e  indignacioun^  to  me, 
for  I  made  al  the  man  hool  in  the  sa- 
bot ? 

24  Xyle  5e  dcmc  vp  the  face,  but  dcme 
a  ri5tful  dom. 

2.-,  Therfore  summe  of  Jerusalem  seiden, 
'NVher  this  is  not,  whom  the  Jewis  sekcn 
to  sice  ? 


TYNDALE,i526.  483 

vppe,  then  went  he  also  vppe  vnto  the 
feast,  nott  oi)enly,  ])utt  as  it  were  prcvely. 

1 1  Then  sought  hym  the  Icwes  at  the 
feast,  and  sayde,  Where  is  he  ] 

12  And  nioehc  murmurjngc  was  there 
of  hym  amongc  the  people.  >Some  sayde. 
He  is  goodo  ;  wothcr  sayde,  Naye,  but 
he  deccavcth  the  people  ; 

13  No  man  spake  openly  of  hym,  for 
fcare  of  the  lewcs. 

14  In  the  myddcs  of  the  feast,  Jesus 
went  vppe  into  the  temple,  and  taught. 

15  And  the  Icwes  marveyllcd,  saiyngc, 
Howe  knowcth  he  the  scriptures,  scyngo 
that  he  never  learned  ? 

16  Jesus  answered  them,  and  sayde, 
jNIy  doctrine  is  nott  myne,  butt  hys 
tliatt  sent  me. 

17  YfF  cny  man  wyll  do  hys  will,  ho 
shall  knowe  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it 
be  of  God,  or  Avhcthcr  I  sjiake  of  my 
silfe. 

18  He  that  spcaketh  of  him  silfe,  seketli 
his  awne  praysc ;  butt  whosoever  seketli 
his  praysc  that  sent  him,  he  ys  true,  and 
no  vnrightcwesucs  is  in  hym. 

19  Did  not  Moses  gcve  you  a  lawe, 
and  yet  none  off  you  kepcth  the  lawe '? 
Why  goo  ye  a  boutc  to  kill  me  1 

20  The  people  answered,  and  sayde, 
Tliou  hast  the  devyll ;  who  goeth  aboutc 
to  kill  the  ? 

21  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  I  have  done  Avon  worke,  and  ye 
all  marvaylc. 

22  i\Ioscs  therfore  gave  vnto  you  cii*- 
cumcision  ;  not  because  it  is  of  Moses, 
but  of  the  fathers  ;  and  yet  yc  on  the 
saboth  daye  circumcise  a  man. 

23  Yf  a  man  on  the  saboth  daye  rc- 
ccave  circumcision,  with  out  breakyngc 
of  the  lawe  off  Moses,  disdaync  ye  at 
me,  be  cause  I  made  a  man  every  whit 
whoale  on  the  saboth  daye  1 

24  Judge  not  after  the  vtter  aperauncc, 
but  iudge  rightewes  iudgement. 

25  Then  sayd  sum  of  them  of  Jeru- 
salem, Is  nott  this  he,  whom  they  went 
aboute  to  kill  1 

li  2 


484 


GOTHIC,  360. 


26  Yali  sai  !  anclaun;iba  rodei)),  yah 
waiht  du  iinma  ni  qijjaud.  Ibai  aufio 
bi  sunyai  ufkun|:eduu  Jjai  reiks,  ]?atei 
sa  ist  bi  sunyai  Cliristus  1 

27  Akei  jjana  kunnum,  whaJTO  ist;  ij> 
Chiistus  bi])e  qimijj,  ni  manna  wait 
whajjro  ist. 

28  Hropida  j^an,  in  alh  laisyands  lesus, 
yah  qijjands,  Yah  niik  kunnu]?,  yah  witujj 
wlui|)ro  im  ;  yah  af  mis  silbiu  ni  qam, 
ak  ist  sunyeins  saei  sandida  mik,  j^anei 
yus  ni  kunnuj'. 

29 

....  i}j  ik  kann  ina,  unte  fram  imma 
im,  yah  is  mik  insandida. 

30  Sokidedun  |mn  ina  gafahan,  yah  ni 
ainslmu  uslagida  ana  ina  haudu,  unte 
nauhjanuh  ni  atiddya  wheila  is. 

31  Ijj  managai  ]>izos  manageins  ga- 
laubidedun  imma,  yah  qejjun,  Ohristus 
Jian  qinii|5,  ibai  ei  managizeins  taiknins 
tauyai,  jaimei  sa  tawidal 

32  Hausidedun  |ian  Fareisaieis  }"0  man- 
agein  birodyandein  bi  ina  jiata  ;  i'nuh- 
sandidedun  andbalitans  )nxi  Fareisaieis, 
yah  ]?ai  auhumistans  gudyans,  ei  ga- 
faifaheina  ina. 

33  panuh  qaj)  lesus,  Nauh  leitila  wheiht 
mi|j  izwis  im,  yah  J^an  gagga  du  jjamma 
sandyandhi  mik. 

34  iSokeil?  mik,  yah  ni  bigiti}? ;  yah 
Jiarei  im  ik,  yus  ni   magujj  qiraan. 

35  paruh  qe})un  J^ai  ludaieis  du  sis 
misso,  Whadre  sa  skuli  gaggan,  |;ei  Aveis 
ni  bigitairaa  ina  ?  nibai  in  distahein 
})iudo  skuh  gaggan,  yali  laisyan  |jiudos  1 

36  Wha  siyai  })ata  Avaurd,  })atei  qa}), 
Sokei|j  mik,  j^ah  ni  bigiti(>  ;  yah  Jiarei 
im  ik,  yus  ni  magu})  qiman  1 

37  I[)  in  spedistin  daga  J^amma  mikilin 
dulhais,  stojj  lesus,  yah  hropida,  qij^ands, 
Yabai  whana  j^aursyai,  gaggai  du  mis, 
yah  driggkai. 

38  Saei  galaubeijj  du  mis,  swaswe  qa|j 
gameleins,  Awhos  us  wambai  is  rinnaud 
watins  libandins. 

39  patuh  |;an  qa}j  bi  Ah  man,  Jjanei 
skuldedun  niman  J>ai  galaubyandans  du 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Joiix 

26  And  nu  !  he  spjc\>  openlice,  and 
hig  ne  cwedal?  nan  };ing  to  him.  Cwede 
we  hwsecler  da  ealdras  ongyton,  clset  d'.s 
is  Crist  ] 

27  Ac  we  witon,  hwanon  des  is  ;  donne 
Crist  cymjj,  donne  nat  nan  man  hwanon 
he  bi]). 

28  Se  Hselend  clypode,  and  l*rde  on 
dam  temple,  and  cw£e}),  Me  ge  cunnon, 
and  ge  witon  hwanon  ic  eom  ;  and  ic 
ne  com  fram  me  sylfum,  ac  se  is  so]'  de 
me  sende,  done  ge  ne  cunnon. 

29  Ic  hine  can,  and  gif  ic  secge  doet 
ic  hine  ne  cunne,  ic  beo  leas,  and  eow 
gelic  ;  ic  hine  can,  and  ic  eom  of  him, 
and  he  me  sende. 

30  Hig  hine  sohton  to  nimanne,  and 
hyra  nan  hj's  ne  set-hran,  fordam  de  his 
tid  ne  com  da  gyt. 

31  Manega  of  daere  menigeo  gelyfdon 
on  hine,  and  cwsedon,  Cwede  ge  wyrc]> 
Crist  ma  tacna,  donne  he  cym]),  donne 
des  de])  1 

32  Dei  Pharisei  gehyrdon  da  menigeo 
dus  murcniende  be  him  ;^  da  ealdras 
and  da  Pharisei  sen  don  hyra  })enas,  dset 
hig  woldon  hine  gefon. 

33  Da  cwse})  se  Hselend,  Gyt  ic  beo 
sume  hwile  mid  eow,  and  ic  gauge  to 
dam,  de  me  sende. 

34  Ge  seca])  me,  and  ne  finda])  ;  and 
ge  ne  magou  cuman,  dar  ic  eom. 

35  Da  ludeas  cwEedon  betweonan  him 
sylfum,  Hwyder  wyle  des  faran,  dast  we 
hine  ne  findon  1  cwyst  dii  wyle  he  faran 
on  ])eoda  todrsefednesse,  and  hig  lisran? 

36  Hwset  is  deos  sprsec,  de  he  spryc}), 
Ge  seca})  me,  and  ne  finda)) ;  and  ge  ne 
magon  cuman,  dar  ic  eom  1 

37  On  dam  seftemestan  mseran  freols- 
dajge,  stod  se  Hselend,  and  clypode, 
Cume  to  me,  se  de  hine  })yrste,  and 
drince. 

38  Se  de  gelyf])  on  me,  swa  dset  gewrit 
cwy]),  Lybbendes  wsetres  flod  fl5\va])  of 
his  innode. 

39  Dset  he  cwse])  be  dam  Gaste,  de 
da  sceoldon  underfon  de  on  hine  gelyf- 


VII.  26-39-]   ^VYCL1FFE,  1389. 

26  And  lo  I  lie  spckitli  opynly,  and 
tliei  soyn  no  thing  to  liini.  Wlier  the 
l)rinces  kuewen  vciili,  for  tliis  is  Crist? 

27  But  wc  wlten  tliis  man,  of  whennis 
he  is  ;  forsoth  whanne  Crist  schal  come, 
no  man  wot  of  whennis  he  is. 

28  Therfore  Jhesu  cricde  in  the  temple, 
techingo  hem,  and  soyinge,  And  50  witen 
ine,  and  of  wlicnnis  I  am  ;  ami  I  cam 
not  of  my  silf,  but  he  is  trewe  that  seute 
me,  whom  5e  knowcn  not. 

29  I  woot  him,  and  if  I  schal  seie 
for  I  woot  not  him,  I  solial  be  lyk  to 
50U,  a  lycre  ;  and  I  woot  him,  for  of 
him  I  am,  and  he  sente  me. 

30  Therfore  thei  sou5ten  for  to  take 
him,  and  no  man  sente  in  to  him  hondis, 
for  his  our  cam  not  5it. 

3 1  Sotldi  many  of  the  cumpanye  bi- 
leueden  in  to  him,  and  seidcn,  ^Vhanne 
Crist  schal  come,  wher  he  schal  do  mo 
tokencs,  than  this  doth  1 

32  Pharisees  herdcn  the  cumpenye  of 
pcple  gi'uccliinge  of  him  thes  tliingis  ; 
and  the  princes  of  Pharisees  senten 
mynistris,  that  thei  schuldeu  take  him. 

33  Tlierfore  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  yit 
a  litel  tyme  I  am  with  50U,  and  I  go 
to  the  fadir,  that  sente  me. 

34  5e  sehulen  seke  me,  and  50  schulen 
not  fynde  ;  and  where  I  am,  50  mown 
not  come. 

35  Therfore  the  Jewis  seiden  to  hem 
silf,  ^Vhidur  is  this  to  goynge,  for  we 
schulen  not  fynde  him  ?  wher  he  is  to 
goyiuge  in  to  scateringe^  ot  hetliene 
men,  and  is  to  techinge  hethene  men  ] 

36  What  is  this  word,  which  he  seide, 
5e  schulen  seke  me,  and  ^e  schulen  not 
fynde  ;  and  where  I  am,  36  mown  not 
come  ] 

37  Foi-soth  in  the  laste  day  of  the 
grete  fee^te,  Jhesu  stood,  and  criede, 
seyinge,  If  ony  man  thirstith,  come  he 
to  me,  and  drynke  he. 

38  He  that  bileneth  in  to  me,  as  the 
scripture  seith,  Flodis  of  quyke  watir 
schulen  Howe  of  his  wombe. 

39  Sothli  he  seide  this  thing  of  the 
Hooly  Goost,  whom  men  bileuynge  in 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


485 


26  Beholde !  he  speakcth  boldly,  and 
they  saye  nothynge  to  him.  Do  not 
oure  ruelars  knowe  in  dede,  that  this 
is  very  Christ? 

27  Butt  we  knowe  this  man,  whence 
he  is ;  but  when  Christ  conuneth,  no 
man  shall  knowe  whence  he  is. 

28  Then  cryed  Jesus  in  the  temple,  as 
he  taught,  sayinge,  And  me  ye  knowe, 
and  whence  I  am  ye  knowe  ;  and  1  am 
nott  come  off  my  silfe,  butt  he  thatb 
sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  knowe  nott. 

29 

....   I  knowe  hym,  for  I  am  off  hym, 
and  he  hath  sent  me. 

30  Then  sought  the  lewes  to  take 
hym,  butt  no  man  layde  hondes  on  hym, 
be  cause  his  tyme  was  nott  yett  come. 

3 1  Many  off  the  people  beleved  on 
hym,  and  sayde,  When  Christ  commeth, 
Avill  he  do  moo  myraeles,  then  this  man 
hathe  done  l 

32  The  Phariscs  herde  that  the  people 
murmured  suche  thynges  about  hym  ; 
and  the  Pliarises  and  scribes  sent  minis- 
ters forthe,  to  take  hym. 

33  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  them,  Yett 
am  I  a  lytell  whyle  with  you,  and  then 
goo  I  vnto  hym,  that  sent  me. 

34  Ye  shall  seke  me,  and  shall  nott 
fynde  me ;  and  where  I  am,  thither  can 
ye  nott  come. 

35  Then  sayde  the  lewes  bitwene  them 
selves,  Whithei-  will  he  goo,  that  we 
shall  nott  fynde  hym  1  will  he  goo 
amonge  the  gentyls  which  are  scattered 
all  a  broade,  and  teaclie  tlic  gentyls  ? 

36  What  maner  off  sayinge  ys  tliys, 
that  he  sayde.  Ye  shall  seke  me,  and 
shall  nott  fynde  me  ;  and  where  I  am, 
thither  can  ye  nott  come  1 

37  In  the  last  daye,  that  grett  daye  off* 
the  feaste,  Jesus  stotle,  and  cryed,  say- 
inge, Y'^f  eny  man  thyrst,  lett  hym  come 
vnto  me,  and  drynke. 

38  Whosoever  beleveth  on  me,  as  sayeth 
the  scripture.  Out  off"  his  belly  shall 
Howe  ryvers  off  water  off  lyfe. 

39  Tliis  si)ake  he  off  the  Spretc,  which 
they  that   beleved   on   hym  shulde  re- 


4SG 


GOTHIC,  160. 


imma  ;  uute  ni  naulil'jmuli  Avas  Alnna 
sa  Woilia  ana  iiii,  unte  lesus  iiauli)ninuh 
iii  Iiauliijis  was. 

40  ]\Ianac;-ai  }jan  ])izos  nianag^eins,  liaus- 
yandaiis  jjize  Avaurde,  qejniu,  »Sa  ist  bi 
sunyai  sa  praufetes. 

4 1  Sumaili  qepun,  Sa  Tst  Christus.  Sum- 
aih  qe]5Uii,  Ibai  jjau'*'  us  Galcilaia  Cliristus 
qimijj  'I 

42  Niu  gameleins  qn]>,  Jjatei  us  fraiwa 
Daweidis,  yah  us  Lejilailuiiiu  Aveilisa, 
jmrei  was  Daweid,  Cliristus  qimi])  ] 

43  panuli  missaqiss  in  |nzai  managein 
■\var|)  bi  ina. 

44  Sumaih  jjan  ize  Avildedun  falian  ina, 
akei  ni  ainsliuu  usiagida  ana  ina  hand- 
uns. 

45  Galijjun  ])an  ]>ri  andbahtos  du  |iaiin 
auhumistam  guJyam  yali  Fareisaium, 
paruh  qejjun  du  im  yainai,  Duwhe  ui 
attauhu]>  ina  1 

46  Andhofun  Jjai  andbahtos,  Niv-diaiduui 
aiAV  rodida  manna,  swaswe  sa  manna. 

47  Andhofun  Jjan  im  pai  Fareisaieis, 
Ibai  yah  yus  afairzidai  siyujj  1 

48  Sai  yau  ainsliun  Jjize  reike  galaub- 
idedi  imma,  ai})]?au  Fareisaie  1 

49  Alya  so  managei,  ]?aiei  ni  kunnun 
witoj),  fraqijjanai  sind. 

50  QaJ>  Nikaudemus  du  im,  saei  atid- 
dya  du  imma  in  naht,  sums  Avisands  izei, 

51  Ibai  Avitojj  unsai'  stoyi]?  mannan, 
nibai  faur{)is  hausei]?  fram  imma,  yah 
ufkunnaijj  Avha  tauyai  1 

52  Andhofun,  yah  qe}>un  du  imma, 
ibai  yali  l>u  us  Galeilaia  is  1  Ussokei, 
yaii  saiwh,  |;atei  praufetus  us  Galeilaia 
ni  urrei?iji. 

(ui 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

don  ;  il'  gyt  rnss  se  Gast  gescald,  forClam 
etc  so  Htelcnd  npes  da  gyt  geAvuldrod.''^ 

40  Of  dfere  tide  seo  menigeo  CAva-]),  eta 
lieo  gehyrde  ctiis  his  sprtece,  Des  is  soj) 
Avitega. 

41  Sume  CAA-redon,  He  is  Crist.  Sume 
CAA'Pedon,  CAvecte  ge,  cynij)  Crist  fi-am 
Gal  ilea  ? 

42  Hu  ne  CAvy|j  cta^t  gCAvrit,  ctn?t  Crist 
cymji  of  Dauides  cynne,  and  of  Bethleem 
ceastre,  ttar  dar  Dauid  Avses  1 

43  Witodlice  unge])AA'-cernes  AA^ses  ge- 
Avorden  on  dsere  menigeo  for  him. 

44  Sume  hig  woldon  hine  niman,  ac 
hyra  nan  his  ne  set-hran. 

45  Da  |)enas  comon  to  dam  bisceopum 
and  to  dam  Pliai'iseum,  and  hig  cwa^don 
to  him.  For  h\A'i  ne  brohton  ge  hinc 
hider  ? 

46  Da  andwyrdon  da  Jjcnas  and  cwredon, 
Ne  sprasc  nrefre  nan  man,  SAA'a  des  man 
sprycj?.  ^ 

47  Da  cwsedon  da  Pharisei  to  him, 
Synd  ge  besAvicene  1 

48  CAvede  ge  gelyfde  renig  dsera  ealdra, 
odde  dfera  Pharisea  on  hyne  ? 

49  Ac  deos  menigeo,  de  ne  cude  da  ee, 
hig  synd  aAvyrgede. 

50  Da  cwtef)  Nichodemus  to  him,  so 
de  com  to  him  on  nyht,  se  AA'tes  hyra 
an, 

51  CAA^st  du  dem]>  ure  se  Benigne  man, 
buton  hyne  man  ser  gehyre,  and  Avite 
hAVfet  he  do  1 

52  Hig  andsAA'aredon,  and  CAVPedon  to 
him,  CAvyst  dii  dset  du  si  Galileisc  ? 
Smea,  and  geseoh,  da^t  nan  Avitega  ne 
cym})  fram  Galilea. 

53  And  hig  cyrdon  ealle  ham. 


Chap.  YHI.     +i  Se  Ht^lend  f:r  on 
Oliuetes  dune. 

2  And  com  eft  on  dfeg-red  to  dam 
teniple  ;  and  eall  diet  folc  com  to  him  ; 
and  he  s?et  and  Iserde  hig. 


VII.  40-VIII.  2.]   AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

to  hiiu  wercn  to  takinge  ;  forsoth  the 
Spirit  was  not  ^it  5ouun,  for  Jhcsiis  was 
uot  5it  glorified. 

40  Tliorfore  of  that  cuinpanyo,  whaiinc 
thci  hadtlou  horde  thes  wordis  t)f  him, 
tliei  Seidell,  Tliis  is  verili  a  ])roi>lietc. 

41  Othero  seiden,  This  is  Crist.  For- 
soth suniinc  seiden,  "Wher  Crist  eometh 
i'ro  Galilee  t 

42  "Wlier  tlic  scripture  seith  not,  that 
of  the  seed  of  Dauith,  and  of  the  castel 
of  Bethleem,  where  Dauith  was,  Crist 
Cometh  1 

43  And  so  dissencioun  is  maad  in  the 
cunij)any  for  him. 

44  Fursothe  sumnie  of  hem  wolden 
take  him,  but  no  man  sente  hondis  on 
him. 

45  Therfore  the  mynistris  camen  to 
the  bischopis  and  Pharisees,  and  thei 
seiden  to  hem,  Whi  brou5tc  50  not  him  ? 

46  The  mynistris  answeridcn,  Xeucre 
man  spak  so,  as  this  spekith. 

47  Therfore  the  Farisees  answeridcn 
to  hem,  Wher  and  5e  be  diseeyucd  ] 

48  Wher  ony  of  the  princes  bilcueden 
in  to  him,  or  of  the  Pharisees  1 

49  But  this  cumpany  of  peplc,  tliat 
knew  not  the  lawc,  ben  cursid. 

50  Nycodemc  seith  to  hem,  he  that 
cam  to  him  in  ny5te,  that  was  oon  of 
hem, 

51  Wher  oure  lawe  demeth  a  man,  no 
but  first  it  haue  herd  of  him,  and  knowe 
what  he  doth  ? 

,52  Thei  answeridcn,  and  seiden  to  him, 
Wher  and  thou  crt  a  man  of  Galilee  1 
Seke  thou  seripturis,  and  se  thou,  for  a 
prophete  rysith  not  ot  Galilee. 

53  And  thei  turnedyn  a5en,  ech  in  to 
bis  hows. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


487 


CiiAP.  VIII.    I  For-otlie  Jhe.su  wente 
in  to  the  mount  of  Olyuete. 

2  And  erly  eft  lie  cam  in  to  the  temple; 
and  al  the  peple  cam  to  him  ;  and  I13 
sittinge  tau5tc  hem. 


ceavc  ;  for  the  Holy  Cost  was  not  yet 
there,  because  that  Jesus  was  uott  yett 
glorified. 

40  ;Many  off  the  people,  when  they 
herde  this  sayinge,  sayd.  This  is  no 
doute  a  prophet. 

4 1  Wother  sayde.  This  is  Christ.  Some 
sayde,  Shall  Christ  come  out  off  Galile  ? 

42  Sayetli  nott  the  scripture,  that 
Christ  shall  come  off  the  seed  off  David, 
and  out  of  the  toune  off  Bethleem,  where 
David  was  1 

43  So  was  there  dissencion  amonge 
the  people  for  hys  sake. 

44  And    some    off  them   Avolde    have 
taken  hym,  butt  noo  man  layed  hondes . 
on  hym. 

45  Then  cam  the  ministers  to  the  hyc 
j^restes  and  Pharises,  and  they  sayde 
vnto  them,  Why  have  ye  not  Ijrought 
hym  ? 

46  The  servauntes  answered.  Never 
man  spake,  as  thys  man  spcaketh. 

47  Then  answered  them  the  Pharises^,. 
xVre  ye  alsoo  disceaved  1 

48  Doth  eny  of  the  ruelcrs,  or  off  the 
Pharises  beleve  on  hym  1 

49  Butt  the  commen  people,  whyche- 
knowe  nott  the  lawe,  are  a  cursed. 

50  Nicodemus  sayde  vnto  them,  lie- 
that  cam  to  Jesus  by  nyght,  whych  wa& 
one  off  them, 

51  Doth  oure  lawe  iudge  eny  man, 
before  it  be  herde,  and  knowen  what 
he  hath  done  1 

52  They  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Arte  thou  alsoo  off  Galile  1  Scarchc. 
and  loke,  for  out  of  Galile  aryseth  noo 
prophet. 

53  And  every  man  went  vnto  his  uK-rxe 
housse. 


Chap.  VIII.     i  Jesus  went  vnto  the 
Mounte  Olivetc. 

2  And  ei'ly  in  the  mornynge  cam 
agayne  into  the  temple  ;  and  all  the 
people  cam  vnto  hym  ;  and  he  sate 
doune  and  taught  them. 


488 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

3  Da  Igeddon  da  Pharisei  and  cla  boc- 
eras  to  him  an  wit'  seo  wses  aparod  on 
unriht-haemede,  and  settou  liig  to-middes 
tyra, 

4  And  cwsedon  to  him,  Laieow,  dis 
wif  wses  afunden  on  unrihton  hsemede,  . 


12  Aftra  du  "im  lesns  vodida,  qaj)uli, 
Ik  im  liuha})  nianasedais  ;  saei  Uiistei[) 
mik,  ni  gaggij?  in  riqiza,  ak  habaij)  liuha]) 
libainais. 

13  panuh  qejjun  du  imma  )ai  Farei- 
saieis,  pu  bi  jjuk  silban  weitwodeis  ;  so 
■\veit\vodi[)a  fieina  nist  sunyeina. 

14  Andhof  lesus,  yah  qaj?  du  im,  Yali 
yabai  ik  weitwodya  bi  mik  silban,  sunya 
ist  so  weitwodi|:a  meina  ;  unte  wait 
whajjro  qam,  yah  wha})  galei|)a.  Ij?  yus 
ni  witu))  whajjro  qima,  aij)})au  whaj'  ga- 
leijja. 

15  Yus  bi  leika  stoyi}',  'i\>  ik  ni  stoya 
aiunohun  ; 

16  A)))ian  yabai  stoya  ik,  staua  meina 


5  ]\Ioyses  us  bebead  on  dfere  se  Aset 
we  sceoldon  dus  gerade  mid  stanum 
oftorfian  ;  hwa?t  cwyst  du  ] 

f  Dis  hig  cwsedon  his  fandiende,  dfet 
hig  hine  wreliton.  Se  Hselend  abeah 
nyder,  and  wrat  mid  his  fingre  on  d?ere 
eorpan. 

7  Da  hig  J?urh-wunedon  hine  acsiende, 
da  aras  he  upp,  and  cwae])  to  him,  Loca, 
hwylc  eower  si  synleas,  weorpe  serest 
Stan  on  hi. 

8  And  he  ubeah  eft,  and  wrat  on  dsere 
eorjjan. 

9  Da  liig  dis  gehyrdon,  da  eodon  hig 

ut  an  eefter  iinum, 

.  .  .    .   ;  and  he  gebad  dar  sylf,  and  dset 
wif  stod  d?er  on  middan. 

10  Se  Hselend  aras  up, and 

cwsejj  to   hyre,  Wif,  hwar  synd   da  de 
de  wreirdou  1  ne  fordemde  de  nan  man. 


1 1  And  heo  cwse}',  Na,  Drihten.  And 
se  Hselend  cwfe}),  Ne  ic  de  ne  fordeme ; 
d5  ga,  and  ne  synga  dii  nsefre  ma. 

1 2  ■''Eft  se  Hselend  sprsec  das  |  ing  to 
him,  and  cwsej^,  Ic  eom  middau-eardes 
leoht  ;  se  de  me  fyligj>,  ne  gx\>  he  na 
on  Jiystro,  ac  he  hsefjj  lifes  leoht. 

13  Da  Pharisei  cwsedon  to  him,  Du 
cydst  gewitnesse  be  de  sylfum  ;  nis  diu 
gewitnes  so[). 

14  Se  Hselend  andswarode,  and  cwrej) 
to  him,  Gif  ic  cyde  gewitnesse  be  me 
sylfum,  min  gewitnes  is  s6\)  ;  furdam  de 
ic  Wdt  liwanon  ic  com,  and  hAvyder  ic 
ga.    Ge  n}ton  hwanon  ic  com,  ne  hwyder 

15  Ge  dema'p  cefter  flsesce,  ic  ne  deme 
nanum  men  ; 

16  And  gyf  ic  deme,  min  dcm  is  sc]?, 


VIII.  3-1 6.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

,^  Sotlili  sorihis  and  Pharisees  bryiifjen  a 
wonimaii  takiin  in  auowtrie,  and  settidcn 
liir  in  the  niiddil, 

4  And  seidcn  to  him,  !Nraistir,  this 
Momman  is  now  takun  in  auoutrie,  .   .  . 

5  Forsotli  in  the  hiwe  Moyses  com- 
auudide  vs  for  to  stoone  siche  ;  therfore 
wliat  soist  tliou  ? 

6  Sotlili  thoi  seiden  this  thin^^  tcmpt- 
ingo  him,  tliat  thei  my3ten  accuse  liim. 
Foi-sothe  Jhesu  bowinge  him  silt"  doun, 
\vrot  with  tlie  fynirir  in  the  erthe. 

7  Sothly  whanne  thei  lastiden^  axinge 
liim,  lie  reiside  him  silf,  and  seide  to 
liem,  Which  of  50U  that  is  with  oute 
synue,  first  sende  a  stoon  in  to  hir. 

S  And  eft  he  bowinge  doun  him  silf, 
wroot  in  tlie  erthe. 

9  Sothli  thei  heeringe  thes  thiiigis, 
wenten  awey  oon  aftir  an  othei-,  thei 
bigynnyngc  at  the  eldere  men ;  and 
Jliesu  dwelte  aloone,  and  the  wommau 
stondinge  in  the  myddel. 

10  Sothli  Jhesu  reisynge  him  silf,  .  .   . 

seide   to   hir,   Womman,   wher 

•ben  thei  that  accusiden  thee  1  no  man 
dampnede  thee. 

1 1  The  which  seyde,  No  man,  Lord. 
Jhesu  scith  to  hir,  Xether  I  schal 
dampne  thee  ;  go  thou,  and  now  aftir- 
ward  nyle  thou  do  synne. 

12  Tlicrfore  eft  Jhesu  spak  to  hem, 
seyinge,  I  am  the  li5t  of  the  world  ;  he 
that  sueth  me,  walkith  not  in  derk- 
uessis,  Ijut  schal  haue  the  li3t  of  lyf. 

13  Therfore  the  Pharisees  seiden,  Thou 
berist  witnessing  of  thi  silf;  thi  witness- 
ing is  not  trewe. 

14  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide  to  hem. 
And  if  I  here  witnessing  of  my  silf,  my 
witnessing  is  trcwe  ;  for  I  woot  fro 
whennis  I  cam,  and  wliidur  I  go.  For- 
sothe  ic  witen  not  fro  whennus  I  come, 
or  whidur  I  go. 

15  Forsoth  50  demen  vp  the  fleisch,  I 
deme  not  ony  man  ; 

16  And  if  I  deme,  my  dom  is  trewe, 


TYNDALE,  1526.  48!) 

3  The  scribes  atid  Phariscs  brought 
vnto  hym  a  woman  taken  in  advoutry, 
and  sett  her  in  the  middcs, 

4  And  .saydc  vnto  hyin,  jSFastor,  thys 
woman  was  taken  in  advoutry,  even  as 
the  dede  was  a  doyng. 

5  Moses  in  the  lawe  commaunded  vs 
tl'.at  suche  sliulde  be  stoned  ;  what  sayst 
thou  therfore  1 

6  And  thys  they  sayde  to  tempt  hym, 
that  they  myglit  have  wher  off  to  accuse 
hym.  Jesus  stouped  doune,  and  wytli 
hys  fynger  wrote  on  the  grounde. 

7  And  whill  they  continued  axynge 
hym,  he  lifte  hym  sylfe  vppe,  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Lett  hym  thatt  ys  a  monge 
you  wyth  out  synne,  cast  the  fyrst  stone 
at  her. 

8  And  agayne  he  stouped  doune,  and 
wrote  on  the  grounde. 

9  As  sone  as  they  herde  that,  they 
went  out  won  by  won,  the  eldest  fyrst  ; 
and  Jesus  was  lefte  a  lone,  and  the 
woman  stondynge  in  the  myddes. 

I  o  When  Jesus  had  lifte  vppe  hym 
sylfe  agayne,  and  sawe  noo  man  butt 
the  woman,  he  sayde  vnto  her.  Woman, 
where  are  those  thyne  accusars  1  hath 
no  man  condempned  the  1 

I I  She  sayde,  Syr,  no  man.  Jesus 
sayde,  Nether  do  I  condenipne  the  ; 
goo  hence,  and  synne  no  moare. 

1 2  Then  spake  Jesus  agayne  vnto  them, 
sayinge,  I  am  the  light  off  the  worlde  ; 
he  that  foloweth  me,  shall  nott  walke 
in  darcknes,  butt  shall  have  the  light 
of  lyfe. 

13  The  Pharises  sayde  vnto  hym,  Thou 
bearest  reccorde  of  thy  sylfe  ;  thy  re- 
corde  ys  not  true. 

14  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
them,  And  yf  I  beare  recorde  off  my 
sylfe,  my  recorde  is  true  ;  for  I  knowe 
whence  I  cam,  and  whither  I  goo.  Ye 
cannot  tell  whence  I  come,  and  whither 
I  goo.^ 

15  Ye  iudge  after  the  flcsshe,  I  iudge 
no  man  ; 

J  6  And  yff  I  Iudge,  then  ys  my  iudg- 


490 


GOTHIC,  360. 


suiiyciiia  isfc,  unte  aiiis  iii  'im,  ak  'ik  yali 
saei  sanflida  mik  atta. 

1 7  Yah  ])aii  in  Avitoda  izwaramma  ga- 
melij)  ist,  J^atei  tAvaddye  niamie  Aveit- 
Avodi|-a  sunya  ist. 

18  ik  im,  saei  weitwodya  bi  mik  sil- 
ban,  yah  wcitwodeij)  bi  mik,  saei  sandida 
mik,  atta. 

19  Qe})un  |ian  du  "imma,  Whar  ist  sa 
atta  I'cins  1  Andhof  lesus,  Ni  mik  kun- 
imJ5,  iiih  attan  meinana  ;  'i\>  mik  kun|j- 
cdei]',  yali  jjau  attan  meinana  kun})edei]>. 

20  po  wanrda  rodida  in  gazaufwkikio, 
laisyands  in  alh  ;  yah  ainshnn  ni  faifah 
ina,  unte  naulijjanuh  ni  qam  Avlieila  is. 

21  panuh  qa|'  aftra  du  'im  lesus,  Ik 
galei})a,yah  sokei[)  mik,  yali  in  frawaurht- 
ai  izwarai  gadaujniijj  3  J;adei  ik  gagga, 
yus  ni  maguj?  qiman. 

22  Qe]nin  |>an  ludaieis,  Nibai  usqimai 
sis  silbin,  ci  qijjij',  padei  ik  gagga,  yus 
ni  magu}>  qiman '? 

23  Yah  qa]j  du  ira  lesus,  Yus  us  ))aim 
daUiJjro  siyu|5,  \\>  ik  us  bairn  iupajn'O  im  ; 
yus  us  Inmima  fairwhau  siyujj,  ij>  ik  ni 
im  us  jjamma  fairwhau. 

24  Qa]j  nu  izwis,  patei  gadaul'nl}? 
in  frawaurlitim  izwaraim  ;  yabai  auk 
ni  galaubeij)  j^atei  ik  im,  gadau|)ni[>  in 
frawaurl itim  izwaraim . 

25  paruli  (ie])un  du  imma,  pu  wlias  is  1 
Yah  qa]5  du  im  lesus,  Anastodeins,  ]atei 
yali  rodya  du  izwis. 

26  Manag  skal  bi  izwis  rodyan,  yah 
stoyan,  akei  saei  sandida  mik  sunyeins 
ist ;  yali  ik,  Jjatei  hausida  at  imma,  ])ata 
rodya  in  Jjamma  fairAvIiau. 

27  Ni  frojjun,  Jjatei  attan  im  qa]?. 

28  Qajnih  |ian  du  i'm  lesus,  pan  ushauh- 
cijj  Jjana  sunu  mans,  jmnuh  ufkunnai}?, 
]'atei  ik  im,  yah  af  mis  silbin  tauya  ni 
waiht ;  ak  swaswe  laisida  mik  atta 
meins,  Jmta  rodya. 

29  Yah  saei  sandida  mik  mij?  mis  ist, 
ni  bilai}>  mis  ainamma  atta ;  unte  ik, 
Jiatei  leikai})  imma,  tauya  sinteiuo. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

fordam  (te  ic  no  eom  tina,  ac  ic  and  se 
feeder  cle  me  sende. 

1 7  And  on  eowre  se  is  awriten,  diet 
iwegra  manna  gewitnes  is  so]'. 

18  Ic  eom,  de  c_ydc  gcwitnesse  be  me 
sylfum,  and  se  faxler  de  me  sende,  cy)' 
gcwitnesse  be  me. 

19  Witodlice  hig  cwsedon  to  him,  II war 
is  din  frederl  Se  rieelend  him  and- 
swarode  and  cw.tJj,  Ne  cuniie  ge  me,  ne 
minne  faeder  ;  gyf  ge  me  cudon,  Aven  is 
dset  ge  cudon  minne  fseder. 

20  t){is  AA'ord  he  spree  a;t  ceap-sceamele, 

;  and  nan  man  hyne  ne  nam, 

fordam  de  hys  tid  ne  com  da  gyt. 

2 1  Witodlice  eft  se  Hselond  cw«J)  to 
him,'''  Ic  fare,  and  ge  me  seca)',  and  ge 
swelta]?  on  eowre  synne ;  ne  mage  ge 
cuman,  dyder  ic  fare. 

22  Da  cwcedon  da  ludeas,  Cwede  ge 
ofslyhj)  he  hine  sylfne,  fordam  he  seg)', 
Ge  ne  magon  cuman,  dyder  ic  fare  1 

23  Dil  cwse|)  he  to  him,  Ge  synd  nyd- 
ane,  and  ic  eom  ufane  ;  ge  synd  of 
disum  middan-earde,  ic  ne  eom  of  disuni 
middan-earde. 

24  Ic  eow  ssede,  Dfet  ge  swelta})  on 
eowrum  synnum  ;  gif  ge  ne  gelj^fa})  divt 
ic  hit  sy,  ge  swelta])  on  eoAA-re  synne. 

25  Da  CAA^cedon  hi  to  him,  IlAA'a3t  eart 
dii  1  Se  Hselend  CAV£e)>  to  him,  Ic  eom 
fruma,  de  to  eoAV  sprece. 

26  Ic  hsebbe  fela  be  eow  to  sprecanne, 
and  to  demanne,  ac  se  de  me  sende  is 
sojjfsest ;  and  ic  sprece  on  middan-earde 
da  J)ing,  de  ic  set  him  gehyrde. 

27  And  hig  ne  undergeton,  dset  he 
tealde  him  God  to  fa^der. 

28  Se  Hsclend  cwsejj  to  him,  Donne 
ge  mannes  sunu  up-ahebba)),  donne  ge- 
cnawe  ge,  doet  ic  hit  eom,  and  ic  ne  do 
nan  J)ing  of  me  sylfum  ;  ac  ic  sprece 
das  ]>ing,  SAva  fa^der  me  leerde. 

29  And  se  de  me  sende  is  mid  me,  and 
he  ne  forlset  me  anne  ;  fordam  de  ic  Avyrce 
symle  da  J)ing,  de  him  synd  gecweme. 


VIII.  17-29-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

for  I  ain  not  ulooiic,  but  I  and  tlic  fjiilir 
that  sentc  nic. 

17  Anil  iu  5oure  lawc  it  is  writun,  for 
the  witnessing  of  twci  men  is  trcwo. 

:S  I  am,  that  bore  witnessing  of  my 
silf,  and  the  fadir  that  sente  mo,  bcrith 
witnessing  of  me. 

19  Thcrt'ore  thei  seiden  to  him,  AVlier 
is  thi  fiulir  ?  Jliesn  answeride,  Nethor 
;e  witen"  me,  netlier  5c  witen  my  failir ; 
if  56  wisten  me,  peraueuturc  and  5c 
schnUlen  witc  my  fader. 

20  Jhesu  spak  tlies  wordis  in  the  tre- 
serie,  techinge  in  the  temple  ;  and  no 
man  took  him,  for  his  onr  cam  not  ^It. 

21  Therfore  eft  Jhcsn  scide  to  hem, 
Lo !  I  go,  and  5e  schulen  seche  me,  and 
;e  schnlen  dove  in  5onre  synne  ;  wliidur 
I  go,  5e  mown  not  eome. 

22  Therfore  the  Jewis  seiden,  Wlicr  he 
schal  sle  him  silf,  for  he  seith,  Whidur  I 
go,  56  mown  not  come  1 

23  And  he  seide  to  hem,  je  ben  of 
bynothe,  I  am  of  abone  ;  ^e  ben  of  this 
world,  I  am  not  of  this  world. 

24  Therfore  I  seide  to  50U,  For  50 
schulen  dye  in  5oure  synnes  ;  forsothe 
if  56  schulen  not  bilcne  for  I  am,  5e 
schulen  deye  in  50ure  synne. 

25  Therfore  thei  seiden  to  him,  AVho 
art  thou  ?  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  The  bi- 
gynnyng,^  which  and  spcke  to  50U. 

26  I  haue  many  thingis  for  to  sj)oke, 
and  dome  of  50U,  but  he  that  sente  me 
is  sothfast ;  and  I  speke  in  the  world 
thes  thingis,  that  I  herde  of  him. 

27  And  thei  kuewcn  not,  for  he  scide 
his  fadir  God. 

28  Tlierfore Jhesu  seith  tohem,"\V]ianne 
;c  ban  reysid  mannis  sone,  thaniie  ;e 
schulen  knowe,  for  I  am,  and  of  my  silf 
I  do  no  thing  ;  but  as  my  fadir  taU5tc 
me,  I  speke  thes  thingis. 

29  And  he  that  sentc  mc  is  with  me, 
and  lefte  not  me  aloone ;  for  I  do  enere 
tho  thingis,  tluit  ben  plesaunt  to  him. 


TYXDALE,  J. -,26. 


41)1 


ment  true,  for  I  am  not  a  lone,  bntt  I 
and  my  father  that  sent  mo. 

17  Itt  ys  also  written  in  yonre  lawe, 
that  the  testimony  of  two  men  ys  true. 

18  I  am  won,  that  bcare  witness  off  my 
sylfe,  and  my  father  that  sent  n)o,  bearotU 
witnes  off  me. 

19  Then  sayde  they  vnto  hym,  AVhere 
is  thy  father  1  Jesus  answered,  Yc 
nether  knowe  me,  nor  yet  my  father; 
yfl:'  ye  had  knowcn  me,  yc  shulde  have 
knowen  my  father  alsoo. 

20  Tiiese  wordes  spake  Jesus  in  tho 
tresury,  as  he  taught  in  tlie  temple ; 
and  no  man  layde  hondes  on  hym,  for 
hys  tyme  Avas  nott  yett  come. 

21  Then  sayde  Jesus  agayiie  vnto  them, 
I  goo  my  waye,  and  ye  shall  sekc  me, 
and  shall  deye  iu  ynurc  synnes;  whither 
I  goo,  thitlier  can  ye  not  come. 

22  Then  spake  the  lewes,  Wyll  he  kyll 
him  sylfe,  be  cause  he  sayth,  Whither  I 
goo,  thither  can  ye  not  come  ? 

23  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Ye  are 
from  beneth,  I  am  from  above  ;  ye  are 
of  this  woride,  I  am  nott  oft"  thys 
worlde. 

24  I  sayde  therfore  vnto  you,  That  ye 
shall  deye  in  yonre  synnes  ;  for  except 
ye  beleve  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  deye  in 
j'oure  synnes. 

25  Then  sayde  they  vnto  hym,  Who 
arte  thou  ?  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them, 
Even  the  very  same  thynge,  that  I  saye 
vnto  you. 

26  I  have  nnmy  thynges  to  saye,  and 
to  iudge  of  you,  but  he  that  sent  me  is 
true ;  and  I  speake  iu  the  worlde  those 
thynges,  whych  I  have  herde  of  hym. 

27  Tliey  vnderstode  not,  that  he  spake 
of  his  father. 

28  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  them,  Wiieii 
ye  have  lift  vj)pe  an  bye  the  sonne  off 
man,  then  shall  ye  knowe,  that  I  am  he, 
and  thatt  I  do  nothynge  o(f  my  silfe  ; 
butt  as  my  father  liath  taught  me,  even 
soo  I  speake. 

29  And  he  that  sent  me  ys  with  me, 
my  father  hath  nott  lefte  me  alone  ;  for 
I  do  alwayc.s  those  thynges,  that  please 
him. 


492 


GOTHIC,  360. 


30  pata  imnia  rodyandln,  managai  ga- 
Uiubidedim  imma. 

31  panuh  qaj)  lesus  du  ])aim  galaub- 
yaiidam  sis  ludaium,  Yabai  yus  gastaiidi)) 
inwaurda  lueinaiiuiia,  bi  suuyai  sipouyos 
meinai  siyu]5  ; 

32  Yah  ufkunnail)  sunya,  yah  so  sunya 
friyans  izwis  briggi[>. 

33  Andhofuu  iimna,  Fraiw  Abrahamis 
siyum,  yah  ni  maunhun  skalkinodedum 
aiw  whanhun  ;  Avhaiwa  Jju  qij^is,  patei 
friyai  waii'l'ij) '? 

34  Audhof  im  iiesus,  Amen,  amen, 
qij'a  izwis,  j'atei  whazuh  saei  tauyi))  fra- 
waurht,  skalks  ist  frawaurlitai. 

35  Sah  })an  skalks  ni  wisip  in  garda, 
du  aiwa,  sunus  wisij?  du  aiwa. 

36  Yabai  nu  sunus  izwis  friyans  hriggijj, 
bi  sunyai  friyai  siyujj. 

37  Wait  l^atei  fraiw  Abrahamis  siyu]>, 
akei  sokci[>  mis  usqiraan,  unte  waurd 
mein  ni  gamot  in  izwis. 

38  Ik  ]atei  gasawli  at  attin  meinamma 
rodya  ;  yah  yus,  j-atei  hausideduj)  fram 
attin  izwaramma,  tauyij\ 

39  Andhofuu,  yah  qe);un  du  imma, 
Atta  unsar  Abraham  ist.  Qa])  im  lesus, 
i\>  barna  Abrahamis  wesei)>,  waurstwa 
Abrahamis  tawidedei|>. 

40  I|>  nu  sokei)?  mik  usqiman,  mannan 
izei  sunya  izwis  rodida,  j:oei  hausida 
fram  Gu|)a  ;  jiatuh  Abraham  ni  tawida. 

41  Yus  tauyi[)  toya  attins  izwaris. 
panuh  qe}>un  imma,  Weis  us  horinassau 
ni  siyum  gabauranai ;  ainana  attan  aig- 
«m,  Guj). 

42  Qa|i  du  im  lesus,  Yabai  GuJ)  atta 
izwar  wesi,  friodedei)^  f^au  mik  ;  unte  ik 
fram  Gu];a  urrann,  yah  qam  ;  Jiih  |>an 
auk  fram  mis  silbin  ni  qam,  ak  is  mik 
insandida. 

43  Duwlie  majslein  meina  ni  kunnu|)  ? 
uute  ni  maguj;  haus}'an  waurd  mein. 

44  Yus  us  attin,  diabauhui,  siyu}j,  yah 
histuns  jjis  attins  izwaris  wileij)  tauyan. 
Yains  manamaurj^rya  was  fram  frum- 
istya,  yah  in  sunyai  ni  gastoj;  ;  unte 
nist  sunya  in  imma.     pan  rodei])  hugii, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

30  Da  he  das  })ing  spraec,  manega  ge- 
lyfdon  on  bine.''' 

31  Witodlice  se  Hgelend  c\vse]>  to  dam 
ludeum,  de  him  gelyfdon,  Gif  ge  wunia)) 
on  minre  spsece,  soj^hce  ge  beo})  mine 
leorning-cnihtas ; 

32  And  ge  oncnjiwa}?  sojjfsestnysse,  and 
s5|)fa?stnes  eow  alyst. 

33  Da  andswarodon  hi  him  and  cwsed- 
on.  We  synd  Abraliames  cynnes,  and  ne 
I'eowedon  we  nanum  men  nsefre  ;  humeta 
cwyst  dii,  Ge  beo})  frige  1 

34  Se  Ha?lend  him  andswarode  and 
cwajjj,  S5j),  ic  eow  secge,  daet  selc  de 
synne  wyrcj),  is  daere  synne  })eow. 

35  Witodlice  se  ];eow  ne  wuna])  on 
liiise,  on  ecnesse,  se  sunu  wunajj  on 
ecnesse. 

36  Gif  se  sunu  eow  alyst,  ge  beob  s5j)- 
lice  frige. 

37  Ic  wat  dset  ge  synd  Abrahames 
beam,  ac  ge  secal'  me  to  ofsleanne,  for- 
dam  min  spare  ne  wunajj  on  eow. 

38  Ic  sprece  dset,  de  ic  mid  feeder  ge- 
seah  ;  and  ge  duj?  da  l>ing,  de  ge  mid 
eowrum  fyeder  gesawon. 

39  Da  andswarodon  liig,  and  cwaedon 
to  him,  Abraliam  is  ure  fsfider.  Da  cwsejj 
se  Hselend  to  him,  Gif  ge  Abrahames 
beai'n  synd,  wyrca]?  Abrahames  weorc. 

40  Nu  ge  seca))  me  to  ofsleanne,  done 
man  de  eow  ssede  sol^fsestnesse,  da  de  ic 
gehyrde  of  Gode ;  ne  dyde  Abraham 
swa. 

41  Ge  W3'rca]j  eoAvres  feeder  weorc. 
Hig  cwsedon  witodlice  to  him,  Ne  synd 
we  of  forhgere  acennede  ;  we  habba]? 
anne,  God,  to  feeder. 

42  Witodlice  se  Hselend  cwse})  to  him 
Gif  God  wsere  eower  feeder,  witodlice  ge 
lufedon  me  ;  ic  com  of  Gode  ;  ne  com 
ic  na  fram  me  sylfum,  ac  he  me  sende. 

43  Hwi  ne  gecnawe  ge  mine  sprsece? 
[fordam  de  ge  ne  magon  gehyran  mine 
spsece.]''' 

44  Ge  synd  deofles  beam,  and  ge  willa]? 
wyrcan  eowres  fieder  willan.  He  wfes 
fram  frym))e  man-slaga,  and  he  ne  wun- 
ode  on  sojifsestnesse  ;  fordam  de  sofjftest- 
nes  nis  on  him.     Donne  he  sprycjj  leas- 


YIII.  30-44]  WVCLIFFE,  1389. 

30  Him  spckincjc  tlies  tliingis,  many 
men  bilouetlen  in  to  him. 

31  Tlieifore  .Iliesu  seiile  to  tlic  Jcwis, 
that  bilt'ueilcn  in  to  him,  If  je  schulen 
Uwelle  in  niy  word,  vcrili  36  schnlcn  be 
my  dis(.'i|)lis  ; 

32  Anil  50  schulen  knowc  the  treuthc, 
ami  tlie  treuthe  scluil  tlelyuei'c  ;ou. 

^"l  'rherfore  the  Jewis  answeriden  to 
him,  We  ben  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and 
ti)  no  man  we  scruyden  cuere ;  liou  seist 
thou,  5e  schulen  be  free  1 

34  Jhcsu  answeride  to  hem,  Treuli, 
tieuli,  1  seie  to  50U,  for  cch  man  that 
doth  synne,  is  the  seruaunt  of  synne. 

35  Sothli  the  seruaunt  dwellith  not  in 
the  hous,  into  withouten  ende,  the  soae 
dwellith  into  withouten  ende. 

36  Thcrfor  if  the  sone  schal  delyucre 
50U,  vcrili  5e  schulen  be  free. 

37  I  woot  for  5e  ben  Abrahams  sones, 
but  ;e  scken  for  to  sle  me,  for  my  word 
takith  not  in  50U. 

38  And  I  speke  tho  thingi.-^,  that  I  sy5 
at  my  fadir  ;  and  5e  dou  tho  thingis, 
that  ^e  syjen  at  ^oure  fadir. 

39  Thei  answeriden,  and  seiden  to  hira, 
Abraham  is  oure  fadir.  Jhesu  seith  to 
hem,  If  5e  ben  the  soncs  of  Abraham, 
do  56  the  werkis  ot  Abi*aham. 

40  Sothli  now  5e  seken  to  sle  me,  a 
man  that  haue  spoken  to  50U  treuthe, 
that  I  herde  of  God  ;  Abraham  dide  not 
this  thing. 

4 1  5e  don  the  workis  of  5oure  fadir. 
And  so  thci  seiden  to  him.  We  ben  not 
born  of  fornycacioun  ;  we  han  o  fadir, 
God. 

42  Therfore  Jhesu  seide  to  hem,  If 
God  were  50ure  fadir,  sothli  50  schulden 
loue  me  ;  forsothe  I  i)i-oeedide+  of  God, 
and  cam  ;  nether  sothli  I  cam  of  my 
silf,  but  he  seute  me. 

43  Whi  knowcn  3c  not  my  speche  ?  for 
je  mown  not  heere  my  word. 

44  5e  ben  of  the  fadir,  the  deuel,  and 
3e  wolen  do  the  desyris  of  3oure  fadir. 
He  was  a  mansleere  fro  the  bigynnyng, 
and  in  treuthe  he  stood  not ;  for  treuthe 
is  not  iu  him.     "Whauuc  he  spckith  a 


TYNbALE,  1526. 


493 


30  As  lie  spake  these  wordes,  many 
beleved  on  hym. 

3 1  Then  sayde  Jesus  to  those  lewes, 
which  beleved  on  liym,  Yf  yc  continue 
in  my  sayinge,  then  are  yc  my  very 
disciples ; 

32  And  ye  shall  knowe  the  trueth, 
and  the  trueth  shall  make  you  free. 

33  They  answered  hym,  We  are  Abra- 
hams seede,  and  were  never  bonde  to 
eny  man ;  why  sayest  thou  then.  Ye 
shalbe  made  fre  1 

34  Jesus  answered  them,  Vercly,  verely, 
I  saye  vnto  you,  that  whosoever  com- 
raitteth  synne,  is  the  servaunt  of  synne. 

35  And  the  servaunt  abydeth  nott  in 
the  housse,  for  ever,  butt  the  sonne 
abydeth  ever. 

36  Yf  the  Sonne  therfore  shall  make 
you  fre,  then  are  ye  fre  in  dcde. 

37  I  knowe  that  ye  are  Abrahams  seed, 
butt  ye  seke  meanes  to  kyll  me,  be  cause 
my  sayinges  have  noo  place  in  you. 

38  I  speake,  that  I  have  seiie  wyth  my 
father  ;  and  ye  do  that,  whych  ye  have 
sene  wyth  youre  father. 

39  They  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Abraham  is  oure  father.  Jesus 
sayde  vnto  them,  Yf  ye  were  Abrahams 
children,  ye  wolde  do  the  dedes  of  Abra- 
ham. 

40  But  nowe  ye  goo  about  to  kill  me, 
a  man  that  have  tolde  you  the  truthe, 
which  I  have  hei'de  off  my  father ;  this 
did  not  Abraham. 

41  Ye  do  the  dedes  of  youre  father. 
Then  sayde  they  vnto  hym,  We  were 
nott  borne  of  fornicacion  ;  we  have  won 
fatlier,  that  is  God. 

42  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Yf  God 
w^ere  youre  father,  then  wolde  ye  have 
loved  me ;  for  I  procede  forthe,  and 
come  from  God ;  nether  cam  I  of  my 
sylfe,  butt  he  sent  me. 

43  Why  do  ye  nott  knowe  my  speache  ? 
be  cause  ye  cannot  abyde  the  heaiynge 
off  my  wordes. 

44  Ye  are  of  youre  father,  the  devyll, 
aiid  the  lustes  off  youre  father  ye  will 
folowe.  He  was  a  murtherer  from  the  be- 
gynnynge,  and  aboode  nott  in  the  trueth  ; 
be  cause  there  ys  noo  trueth  in  hym. 


494 


GOTHIC,  360. 


us    scinaim   vodeil> ;    uiite   liugnya   ist, 
yah  atta  is. 

45  lj>  ik  l^atei  sunya  rodida,  ui  ga- 
laubeij)  mis. 

46  Whas  izwara  gasakil'  niik  bi  fia- 
waurht  1  jjande  sunya  qij"a,  duwlie  ui 
galaubei})  mis  1 

4)  Sa  wisauds  us  Gul'a,  waurda  Gu})S 
hauscijj  ;  dupe  yus  ui  hauseijj,  vuite  us 
Gujja  ni  siyujj. 

48  Andhofun  }'an  |;ai  ludaieis,  yali 
<:ie|)un  du  imuia,  Niu  waila  qij;ani  Aveis, 
]?atei  Samareites  is  ])u,  yali  unluil|)0ii 
habais  1 

49  Andliof  lesus,  Ik  unlmljjon  ui  liaba, 
ak  swera  at  tan  uieiuaua^  yah  yus  uu- 
sweraij)  mik. 

50  Ik  ni  sokya  hauheiu  meina ;  ist, 
saei  sokei'p,  yah  stoyip). 

51  Amen,  amen,  qi|)a  I'zwis,  yabal  wlias 
waurd  mein  fastai]>,  dau])U  ui  gasaiwhi}) 
aiwa  dage. 

52  panuh  qe})uu  du  imma  jiai  ludaieis, 
Nu  ufkunjiedum,  [tatei  unliul})0n  habais. 
Abraham  gadau|5noda,  yah  praufeteis, 
yah  })U  qil'is,  Yabai  Avhas  mein  waurd 
fastaij  ui  kausyai  dauj;au  aiwa  dage. 

53  Ibai  J;u  maiza  'is  attin  uusaramma 
Abraliama,  saei  gadaujMioda,  yah  prau- 
feteis gadaujjuodedun  ;  whaua  j^uk  silbau 
tauyis  |;u  1 

54  Andhof  lesus,  Yabai  ik  hauhya  mik 
silbau,  so  hauheins  meina  ui  waihts  ist  ; 
i'st  atta  meius,  saei  haubeij)  mik,  j'anei 
JUS  (ii|'i)>,  l^atei  Gu|)  uusar  ist. 

55  Yah  ni  kuunu]>  ina,  i|'  ik  kaun  ina  ; 
yah  yabai  qej^yau  |iatei  ui  kunnyau  ina, 
siyau  galeiks  izwis  liugnya ;  ak  kaun 
iua,  yah  waurd  is  fasta. 

56  Abraham,  atta  izwar,  sifaida,  ei  ga- 
sewhi  dag  meinaua;  yah  gasawh,  yah 
faginoda. 

57  panuh  qejjun  ]>&[  ludaieis  du  imma, 
Fimftiguns  yere  nauh  ni  habais,  yah 
Abi-aliam  sawht  1 

58  Qa{)  im  lesus,  Amen,  amen,  qij^a 
izwis,  faur|)izei  Abraham  waur|'i,  im  ik. 

59  panuh  nemun  stainans,  ei  Avaurpeiua 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.    [St.  John 

uuga,  he  spiycj)  of  him  sylfnm  ;  torClam 
Cte  lie  is  leas,  and  his  fieder  eac. 

45  Witodlice  ge  ne  gelyfaj?  me,  forclam 
cte  ic  secge  eow  s6})f*stnesse.''' 

46  Hwylc  eower  ascuna])  me  for  svnne  1 
gif  ic  s6)j  secge,  hwl  ne  gelyfe  ge  me  1 

47  Se  de  is  cf  Gode,  gehyrp  Godes 
word  ;  foi'dig  ge  ne  geliyraj',  forttam  de 
ge  ne  synd  of  Gode. 

48  Witodlice  da  ludeas  andswaredon, 
and  cwEedon  to  him,  Hwl  ne  cwede  we 
wel,  dset  du  eart  Samaritanisc,  and  eart 
w6d  1 

49  Se  Ileelend  andswarode,  and  cwa^j', 
Ne  eom  ic  w6d,  ac  ic  arwurj)ige  minne 
f;eder,  and  ge  unarvvurjiedon  me. 

50  Witodlice  ne  sece  ic  min  wuldor  ; 
se  is,  de  sec|),  and  demjj. 

51  S6|i,  ic  secge  eow,  gifhwa  mine 
spra3ce  gehealt,  ne  gesyhj)  he  deaj)  nscfre. 

52  Da  cw*don  da  ludeas,  Nii  we 
witon,  dtet  dii  eart  w6d.  Abraham  wa>s 
dead,  and  da  witegan,  and  du  cwyst, 
Gif  hwa  mine  sprsece  gehealt,  ne  \n]>  he 
UEufie  dead. 

53  Cwyst  dii  dset  dii  sy  mserra  donne 
lire  f^der  Abraham,  se  wses  dead,  and 
da  witegan  Wccron  deade ;  hwajt  ])inc}) 
de  dret  dii  sy  ? 

54  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  Gif  ic 
wuldrige  me  sylfiie,  nis  min  wuldor 
naht ;  min  fgeder  is,  de  me  wuldraj),  be 
dam  ge  cwedaj),  djet  he  sy  lire  God. 

55  And  ge  ne  ciidon  bine,  ic  hine  cann; 
and  gif  ic  secge  dret  ic  hine  ne  cunne,  ic 
beo  leas  and  eow  gelic ;  ac  ic  hyne  cann, 
and  ic  liealde  his  sprccce. 

56  Abraham,  eower  feeder,  geblissode, 
d;et  he  gesawe  minne  dteg ;  and  he  ge- 
scali,  and  geblissode. 

57  Da  ludeas  cwsedon  to  him,  Gyt  dil 
ne  eart  fiftig  wintre,  and  gesawe  dii 
Abraham  ] 

58  Se  Hselend  cwre];  to  him,  Ic  wses, 
serdain  de  Abraham  wses. 

59  Hig  namon  stanas,  to  dam  daet  hig 


VIII.  45-59-]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

lesini^e.  lie  spokith  oF  his  owiie  thingis  ; 
for  he  is  u  lyioiv,  aiul  failir  ui  it. 

45  Sothcli  for  I  scyc  trcuthc,  5c  biloucu 
not  to  inc. 

46  Who  of  5011  schiil  rcjjroue  111c  of 
syune  ?  if  I  soio  trcuthc,  whi  biloucu  3c 
not  to  nic  1 

47  He  that  is  of  God,  hceiMth  the 
cordis  of  God  ;  thcrfore  50  hcereu  not, 
for  5c  ben  not  of  God. 

48  Tliorforo  tlic  Jewis  answcridcn,  and 
seidcn,  Whcr  we  scyu  not  wcl,  for  thou 
art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  a  deuel  1 

49  Jhcsu  answcridc,  and  scidc,  I  liauc 
not  a  deuci,  but  I  honoure  my  fadir, 
and  50  han  vnlionourid  mc. 

50  Forsothe  I  sekc  not  my  glorie ; 
thcr  is,  that  sckith,  and  demeth. 

51  Treuli,  treuli,  I  scie  to  50U,  if  ony 
man  schal  kcpe  my  word,  he  schal  not 
se^  dceth  in  to  with  outen  ende. 

52  Thcrfor  the  Jewis  seidcn,  j^ow  we 
han  knowcn,  for  thou  hast  a  dcuel. 
Abraham  is  deed,  and  the  j)rophetis, 
and  tliou  seist,  If  ony  man  sclial  kepe 
my  word,  he  schal  not  taaste  dceth  iu 
to  with  outen  ende. 

53  AVher  thou  ert  more  tlian  oure  fadir 
Abraluim,  that  is  deed,  and  the  jirophetis 
ben  deede  ;  whom  makist  thou  thi  silf  ? 

54  Jliesu  answcridc,  If  I  glorifie  ray 
silf,  my  glorie  is  nojt ;  my  fadir  is, 
that  glorificth  nae,  whom  30  seyn,  for  he 
is  3oure  God. 

55  And  50  han  not  knowcn  him,  for- 
soth  I  haue  knowe  him  ;  and  if  I  schal 
seye  for  I  woot  not  him,  I  shal  be  a 
lyere  lyk  to  30U  j  but  I  woot  him,  and 
I  kepe  his  word. 

56  Abraham,  5oure  fader,  ful  out  ioyede, 
that  he  schulde  so  my  day  ;  and  he  sy3, 
and  he  ioyede. 

57  Thcrfore  the  Jewis  scyden  to  him, 
Thou  hast  not  3it  fifty  3eer,  and  hast 
thou  seyn  Abraham  1 

58  Therfore  Jhcsu  scide  to  hem,  Treuli, 
treuli,  I  seye  to  30U,  bifore  that  Abraham 
was  maad,  I  am. 

59  Thcrfore  thei  token  stoones,  that 


TYNDALK,  1.126. 


'If)  5 


AVhcn  he  spoakcth  a  lye,  tlicu  spcakctli 
he  oil"  hys  awne  ;  fur  he  ys  u  lyar,  aiul 
the  father  thcrof. 

45  And  bi>  cause  I  tell  you  tlic  tructli, 
thcrfore  bclcve  ye  nott  me. 

46  "Which  of  you  can  rebuke  me  oil 
synne  1  yf  I  say  the  trueth,  why  do  not 
ye  bcleve  me  1 

47  lie  that  is  of  God,  hearcth  Goddcs 
wordcs ;  ye  therfore  heare  them  not,  be 
cause  yc  are  nott  of  God. 

48  Then  answered  the  Icwes,  and  saydc 
vnto  hym,  Save  we  nott  well,  that  thou 
arte  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  the  dcvyin 

49  Jesus  answered,  I  liavc  not  the 
devyll,  butt  I  lioiiour  my  father,  and  yc 
have  dishonoured  me. 

50  I  seke  nott  myne  awne  prayse  ; 
there  is  won,  that  seketli  it,  and  iudgetli. 

51  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  yf 
a  man  kepe  my  sayinges,  he  shall  never 
se  dceth. 

52  Then  sade  the  lewes  to  hym,  Nowe 
knowe  we,  that  thou  hast  the  dcvyll. 
Abraham  is  deed,  and  also  the  p»ro  • 
phcttcs,  and  yctt  thou  sayest,  Yf  a  man 
kepe  my  sayiuge,  he  shall  never  tast 
deeth. 

53  Arte  thou  greater  then  ourc  father 
Abraham,  which  is  deed,  and  the  pi'o- 
])hettes  arc  deed ;  whomc  makcst  thou 
thy  silfe  ? 

54  Jesus  answered,  Yf  I  prayse  my 
silfc,  my  pi'ayse  is  nothyngc  worth  ;  hit 
is  my  father,  that  prayscth  mc,  whicli 
ye  saye,  is  youre  God. 

55  And  yet  have  ye  not  knowcn  hym, 
but  I  knowe  hym  ;  and  yf  I  shulde  saye 
I  knowe  hym  nott,  I  shulde  be  a  lyare 
lyke  vnto  you ;  but  I  knowe  hym,  and 
kcpe  his  sayinge. 

56  Youre  father,  Abraham,  was  glad 
to  se  my  daye ;  and  he  sawe  it,  and 
reioysed. 

57  Then  sayde  the  Icwes  vnto  hym, 
Thou  arte  not  yet  .1.  yere  olde,  and  hast 
thou  seuc  Abraham  1 

58  Jesus  sayd  vnto  them,  Verely,  verely, 
I  say  vnto  you,  yer  Abraham  was,  I  am. 

59  Then  toke  they  vppe  stones,  to  caste 


4il6 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ana  'iiia  ;  i|>  lesus  ];an  gafalh  sik,  yali 
usiddya  us  alli,  uslei|'aiids  pairli  inidyans 
iiis,  yah  wliarboda  swa. 


Chap.  IX.  i  Yah  Jjaivligaggands, 
gaumida  mann  bliudamma  us  gabaurjjai. 

2  paruh  frehun  ina  siponyos  is  qil^and- 
ans,  Eabbei,  whas  frawaurhta,  sau,  J)au 
fiidrein  is,  ei  bhnds  gabauraus  war)>  1 

3  Andhof  iiesus,  Nih  sa  frawaurhta, 
nib  fadreiu  is  ;  ak  ei  bairhta  waurj^eina 
waurstwa  Gujis  ana  imma. 

4  Ik  skal  Avaurkyan  waurstwa  |)is  sand- 
yandins  niik,  unte  dags  ist  ;  qiniijj  nahts, 
jjanei  ni  manna  mag  waurkyan. 

5  pan  in  {^amina  fairwhau  im,  liuhajj 
ini  ))is  fairwhaus. 

6  pata  qijiands,  gaspaiw  dala)?,  yah  ga- 
waurhta  fani  us  Jianinia  spaiskuldra,  yah 
gasmait  imma  ana  augona  Jjata  fani 
Jiamma  blindin, 

7  Yah  qa()  du  imma,  Gagg,  )>\vahan  in 
swumfsl  fcjiloamis,  Jjatei  gaskeiryada,  In- 
sandijjs.  Galaij),  yah  af))Woh,  yah  qam 
saiwhands. 

8  panuh  garaznans,  yah  Jjai  saiwhand- 
ans  ina  faur))is,  jjatei  is  bidagwa  was, 
qe})un,  Niu  sa  ist,  saei  sat,  aihtronds? 

9  Sumaih  qejmn,  patei  sa  ist  ;  sumaih, 
patei  galeiks  J^amma  ist.  Ij)  is  qa}>, 
patei  ik  im. 

10  panuh  qe])un  du  imma,  Whaiwa 
ushdvuodedun  J)us  Jjo  augona  1 

1 1  Andhof  yains  yah  qap,  Manna  liait- 
ans  lesus,  fani  gawaurhta,  yah  bismait 
mis  augona,  yah  qa]?  mis,  Gagg,  aff)Avah- 
an  in  Jjata  swumfsl  Siloamis  ;  'i\>  ik  ga- 
\a\]>,  yah  bij^wahands,  ussawh. 

1 2  Qejjun  l^an  du  imma,  Whar  ist  sa  1 
1]>  is  qa}),  Ni  wait. 

13  Gatiuhand  ina  du  Fareisaium  J^ana 
saei  was  blinds. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

woldon   hine  torfian  ;    se  Hselend  hine 
bediglode,  and  eude  of  dam  temple,  .  . 


Chap.  IX.  +1  Da  se  Hselend  for,  da 
geseah  he  anne  man  de  W£es  bhnd  ge- 
boren. 

2  And  liis  leorning-cnihtas  hine  acsodon 
and  cwccdon,  Lareow,  hwset  syngode, 
des,  odde  his  magas,  dset  he  wsere  blind 
geboren  1 

3  Se  Hselend  andswarode  and  cwse]>, 
Ne  syngode  he,  ne  his  magas  ;  ac  dset 
Godes  weorc  weere  geswutelod  on  him. 

4  Me  gebyra])  to  wyrcanne  dses  weorc 
de  me  sende,  da  hwile  de  hit  dfeg  is ; 
niht  cymji,  donne  nan  man  Avyrcan  ne 
maeg. 

5  Ic  eom  middan-eardes  leoht,  da  hwile 
de  ic  on  middan-earde  eom. 

6  Da  he  das  )jing  ssede,  da  spsette  he 
on  da  eorjjan,  and  worhte  feim  of  his 
ppatle,  and  smyrede  mid  dam  fenne  ofer 
his  eagan, 

7  And  cwpej)  to  him,  Ga,  and  jnveah  de 

on  Syloes  mere, He  f5r,  and 

]jw6h  hine,  and  com  geseonde 


8  Witodlice  his  neah-geburas,  and  da 
de  hine  gesawon,  da  he  wsedla  wses, 
cwaedon,  Hu  nis  dis  se,  de  sset,  and 
wiedlode  1 

9  Sume  cwaedon.  He  hyt  is  ;  sume 
cwaedon,  Nese,  ac  is  him  gelic.  He 
cwsep  s6l)lice,  Ic  hit  eom. 

10  Da  cwsedon  hig  to  him,  Hu  wseron 
dine  eagan  ge-openede  1 

1 1  He  andswarode  and  cwsej),  Se  man, 
de  is  genemned  Hselend,  worhte  fenn, 
and  smyrede  mine  eagan,  and  cwsej)  to 
me,  Ga,  to  Syloes  mere,  and  ))weah  de ; 
and  ic  code,  and  jjwch  me,  and  geseah. 

12  Da  cwsedon  hig  to  him,  Hwar  is 
he  1  Da  cwsejj  he,  Ic  nat. 

13  Hig  Iseddon  to  dam  Phariseon  done 

dc  dar  blind  wees. 


IX.  I-I3.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

tliei  scliulden  caste  in  to  liiin  ;  sotlili 
Jliesu  hiddc  him,  ami  wente  out  of  the 
tcinplo 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


497 


CiiAP.  IX.      I  And    Jhosu    passinge, 
sy5  a  man  Itlyud  fro  the  hirtlie. 

2  And  liis  disciplis  axidcn  him,  riaby,''' 
who  synncde,  tliis  man,  or  his  fadir  and 
modir,  that  ho  schiikle  be  born  blynd  1 

3  Jhosu  answeridc,  Nether  this  man 
synnede,  neither  his  fadir  and  moder  ; 
but  that  the  werkis  of  God  be  scliewid 
in  hym. 

4  It  bihoueth  me  for  to  worche  tlie 
werkis  of  him  that  sente  me,  tlie  while 
the  day  is  ;  the  ny5t  schal  come,  whanne 
no  man  may  worche. 

5  Hon  longe  I  am  in  the  workl,  I  ani 
the  li5t  of  the  world. 

6  Whanne  he  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
he  spette  in  to  erthe,  and  made  cley  of 
the  spotle,  and  leyde^  the  cley  on  his 
y5en, 

7  And  seide  to  him,  Go,  and  be  thou 
wayschcn  in  the  watir'''  of  Siloe,  that  is 
iutcrpretid.  Sent.  Therfore  he  wente, 
and  waischide,  and  cam  seynge. 

8  And  so  nei5eboris,  and  thei  that 
liadden  seyn  hym  byfore,  for  he  was  a 
beggei'e,  seiden,  Wher  this  is  not  he, 
that  sat,  and  beggide  ] 

9  Othere  men  seiden.  For  tliis  it  is ; 
othere  men  forsothe.  Nay,  but  it  is  a 
lyk  of  him.  Forsoth  he  seide,  For  I 
am. 

10  Therfore  thei  seiden  to  him.  How 
ben  thin  y5cn  openyd  to  thee  1 

1 1  He  answeride,  The  ilkc  man,  that 
is  seid  Jlicsu,  made  cley,  and  anoyntide 
myn  y^en,  and  seide  to  me,  Go  thou  to 
the  watir^  of  Siloe,  and  waische  ;  and  I 
wente,  and  waischide,  and  sy3. 

1 2  And  thei  seiden  to  liim,  Whcr  is 
hcl    He  seith,  I  woot  not. 

13  Thei  ledeu  him  that  was  blynd  to 
the  Pliarisces. 


at  hym  ;  but  Jesus  hid  hym  silfc,  and 
went  out  of  the  temple 


Chap.  IX.  i  And  as  Jesus  passed 
by,  he  sawe  a  man  which  was  blynde 
from  his  I)irtli. 

2  And  his  disciples  axed  hym,  sayinge, 
^Master,  who  did  synne,  this  man,  or  his 
father  and  mother,  that  he  was  borne 
blynde  1 

3  Jesus  answered.  Nether  this  man 
bathe  synned,  nor  yet  liis  father  and 
mother ;  but  that  the  workes  of  God 
shulde  be  shewed  on  hym. 

4  I  must  worke  the  workes  off  hym 
that  sent  me,  whill  it  is  daye  ;  the  nyght 
commeth,  when  no  man  can  worke. 

5  As  longe  as  I  am  in  the  woi-lde,  I  am 
the  light  of  the  worlde. 

6  As  soue  as  he  liad  thus  spoken,  lie 
spate  on  the  grounde,  and  made  claye 
of  the  spetle,  and  rubbed  the  claye  on 
the  eyes  off  the  blynde, 

7  And  sayde  vnto  hym.  Goo,  wesshe 
the  in  the  pole  of  Siloe,  Avhich  by  in 
terpretacion  signifieth,  Sent.  He  went 
liis  waye,  and  wesshed,  and  cam  agayne 
seinge. 

8  The  neghboures,  and  they  that  had 
sene  hym  before,  liowe  that  he  was  a 
begger,  sayde,  Is  not  this  he,  that  sate, 
and  begged  ? 

9  Some  sayde,  This  is  he ;  other  sayd, 
He  is  lyke  hym.  He  hym  silfe  sayde, 
I  am  even  he. 

10  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Howe  are 
thyne  eyes  oi)enned  then  1 

1 1  He  answered  and  sayde,  The  man, 
that  is  called  Jesus,  made  claye,  and 
anoynted  myne  eyes,  and  sayd  vnto 
me.  Goo  to  the  pole  Siloe,  and  wesshe  ; 
I  went,  and  wesshed,  and  reccaved  my 
sight. 

12  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  "Where  is  he  ? 
He  sayde,  I  camiot  tell. 

J  3  Then  brought  they  to  the  Phavises 
him  that  a  litcU  before  was  blynde. 
Kk 


498 


GOTHIC,  360. 


14  Wasuli  jjau  sabbato,  |jau  jjata  fani 
gawaurhta  lesiis,  yah  uslauk  imma 
augona. 

15  Aftra  Tpan  frchun  ina  yah  jai  Farei- 
saieis,  whaiwa  ussawh.  1J>  is  qa])  yah 
]  aim,  Fani  galagida  mis  ana  augona; 
yah  af|nvoh,  yah  saiwlia. 

16  Qe|)un  );au  snmai  Jjize  Faveisaie, 
Sa  manna  nist  fram  Gu|)a,  J'ande  sabbate 
daga  ni  witaij'.  Sumaih  qejjun,  Whaiwa 
rnag  manna  frawaurhts  swaleikos  taikn- 
ins  tauyan  1  Yah  missaqiss  war]?  mij) 
im. 

17  Qejninuh  du  [jamma  faur]>is  bh'ndiu 
aftra,  pu  wha  qil'is  bi  jjana,  ei  uslauk 
]ms  angonal  1]j  'is  qajnih,  patei  prau- 
ietus  ist. 

18  Ni  galaubidedun  ];an  ludaieis  bi 
i'na,  jiatei  Vs  blinds  wcsi,  yah  ussewhi, 
unte  atwopidedun  Jians  fadrein  is,  J)is 
iissaiwhandins. 

19  Yah  frehuu  ins,  qijjandans,  Sau  ist 
sa  sunus  izwar,  ])anei  yus  qi]>\\>,  })atei 
blinds  gabaurans  waur])!  1  whaiwa  nu 
saiwlii})'? 

20  Andhofun  )ian  im  }>ai  fadrein  is,  yah 
qe|5un,  Witum,  ))atei  sa  ist  sunus  unsar, 
3'ah  j-atei  blinds  gabaurans  warjj ; 

2  1  I})  whaiwa  nu  saiwhijj,  ni  witum, 
ai|)}3au  whas  uslauk  imma  )'o  augona, 
weis  ni  witum  ;  silba  uswahsans  ist,  ina 
fraihnij),  silba  bi  sik  rodyai. 


22  pata  qej>un  |)ai  fadrein  is,  unte 
ohtedun  sis  ludaiuns ;  yujsan  auk  ga- 
qefnm  sis  ludaieis,  ei  yabai  whas  ina 
andhaihaiti  Christu,  utana  swnagogais 
"wairjjai. 

23  DuhJ^e  |)ai  berusyos  is  qe])un,  patei 
uswahsans  ist,  silban  fraihni|). 

24  Atwopidedun  j^an  an);aramma  sinjja 
jjana  mannau,  saei  was  blinds,  yah  qe])un 
*lu  Ymma,  Gif  hauhein  Gujja ;  weis  wit- 
um, Jjatei  sa  manna  frawaurhts  ist. 

25  panuh  andhof  yains,  Yabai  fra- 
waurhts ist,  ik  ni  wait ;  |:at-ain  wait,  ei 
blinds  was,  i]>  nu  saiwha. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Joio 

14  Hit  wa3S  restc-dseg,  da  se  Hgelend 
worhte  cttet  fenn,  and  his  eagan  uutynde. 

15  Eft  tla  Pharisei  hyne  acsedon,  hu 
he  gesawe.  He  cwosj?  to  him.  He  dyde 
fenn  ofer  muie  eagan ;  and  ic  ];w6h,  and 
ic  geseo. 

I  6  Sume  (ta  Pharisei  cwcedon,  Nis  cles 
man  of  Gode,  de  reste-d«g  ne  hylt.  Sume 
cwsedon,  Hii  mjeg  synful  man  das  tacn 
wyrcan  1  And  hig  fliton  him  betweonan. 


17  Hig  cwsedon  eft  to  dam  blindan, 
Hwa^t  segst  du  be  dam,  de  diue  eagan 
untynde  1  He  c\\x]>,  He  is  witega. 

18  Ne  gelyfdon  da  ludeas  be  him,  da?t 
he  blind  wtere,  and  ges:'i\ve,  Berdam  de 
hig  clypodon  his  magas,  de  gesawon. 


19  And  iicsodon  hig,  and  cwsedon,  Is 
dis  eower  sunu,  de  ge  seega]?,  dtet  blind 
Avsere  ilcenned  1  hunieta  gesyh])  he  nu  1 

20  Hys  magas  him  andswaredon,  and 
cwEedon,  We  witon,  dset  des  ys  ure 
sunu,  and  dset  he  wa?s  blind  acenned  ; 

21  We  nyton,  humeta  he  nu  gesyliji, 
ne  hwa  his  eagan  untynde ;  acsiajj  hine 
sylfne,  ylde  he  hsefjj,  sprece  for  hine 
sylfne. 


22  His  magas  spreecon  das  jjing,  foi'- 
dam  de  hig  ondredou  da  ludeas ;  da 
gedihton  da  ludeas,  gif  hwa  Crist  and- 
ette  dset  he  wsere,  butan  hyra  gefer- 
rsedene. 

23  Fordam  cwsedon  his  magas,  He 
hfefj)  ylde,  acsiaj)  hine  sylfne. 

24  Da  clypedon  hig  eft  done  man,  de 
£er  blind  wtes,  and  cwsedon  to  him,  Sege 
Gode  wuldor ;  we  witon,  dset  he  is 
synful. 

25  And  he  cwsej?,  Gif  he  synful  is,  dfet 
ic  nat  ;  an  ))ing  ic  wat,  djet  ic  wa?s 
blind,  and  dset  ic  mi  geseo. 


IX.  14-^5]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

14  Forsotli  it  w;is  sabotli,  wliannc  Jhesu 
uukIc  cloy,  aiul  opciiydc  liis  y5cn. 

15  Eft  Pharisees  axidon  liiin,  how  he 
liadile  scyn.  Sothly  he  seidc  to  licni, 
Ho  puttide  to  luc  cloy  011  the  yjou  ; 
and  I  waischide,  and  I  se. 

16  Thcrfove  sunime  of  Pharisees  seiden, 
This  man  is  not  of  God,  for  he  kepith 
not  tlie  saboth,  Othorc  men  seyden,  How 
may  a  man  synncre  do  thcs  syngnysl^ 
And  dyuysioun  was  a  mung  honi. 

17  Tlicrfore  thel  seyn  cftsoonc  to  tlie 
l)lynd  man,  What  soist  thou  of  him, 
that  oponydc  thin  y;en  ?  Sothli  he  seide, 
For  he  is  a  prophete. 

18  Therfore  Jewis  bileueden  not  of 
him,  for  he  was  blynd,  and  hadde  seyn. 
til  thei  clepiden  his  fadir  and  modir, 
that  hadde  seyn. 

1 9  And  thei  axiden  hem,  seyinge.  Is 
this  5oure  sone,  whom  50  seyn,  for  lie  is 
born  blynd  1  liou  therfore  secth  he  now  1 

20  His  fadir  and  modir  answeriden  to 
hem,  and  seyden,  "We  witen,  for  tliis  is 
oure  sone,  and  for  he  is  born  blynd  ; 

2 1  Sothli  liow  he  seeth  now,  we  witen 
not,  or  who  openyde  his  y5en,  we  witen 
not ;  axe  56  him,  he  liatli  age,  speke  he 
of  him  silf. 


■J 2  His  fadir  and  modir  seiden  thes 
thingis,  for  thei  dredden  Jewis  ;  forsuth 
now  the  Jewis  hadden  conspirid,  that  if 
ony  man  knowlcchide  him  Crist,  be 
schulde  be  don  out  of  the  synagoge. 

23  Therfore  his  fadir  and  modir  seiden, 
For  he  hath  age,  axe  je  him. 

24  Therfore  cftsoonc  thei  clepiden  the 
man,  that  was  blynd,  and  seyden  to  him, 
3yue  thou  glorie  to  God  :  we  witen,  for 
this  man  is  a  synuer. 

25  Thei-fore  he  seide.  If  he  is  a  synner, 
I  woot  not ;  o  thing  I  woot,  for  whannc 
I  was  blynd,  now  I  se. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


401) 


14  Hit  was  the  saboth  daye,  when 
Jesus  made  the  clayo,  and  opened  his 
eyes. 

15  Then  agayne  the  Pliarisos  also  axed 
hym,  howe  he  had  reccaved  his  sight. 
He  sayde  vuto  them,  He  putt  claye  apou 
myne  eyes ;  and  I  wasshed,  and  I  se. 

16  Then  sayde  some  of  the  Pharises, 
This  man  is  not  of  God,  be  cause  he 
kepetli  not  the  saboth  daye  Other 
sayde,  Howe  can  a  man  that  is  a  synner 
do  suche  myraclos  ]  And  there  was 
stryfe  a  monge  them. 

17  Then  spake  they  vnto  the  blynde 
agayne,  What  sayst  thou  of  hym,  be 
cause  he  hath  opcnncd  thyue  eyes  ]  And 
he  sayd,  He  ys  a  prophet. 

18  The  lewes  did  nott  beleve  off  the 
felowe,  howe  that  he  was  blynde,  and 
had  receaved  hys  sight,  vntill  they  had 
called  the  father  and  mother  off  him, 
that  had  receaved  his  sight. 

19  And  they  axed  them,  saying,  Ys 
this  youre  sonne,  whome  ye  saye  Avas 
borne  blynde  ?  howe  doth  he  nowe  se 
then"? 

20  His  father  and  mother  answered 
them,  and  sayde.  We  wote  wele,  that 
this  is  oure  sonne,  and  that  he  was  borne- 
blynde ; 

2 1  Butt  by  what  meanes  he  nowe  seyth, 
that  can  we  nott  tell,  or  who  hath  open- 
ned  his  eyes,  can  we  nott  tell ;  he  is 
olde  ynough,  axe  hym,  lett  hym  answer 
for  hym  sylfe  off  thynges  that  pertayue 
to  hym  sylfe. 

22  Suche  wordes  spake  his  father  and 
mother,  be  cause  they  feared  the  lewes  ; 
for  the  lewes  had  consj)yred  all  redy, 
that  yff  ony  man  did  confesse  that  he 
was  Christ,  he  shulde  be  excommimicat 
out  of  the  simigoge. 

23  Therfore  sayde  his  father  and  mo- 
ther. He  is  olde  ynough,  axe  hym. 

24  Then  agayne  called  they  the  man, 
that  was  blynde,  and  sayd  vnto  hym, 
Geve  God  the  prayse ;  wc  knowe,  thatt 
thys  man  ys  a  synner. 

25  He  answered  and  sayde,  W^hither 
lie  be  a  synner  or  noo,  I  cannot  tell ; 
won  thynge  I  am  sure  off,  that  I  was 
blynde,  and  nowe  I  se. 

K  k  2 


500 


GOTHIC,  360. 


26  panuli  qejjuii  aftra,  Wlia  gatawida 
fus  ]  Avliaiwa  uslauk  |)us  augona  1 

27  Andhof  im,  Qa|^  I'zwis  yu,  yah  ni 
hausidedu)) ;  wha  afti'a  wilei^  hausyan  1 
ibai  yah  yus  wileij)  ]-amma  siponyos 
wair)'an  1 

28  panuh  hiiloun  imma,  yah  qe}mn,  pu 
is  siponeis  Jiamma ;  ij)  weis  jMose  sipon- 
yos siyum. 

29  Weis  witum,  jatei  du  Mose  rodida 
GuJ) ;  ijj  j'ana  ni  kimuum,  Avhajji'o  ist. 

30  Andhof  sa  manna,  yali  qa)?  du  im, 
Auk  in  J^amraa  sildaleik  ist,  ]:atei  yus  ni 
witu})  whajn'o  ist,  yah  uslauk  mis  aug- 
ona. 

31  Witumuh  }3an,  jiatei  Gu])  frawaurht- 
aim  ni  andhausei}?,  ak  yabai  whas  gujj- 
blostreis  ist,  yah  wilyan  is  tauyi}?,  J^am- 
ma  hausei}>. 

32  Fram  aiwa  ni  gahausi}'  was,  jjatei 
uslukijj  whas  augona  blindamma  ga- 
bauvanamma  ; 

33  Nih  wesi  sa  fram  Gu{)a,  ni  mahtedi 
tauyan  ni  waiht. 

34  Andhofun,  yah  qejjun  du  imma.  In 
frawaurhtim  |)U  gabaui-ans  warst  alls, 
yah  J>u  laiseis  unsis  1  Yah  uswaurpun 
imma  ut. 

35  Hausida  lesus,  )iatei  uswaurpun 
I'mma  ut ;  yah  bigat  ina,  qa])uh  du  im- 
ma, pu  gaulaubeis  du  sunau  Gu]>s  ] 

36  Andhof  yains,  yah  qa|j,  An  whas  ist, 
Frauya,  ei  galaubyau  du  imma  1 

37  Q^f'  i'fi^  imma  lesus,  Yah  gasawht 
ina,  yah  saei  rodeijj  mijj  jjus,  sa  ist. 

38  Ij)  is  qajjuh,  Galaubya,  Frauya. 
Yah  inwait  ina. 


39  Yali  qa}>  lesus,  Du  stauai,  ik  in 
|)amma  fairwhau  qam,  ei  Jjai  unsaiwhand- 
ans,  saiwhaina,  yah  ])ai  saiwhandans, 
blindai  wair}'aina. 

40  Yah  hausidedun  |)ize  Fareisaie 
sumai  |)ata,  ]jai  wisandans  mij)  imma, 
yah  qejiun  du  imma,  Ibai  yah  weis 
blindai  siyum  1 

41  Qa])  iin  lesus,  Ij?  blindai  weseij),  ni 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

26  Da  cwsedon  hig  to  him,  Hw£et  dyde 
he  de  1  \m  ontynde  he  dine  eagan  1 

27  He  andswarode  him  and  cwaej),  Ic 
eow  ssede  ser,  and  ge  gehyrdon  ;  hwi 
wylle  ge  hyt  eft  gehyran  1  cwede  ge 
wylle  ge  beon  his  leorning-cnilitas  1 

28  DI  wyrigdon  hig  hine,  and  cwsedon, 
Si  dii  his  leorning-cniht ;  we  synd 
IMoyses  leorning-cnilitas. 

29  We  Aviton,  Aset  God  spsec  wict  Moy- 
sen  ;  nyte  we,  hwanon  cJes  is. 

30  Se  man  andswarode,  and  cwfej)  to 
him,  D?et  is  wundorlic,  tl»t  ge  nyton 
hwanon  he  is,  and  he  untynde  mine 
eagan. 

3  r  AVe  witon  soj'lice,  djet  God  ne  ge- 
hyr]?  synfulle,  ac  gif  hwa  is  Gode  ge- 
coren,  and  his  willan  wyrcjj,  done  he 
gehyr)). 

32  Ne  gehyrde  we  nsefre  on  worukle, 
daet  0enig  ontynde  dses  eagan  de  wttre 
blind  geboren ; 

33  Ne  mihte  des  nan  )nng  don,  gif  he 
nsere  of  Gode. 

34  Hig  andswaredon,  and  cwsedon  to 
him,  Eall  du  eai't  on  synnum  geboren, 
and  du  Iccrst  us  ?  And  hig  drifon  hine 
lit. 

35  Da  se  Hselend  gehyrde,  dset  hig 
hyne  drifon  ut  :  da  cwse})  he  to  him,  da 
he  hine  gemitte,  Gelyfst  du  on  Godes 
sunu  1 

36  He  andswarode,  and  cwsel',  Hwylc 
is,  Drihten,  daet  ic  on  hine  gelyfe  ] 

37  And  se  Haelend  cwse})  to  him,  Du 
hine  gesawe,  and  se  de  wid  de  spryc)?, 
se  hit  is. 

38  Da  cw8e))  he,  Drihten,  ic  gelyfe. 
And  he  feoll  nydcr,  and  ge-eadmedde 
hyne. 

39  And  se  Hselend  cwse])  to  him,  Ic 
com  on  dysne  middan-eard,  to  demenne, 
dpet  da  sceolon  geseon,  de  ne  geseo|>, 
and  beon  blinde,  da  de  geseojj. 

40  Da  dset  gehyrdon  da  Pharisei,  de 
mid  him  wseron,  da  cwcedon  hig  to 
hym,  Cwyst  du  synd  we  blinde  1 

41  And  se  Hselend  cwsp])  to  him,  Gif 


IX.  -6-41.]  WYCLIFFE,  i  389. 

26  Tlicrfore  thei  seidcn  to  him,  AVliat 
il'ulc  he  to  thee  1  how  opeiiyde  he  thiu 
y5cu  1 

:"]  He  an'^wcriJe  to  hem,  I  se'ule  to 
5011  now,  and  ^e  herdcn  ;  what  wolen  50 
eftsoone  heere  1  wher  and  je  wolen  be 
niaad  his  (lisciplis] 

28  Theifore  thei  waridcn^  him,  and 
soiilen,  ]jc  thou  his  disciple  ;  we  ben 
disci[ilis  of  Moyscs. 

29  W'c  witen,  for  God  spak  to  ^foyscs  ; 
forsoth  we  Avitcn  no3t  this,  of  whcnnis 
he  is. 

30  The  ilke  man  answeride,  and  seide 
to  hem,  Forsoth  in  this  thinLf  is  wonder- 
ful, that  5e  witen  net  of  whenuis  he  is, 
and  he  hath  opened  myn  y^en. 

31  Sothli  we  witen,  for  God  heeritli 
nut  synncris,  but  if  ony  man  is  wor- 
shiper of  God,  and  doth  his  wille,  hym 
he  heerith. 

32  Fro  the  world  it  is  not  herd,  that 
(iny  man  opcuyde  the  y^eu  of  a  blynd 
born  man  ; 

33  No  but  this  were  of  God,  he  my5te 
not  do  ony  thing. 

34  Thei  answeriden,  and  seiden  to 
him.  Thou  art  al  boren  in  sj-nnes,  and 
techist  thou  vs]  And  thei  castiden  out 
liim. 

33  Jhesu  herde,  for  thei  han  cast  out 
him  ;  and  whanne  he  hadde  foundeu 
him,  he  seide  to  him,  Uileuest  tiiou  in 
to  the  sone  of  God  ] 

36  lie  answeride,  and  seide.  Lord,  who 
is  he,  that  I  bileue  in  to  him  ] 

37  And  Jhesu  seide  to  him.  And  thou 
hast  seyn  him,  and  he  it  is,  that  spekith 
with  thee. 

3X  And  he  seide.  Lord,  I  bileue.  And 
he  fallinge  doun,  worshipide  him. 

39  Therfore  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  I  cam 
in  to  this  world,  in  to  dom,  that  thei 
that  seen  not,  se,  and  thei  that  seen, 
be  maad  biynde. 

40  And  summe  of  the  Pharisees  herden, 
that  wereu  with  him,  and  thei  seiden  to 
him,  Wher  and  we  ben  biynde  ? 

41  Jhesu  seide  to   hem,  If  5e   weren 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


501 


26  Then  sayde  they  to  him  agayne, 
What  did  he  to  tlie  %  howe  opened  lie 
thyne  eyes  ? 

27  lie  answered  them,  I  tolde  you  yer- 
wliyle,  and  ye  did  nott  licare  ;  wherfore 
wolde  ye  hearc  ytt  agayne  1  ■\vyll  ye 
alsoo  be  hys  discij)lcs  1 

28  Tiicn  rated  they  hym,  and  sayde, 
Tiiou  arte  hys  disciple ;  we  are  Moses 
discii)lcs. 

29  We  arc  sure,  that  God  spake  wyth 
]\li)scs  ;  thys  felowe  we  knowe  not,  from 
whence  he  ys. 

30  The  man  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
them.  This  is  a  merveleous  thynge,  that 
ye  wote  nere  whence  he  is,  and  yet  hath 
he  opcnned  myne  eyes. 

31  We  knowe  wele  ynought,  that  God 
heareth  noo  synncrs,  but  yf  cny  man  be 
a  worshipper  of  God,  and  do  what  his 
will  is,  him  heareth  he. 

32  8cnce  the  worldc  began  was  it  nott 
herde,  that  eny  man  o|ienned  the  eyes 
oft'  won  that  was  borne  blind  ; 

33  If  this  man  Avere  not  of  God,  he 
coulde  have  done  noo  thynge. 

34  They  answei'ed,  and  sayd  vnto  him. 
Thou  arte  altogedder  borne  in  synne, 
and  dost  thou  teache  vs  1  And  they  cast 
hym  out. 

35  Jesus  herde,  that  they  had  excom- 
municate him  ;  and  as  sone  as  he  had 
founde  hym,  he  sayd  vnto  hym,  Doest 
thou  boleve  on  the  sonne  of  God  ] 

36  He  answered,  and  sayde.  And  who 
ys  yt,  Lorde,  that  1  myght  beleve  on 
hym  1 

37  And  Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym.  Thou 
hast  both  sene  hym,  and  he  it  is,  that 
talketh  with  the. 

38  And  he  sayde,  Lorde,  I  beleve. 
And  worshipped  hym. 

39  Jesus  sayde,  I  am  come  vnto  iudge- 
ment,  into  this  worldc,  that  they  which 
se  nott,  myght  se,  and  they  which  se, 
myght  be  made  biynde. 

40  And  some  oil  the  Pharises,  whych 
were  wyth  hym,  herde  these  wordcs, 
and  sayde  vnto  hym.  Are  we  then 
biynde  ] 

41  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Yf  ye  were 


502 


GOTHIC,  360. 


J'au  habaidedeijj  frawauvlitais  ;  'i\>  nu 
qijjij),  patei  gasaiwham,  eij^an  frawaurhts 
izwara  J)aix-liwisiJ). 


Chap.  X.  i  Amen,  amen,  qijiaizwis, 
saei  inn  ni  atgaggij'  {^airli  daur  in  gardan 
lambe,  ak  steigij?  alya})ro,  sail  bliftus  ist 
yah  waidedya. 

2  i\>  sa  inngaggands  Jiairh  daur,  liaird- 
eis  ist  lambe. 

3  pammuh  daurawards  usluki|),  yab  );o 
lamba  stibuai  is  bausyand,  yab  ]>o  swe- 
sona  lamba  baiti])  bi  namin,  yab  ustiubij? 

^-  .     .      . 

4  Yab  |)an  ]?o  swesona  ustmbi)?,  fam-a 

im  gaggi|',  yab  })0  lamba  ina  laistyand ; 
uute  kunnun  stibna  is. 

5  1]>  framaj)yana  ni  laistyand,  ak  Jiliub- 
and  faura  imma  ;  unte  ni  kunnun  \>\ze 
frama|jyane  stibna. 

6  po  gayukon  qaj)  im  lesus  ;  'i]>  yaiuai 
ni  fro|puu  wba  was  jmtei  rodida  du  im. 


7  panub  qa]>  aftra  du  im  lesus,  Amen, 
amen,  qi|ja  izwis,  ]?atei  ik  im  daur  |)ize 
lambe. 

8  AUai  swa  managai  swe  qemun,  ])iubos 
sind  yab  waidedyans,  akei  ni  bausidedun 
im  ]^o  lamba. 

9  Ik  im  )>ata  daur.  pairb  mik  yabai 
wbas  inngaggi]?,  ganisi}) ;  yab  inngaggi)), 
yab  utgaggijj,  yab  wiuya  bigitij). 

10  piubs  ni  qimi]),  nibai  ei  stilai,  yab 
ufsneij^ai,  yab  Iraqi  styai  ;  i]j  ik  qam,  ei 
libain  aigeina,  yab  managizo  aigeina. 

11  Ik  im  bairdeis  gods;  bairdeis  sa 
goda  saiwala  seina  lagyi})  faur  lamba. 

12  Ijj  asneis,  yab  saei  nist  bairdeis, 
|)izei  ni  sind  lamba,  swesa  gasaiwbijj 
wulf  qimandan,  yab  bileijji))  ]jaim  lambam, 
yab  ))liubi}) ;  yah  sa  wulfs  frawilwi]>  ]>o, 
yab  distabyij)  jjo  lamba. 

13  I|)  sa  asneis  af[)liuhi]>,  unte  asneis 


ANGLO-SAXOlSr,  995.     [St.  Jonic 

ge  blinde  wseron,  npefde  ge  nana  synne  ; 
mi  ge  secgajj,  dtet  ge  geseon,  dset  is 
eowre  syn. 


Chap.  X.  "''i  So)?,  ic  seege  eow,  so 
de  ne  gsejj  set  ctam  geate  into  sceapa 
falde,  ac  styb])  elles  ofer,  be  is  Jjeof  and 
sceaj^a. 

2  Se  cle  in-gse})  pet  dam  geate,  he  is 
sceapa  byrde. 

3  Da^ne  se  geat-weard  Ijet  in,  and  da 
sceap  gebyraj)  bis  stefne,  and  be  ncm}> 
bis  agene  sceap  be  naman,  and  Itet  big 
lit. 

4  And  donne  be  bis  agene  sceap  Iset 
lit,  be  gsejj  beforan  bim,  and  da  sceaj) 
him  fyliajj  ;  fordam  de  big  gecnawaj) 
bis  stefne. 

5  Ne  fyUa))  big  uncudum,  ac  fleo]?  fram 
bim  ;  fordam  de  big  ne  gecneowon  un- 
cudra  stefne. 

6  Dis  bigspell  se  Heelend  bim  ssede  ; 
big  nyston  hwait  be  sprpec  to  bim. 


7  Eft  se  Hselend  cwsejj  to  bim,  S6|>,  ic 
eow  secge,  ic  eom  sceapa  geat. 

8  Ealle  da  do  comon,  Avseron  J>eofas 
and  scea])an,  ac  da  sceap  big  ne  ge- 
hyrdon. 

9  Ic  eom  geat.  Swa  bwylc  swa  Jjurb 
me  gsep,  by)>  btil ;  and  gse]>  in,  and  ut, 
and  fint  laese. 

10  peof  ne  cymj>,  buton  dset  be  stele, 
and  sleti,  and  ford5  ;  ic  com,  to  dam 
dffit  big  babbon  lif,  and  babbon  genob.''' 

1 1  Ic  eom  god  byrde  ;  god  byrde  sylj> 
bis  lif  for  bis  sceapum. 

12  Se  byra,  se  de  nis  byrde,  and  se 
de  nab  da  sceap,  donne  be  done  wulf 
gesyb}>,  donne  flyb|)  be,  and  forlset  da 
sceap  ;  and  se  wulf  nimjj,  and  todrif|)  da 
sceap. 

13  Se  byra  flyb]?,   fordam  de  be  bij) 


X.  1-13.']  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

Itlyiule,  5c  sclmlilcn  not  liaue  symic  ; 
liiit  now  ;e  soyn,  For  wo  seen,  jourc 
svnno  dwi'Ilitli. 


TYXDALE,  T526. 


u03 


CiiAP.  X.  I  Treiili,  trculi,  I  scie  to 
;ou,  he  tluit  conicth  not  in  by  tlic  dorc 
iu  to  the  fold  of  the  schcep,  but  sti5eth 
v])  by  another  Aveye,  is  nyjt  thcf  uud 
day  thef. 

2  Forsothe  he  that  entrith  by  the  dore, 
is  the  schepherdc  of  the  schcep. 

3  To  tliis  the  porter  openeth,  and  tlic 
scheep  hecren  his  vols,  and  he  clepith 
Ills  owne  scheep  by  name,  and  ledith 
out  lieni. 

4  And  wliannc  lie  hath  sent  out  his 
owne  scheep,  he  t^oth  bifore  hem,  and 
the  scheep  suweii  him;  for  thei  kuowcn 
his  vois. 

5  Sothli  thci  suwen  not  an  alien,  but 
fleeu  fro  him  ;  for  thei  ban  not  knowen 
the  voys  of  alyens. 

6  Jhesu  seide  to  hem  this  prouerbe ; 
forsoth  thei  kuewen  not  what  he  spak 
to  hem. 

7  Thcrfore  Jhesu  seide  to  hem  eftsoone, 
Treuli,  trculi,  I  seie  to  50U,  for  I  am  the 
dore  of  the  schcep. 

S  Alle  how  nianye  euere  camen,  ben 
ny5t  theiies  and  day  theues,  but  the 
scheep  herden  not  hem. 

9  I  am  the  dore.  If  ony  man  schal 
cntre  by  me,  he  schal  be  saucd  ;  and 
he  schr\l  is,o  yn,  and  schal  go  out,  and 
he  schal  fynde  lesewis. 

10  A  ni5t  thcef  cometh  not,  no  but 
that  he  stele,  and  sle,  and  leese  ;  I  cam, 
that  thei  haue  lyf,  and  haue  more  pleu- 
teuously. 

Ill  am  a  good  schephcrde  ;  a  good 
schepherdc  jyueth  his  soule  ^  for  his 
scheep. 

12  Forsoth  a  marchaunt,'''  and  that  is 
not  schephcrde,  whos  ben  not  the  schcep 
his  owne,  seeth  a  wolf  comynge,  and  he 
Iceueth^  the  scheep,  and  fleeth  ;  and  the 
wolf  rauyschith,  and  disi)arplitht  the 
scheep. 

13  Forsoth  the  marchaunt  fleeth,  for 


blynde,  yc  shuldc  have  noo  synne  ;  but 
nowe  yc  saye,  \Vc  se,  thcrfore  yourc 
syunc  remayneth. 


CiiAP.  X.  I  Uerely,  verely,  I  saye 
vnto  you,  whosoever  cntrcth  not  in  by 
the  dore  into  the  shepe  folde,  but  elym- 
eth  vppe  some  other  waye,  he  is  a  thefe 
and  a  robber. 

2  He  thatt  gocth  in  by  the  dore,  is  the 
shephcordc  of  tiie  shcpe. 

3  To  this  man  the  porter  opcnneth  the 
dore,  and  the  shcpe  hcare  hys  voyce, 
and  lie  callcth  hys  awne  shepe  by  name, 
and  leadetii  them  out. 

4  And  when  he  hath  sent  fovthe  hys 
awne  shcpe,  he  gocth  before  them,  and 
the  shepe  folowe  hym  ;  for  they  knowe 
h^-s  voyce. 

5  A  straunger  they  will  nott  folowe, 
butt  wyll  flye  from  Inm  ;  for  they  knowe 
nott  the  voyce  of  straungers. 

6  This  manner  of  sayinge  si)ake  Jesus 
vnto  them  ;  and  they  vnderstodc  nott 
what  thyuges  they  were  whycli  he  spake 
vnto  them. 

7  Then  saydc  Jesus  vnto  them  agayne, 
Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  thatt  I 
am  the  dore  of  the  shepe. 

8  All  e\en  as  many  as  cam  before  me, 
are  theves  and  robbers,  but  the  shepe 
did  not  heare  them. 

9  I  am  the  dore.  By  me  yf  eny  man 
enter  in,  he  shalbe  safe  ;  and  shall  goo 
in,  and  out,  and  fynde  pasture. 

10  The  thcfc  commcth  not,  but  for  to 
steale,  and  kyll,  and  dcstroye  ;  I  cam, 
that  they  myght  have  lyfe,  and  have  yt 
more  aboundantly. 

Ill  am  a  goode  shepheerd  ;  a  goode 
shcphecrd  geveth  his  lyle  for  his  shepe. 

12  An  heyred  servaunt,  which  is  not 
the  shei)hccrd,  nether  the  shepe  arc  his 
awne,  seith  the  wolfe  commynge,  and 
leveth  the  shepe,  and  flyeth  ;  and  the 
wolfe  catcheth,  and  scattereth  the  shepe. 

13  The  heyred  servaunt  flyeth,  be  cause 


504  GOTHIC,  360. 

ist,  yah  ni  kar-ist  ina  J)ize  lambe. 

14  Ik  im  hairdeis  sa  goda,  yah  kann 
meina,  yah  kunnun  mik  |)0  meina. 

15  Swaswe  kann  mik  atta,  yah  "ik  kann 
attan  ;  yah  saiwala  meina  higya  faur  jo 
lamba. 

16  Yah  an]iara  lamba  aih,  Jjoei  ni  sind 
)  is  awistris,  yali  |}0  skal  briggau,  yah 
stibnos  meinaizos  hausyand  ;  yah  Avair];- 
and  ain  awe];i  ains  hairdeis. 

17  Duhjje  atta  mik  friyo]?,  unte  ik 
Ligya  saiwala  meina,  ei  aftra  nimau  |jo. 

18  Ni  whashun  nimiji  ])0  af  [mis,  akei 
ik  lagya  jjo  afj+  mis  silbin.  AValdufni 
haba  aflagyan  }io,  yah  "waldufni  haba 
aftra  niman  j;o.  po  anabusu  nam  at 
i.ttin  meinamma. 

1 9  JXinuh  missaqiss  aftra  war])  mij) 
ludaium  in  ])ize  Avaurde. 

20  Qe|<unuh  managai  I'ze,  Unhul[)on 
liabai|),  yah  dsvalmoj; ;  wha  pamma  haus- 
ei[)] 

21  Sumaili  qejnn,  po  waurda  ni  sind 
mduiljjun  lialjandins.  Ibai  mag  unhul|-,o 
blindaim  augona  uslukan  ? 

22  War})  Jail  ]nniuyi[;a  iu  lairusaul- 
Avmai,  yah  wintrus  was. 

23  Yah  wharboda  lesus  in  alh,  in 
iibizwai  Saulaumonis. 

24  panuh  birunnun  ina  ludaieis,  yah 
qejjun  du  imma,  Uud  Avha  saiwala  uns- 
ara  hahis  1  yabai  ))u  siyais  Christus, 
qif)  imsis  andaugiba. 

25  Andhof  lesus,  Qa))  izwis,  yah  ni 
galaubei]) ;  Avaurstwa  })oei  ik  tauya  in 
namin  attins  meinis,  \io  weitwodyand  bi 
mik. 

26  Akei  yus  ni  galaubei)),  unte  ni  siyuj) 
lambe  meinaize,  swaswe  qaj)  izwis. 

27  Lamba  meina  stibnai  meinai  haus- 
yand, yah  ik  kann  ])0,  yah  laistyand 
mik. 

28  Yah  ik  libain  aiweinon  giba  im, 
yah  ni  fraqistnand  aiw,  yah  ni  frawilwij? 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

ally  rod,   and    him    ne  gebyra])   to   Ctani 
sceapum. 

14  Ic  eom  god  hyrde,  and  ic  gecnawe 
mine  sceap,  and  hig  gecnilwa))  me. 

15  Swa,  mm  fteder  can  me,  ic  can 
m'nne  feeder ;  [and  ic  sylle  min  agen 
lif  for  minum  sceapum].''' 

16  And  ic  ha^bbe  odre  sceap,  eta  ne 
synd  of  disse  heorde,  and  hit  gebyraj) 
tta?t  ic  Isede  da,  and  hig  gehyrajj  mine 
stefne  ;  and  hyt  hy\>  an  heord  and  an 
hyrde. 

17  Fordam  feeder  me  lufaji,  fordam  de 
ic  sylle  mine  siwle,  and  hig  eft  ninie. 

18  Ne  nim})  hig  n^n  man  pet  me,  ac 
Itcte  hig  fram  me  sylfum.  Ic  hcebbe 
anwald  mine  sitwle  to  illaetanne,  and 
ic  haibbe  anweald  hig  eft  to  niraanne. 
Dis  bebod  ic  nam  vet  milium  feeder. 

19  Eft  wees  ungejiweernes  gewordeii 
betwyx  dam  ludeum  for  dysum  sprsec- 
um. 

20  Manega  hira  cwBedon,  Deofol  is  on 
him,  and  he  Avet ;  hwl  hlyste  ge  him  ? 

21  Sume  CAVicdon,  Ne  synd  na  dis 
Avodes  mannes  Avord.  Cwyst  du  majg 
Avod  man  blindra  manna  eagan  ontjn- 
an  f 

22  Dii  weerontempl-halgunga  on  Hieru- 
salem,  and  hit  Avees  a^  inter. 

23  And  se  Ilgelend  code  on  dam  temple, 
on  Sal om ones  portice. 

24  Da  bestodou  da  ludeas  hyne  utan, 
and  cwsedon  to  him,  Hu  lange  geelst  dii 
ure  lif  ?  sege  us  openlice,  hwa^der  dii 
Crist  sy. 

25  Se  Heelend  him  andswai'ode  and 
cwee}),  Ic  spece  to  eow,  and  ge  ne  ge- 
lyfaj) ;  da  Aveorc  de  ic  Avyrce  on  mmes 
feeder  naman,  da  cyda})  gewitnesse  be 
me. 

26  Ac  ge  ne  gelyfa];,  fordam  de  ge 
ne  synd  of  minum  sceapum  .... 

27  Mine  sceap  gehyra))  mine  stefne, 
and  ic  gecnawe  hig,  and  hig  folgiaj)  me. 

28  And  ic  him  sylle  cce  lif,  and  hig 
ne  forwurda])  nsefre,  and  ne  nim])  hig 


X.  14-28.]    WVCLIFFE,  1389. 

lie   is  a  luaroluuint,  ami   it  pcrteyncth 
nut  to  him  of  the  sohcep. 

14  I  am  a  !j;ooil  sclieplienle,  and  I 
]<no\vc  my  schcep,  and  my  solicop  knowcu 
me. 

15  As  my  fadir  liath  knowun  me,  and 
I  knowe  tlic  fadir ;  and  I  puttc  my  lyf 
for  my  scheep. 

16  And  I  liaue  otliere  scheep,  that  beu 
not  of  this  folde,  and  it  bilioucth  me 
for  to  Iccde  hem  to,  and  thei  sehulen 
heere  my  vois  ;  and  it  schal  be  maad  o 
fold  and  o  sche[)herde. 

17  Therforc  the  fadir  loueth  me,  for  I 
putto  my  soule,  that  cftsoone  I  take  it. 

18  Xo  man  takith  it  fro  me,  but  I 
putte  it  fro  my  silf.  I  hane  power  for 
to  putte  it,  and  I  haue  power  for  to  take 
it  eftsoone.  This  maundemeut  I  haue 
take  of  my  fadir. 

1 9  And  so  dissencioun  was  maad 
among  the  Jewis  for  thes  wordis. 

20  Forsoth  manye  of  hem  seiden,  He 
hath  a  deuci,  and  maddith;^  what  hecreu 
5e  him  ? 

2  1  Otliere  men  seiden,  Thes  •wordis 
both  not  of  a  man  liauynLte  a  fend. 
Wlier  a  deuel  may  opene  the  y5eu  of 
blynde  men  ] 

22  Forsothe  uewe  feestis  of  halwing  of 
the  temple  ben  maad  in  Jerusalem,  and 
it  was  wyntir. 

23  Ami  Jhesu  walkide  in  the  temple, 
in  the  porche  of  Salomon. 

24  Tliorforc  Jewis  enyyrowneden  him, 
and  seiden  to  him,  Hou  longe  dust  thou 
a  wey  oure  soule  ?  if  thou  ert  Crist,  scie 
to  vs  upynly. 

25  Jhe.su  answcridc  to  hem,  I  speke  to 
50U,  and  5e  bileuen  not  :  the  wurkis  that 
I  do  in  the  name  of  my  fadir,  thes  beren 
witnessing  of  me.     . 

26  But  and  50  bileuen  not,  for  je  ben 
not  of  my  scheep 

27  My  scheepe  heeren  my  vois,  and  I 
knowe  hem,  and  thei  suen  me. 

28  And  I  iyue  to  hem  cuerelasting  lyf, 
and  thei  schnlcu  not  pcrische  in  to  with 


TVXDALE,  1526. 


.'^O.i 


he  is  an  heyrcd  servaunt,  and  careth  not 
for  the  shelve. 

14  I  am  that  goodc  .shepheeid,  and 
knowe  my  shepe,  and  am  k  no  wen  of 
myne. 

15  As  my  father  knoweth  me,  even  suo 
knowe  I  my  father  ;  and  I  geve  my  sylfo 
for  my  shepe. 

16  And  other  shepe  I  have,  which  are 
not  off  this  folde,  them  also  must  I 
bringc,  and  they  shall  hcare  my  voyce  ; 
and  there  shalbe  won  flocke  and  won 
sliepliecrdc. 

1 7  Thcrfore  doth  my  father  love  nic, 
be  cause  I  put  my  lyfc  from  me,  that 
I  myglit  take  it  a'^'ayne. 

18  X'o  man  taketh  it  from  me,  butt  I 
put  ytt  away  off  my  s}lfe.  I  have  power 
to  put  it  from  me,  and  power  I  have  to 
take  it  agayne.  Tliys  commaundmcnt 
have  I  receaved  of  my  father. 

19  Agayne  there  was  dissencion  amouge 
the  Icwes  for  these  sayinges. 

20  And  many  of  them  sayd.  He  hath 
the  devyll,  and  is  madde  ;  why  heare  ye 
hym] 

21  Other  sayde.  These  are  nott  the 
wordes  off  hym  that  hath  the  devyll. 
Can  the  devyll  open  the  eyes  off"  the 
blynde  1 

22  Hit  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feaste  of 
the  dedieacion,  and  itt  was  wynter. 

23  And  Jesus  walked  ...  in  Solomons 
hall. 

24  Then  cam  the  lewes  rounde  aboute 
hym,  and  sayde  vnto  hym,  Howe  longe 
dost  thou  make  vs  doute  ?  yff  thou  be 
Chryst,  tell  vs  playnly.- 

25  Jesus  answered  them,  I  tulde  you, 
and  ye  beleve  nott ;  the  workes  that  I 
do  in  my  fathers  name,  beare  witncs  off 
me. 

26  Butt  ye  beleve  not,  because  ye  are 
not  of  my  shepe,  as  I  sayde  vnto  you. 

27  My  shepe  heare  my  voyce,  and  I 
knowe  them,  and  they  fulowe  me. 

28  And  I  geve  vnto  them  eternall  lyfe, 
and   they  shall   never   perisshe,   nether 


iOG 


GOTHIC,  160. 


wliasliun  ])0  us  laaiulau  meinai. 

29  Atta  meiiis  jiatcl  fragaf  mis,  maizo 
allaim  ist ;  yah  iii  aiw  ainsliun  mag 
frawihvan  ]>o  us  liandau  attins  meinis. 

30  Ik  yah  atta  meins  ain  siyu.  _ 

31  Nemun  aftra  stainans  })ai  ludaieis, 
ci  Avaurpeina  aua  i'na. 

32  Andhof  im  lesus,  Managa  gocia 
waurstwa  ataugida  izwis  us  attin  mein- 
amma,  in  wharyis  ))ize  Avaurstwe  stainei}> 
mik  1 

33  Andhofun  imma  |)ai  ludaieis,  In 
godis  waurstwis  ni  stainyam  \mk,  ak  'in 
Avayamercins.  yah  |iatei  jju,  manna  wis- 
ands,  tauyis  ]juk  silban  du  Gu]?a. 

34  Andhof  im  lesus,  Niu  ist  gameli|) 
in  witoda  izwaramma,  Ik  qa]?,  Guda 
siyuj)  1 

35  Yabai  yainans  qa)>  guda,  du  })aimei 
waurd  Gu]?s  war}',  yah  ni  maht  ist  ga- 
tairan  })ata  gamehdo, 

36  panei  atta  gawelhaida,  yah  insand- 
ida  in  Jjana  fairwhu,  yns  qij'ij',  patei 
wayameryau,  unte  qa]?,  Sunns  GuJ;s  im  ? 

37  ISTiba  tauyau  waurstwa  attins  meinis, 
ni  galaubeij)  mis  ; 

38  Ij)  yabai  tauyau,  niba  mis  galaub- 
3'ai[i,  |)aim  waurstwam  galaubyaij;  ;  ei 
ufkunnaijj  yah  galaubyai|),  }5atei  in  mis 
atta,  yah  ik  in  imma. 

39  Sokidedun  ina  aftra  gafahan,  yah 
usiddya  us  handum  ize. 

40  Yah  galaijj  aftra  ufar  laurdanu,  in 
{jana  stad  Jiarei  was  lohannes  frumist 
claupyands,  yali  sahda  yainar. 

41  Yah  managai  qenum  at  imma,  yah 
qe})un,  patei  loliannes  gatawida  taikne 
ni  ainohun  ;  'iy  alhita  J^atei  qa]j  lohannes 
bi  fiana,  sunya  was. 

42  Yah  galaubidedun  managai  du  imma 
yainar. 


CiiAP.  XI.     I  Wasuh  pan  sums  sinks, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995,     [St.  John 
nan  man  of  minre  handa. 

29  Dset  de  min  feder  me  sealde,  is 
mserre  donne  penig  otter  ]jing  3  and  ne 
mpcg  hit  nan  man  niman  of  mines  fteder 
handa. 

30  Ic  and  feeder  synd  tin. 

31  Da  ludeas  namon  stanas,  6ivet  hig 
woldon  hyne  torfian. 

32  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode  and 
cwaj]?,  Manega  godc  weorc  ic  eow  set- 
eowde  be  niinum  fteder,  for  hwylcum 
(Jpera  weorca  wylle  ge  me  hcTnan? 

33  Da  ludeas  him  andswarcdon  and 
cwajdon,  Ne  ha^ne  we  cte  for  godum 
weorce,  ac  for  ctinre  bysnier-spsece,  and 
fordani  cte  du  cart  man,  and  wyrcst  de 
to  Gode. 

34  Se  PIselend  him  andswarode  and 
cwtej;,  Hu  nys  liit  awriten  on  cowre  ee, 
Dset  ic  ssede,  Ge  synd  godas  1 

35  Gif  he  da  tealde  godas,  de  Godes 
space  to  wK?s  geworden,  and  dtet  hillige 
gewrit  ne  mseg  beon  awend, 

36  De  feeder  gchalgode,  and  sende  on 
middan-eard,  ge  secga]),  Dvet  dii  bysmcr 
spycst,  fordam  ic  sa^de,  Ic  eom  Godes 
sunn  ? 

37  Gif  ic  ne  wyrce  mines  fader  weorc, 
ne  gelyfaj)  me  ; 

38  Gif  ic  wyrce  mines  feder  weorc, 
and  gif  ge  me  nellaj)  gelyfan,  gelyfaj) 
dam  weorcum  ;  dset  ge  oncnilwon  and 
gelyfon,  dset  fajder  ys  on  me,  and  ic  on 
ftvjder. 

39  Hig  smeadon  witodlice  ymbe  dtet 
hig  woldon  hine  gefon,  and  he  code  lit 
fram  liim. 

40  And  he  for  eft  ofer  lordanen,  to 
dtere  stowe  de  lohannes  wa^s  and  serest 
on  fnllode,  and  lie  wunode  da^r. 

41  And  manega  comon  to  him,  and 
cwsedon,  Witodlice  ne  worhte  loliannes 
nan  tiicn  ;  ealle  da  jjing  de  lohannes 
sj«de  be  dyssum,  Wccron  scJjje. 

42  And  manega  gelyfdon  on  hyne. 


Chap.  XI.     ''^i  Witodlice   sum  seoc 


X.  29-^1-  i]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

'  oiitcii    ciulo,   and    ony   man    sclial    not 
lauysi'lic  hem  of  myii  liond. 

29  That  thin;^  that  my  fadir  5af  to  mc, 
is  more  than  alio  ;  thert'oro  no  man  may 
rauysche  fro  my  fadris  hond. 

30  I  and  the  fadir  ben  o  thinjjj. 

3 1  Jewis  token  vp  stoones,  foi'  to  stoone 
hym  to  the  deeth. 

32  Jhesii  answeride  to  hem,  I  hauc 
schewid  to  5011  manye  goode  werkis  of 
my  fadir,  for  which  werk  of  hem  stoonen 
3e  me  ] 

33  The  Jewis  ansNveriden  to  him,  We 
stoonen  not  thee  of  good  work,  but  of 
bhispheinye,  and  for  thou,  sitheu  thou 
art  a  man,  makist  thi  silf  God. 

34  .Thcsu  answeride  to  hem,  "Wlier  it  is 
not  writun  in  joure  hiwe,  For  I  scide, 
5c  ben  goddis  ? 

35  If  he  seide  hem  goddis,  to  whiche 
the  word  of  God  is  maad,  and  the  scrip- 
ture, wliich  tlie  fadir  halwide,  and  sente 
in  to  the  workl,  may  not  be  vndon, 

36  And  5e  seyn,  for  I  bUvspheme,  for  I 
seide,  I  am  Goddis  soue  ? 


37  If  I  do  not  tlie  Avorkis  of  my  fadir, 
nyle  5e  bileue  to  me  ; 

38  Sothli  if  I  do,  thou5  50  wolen  not 
bilcuc  to  me,  bileue  50  to  the  workis  ; 
that  56  knowe  and  bileue,  for  the  fadir 
is  in  me,  and  I  iu  the  fadir. 

39  Therfore  thei  sou5ten  for  to  take 
him,  and  he  wente  out  of  her  hondirf. 

40  And  he  wente  eftsoone  ouer  Jordan, 
in  to  tliat  place  where  John  was  first 
baptisinge,  and  he  dwelte  there. 

41  And  manye  eamen  to  him,  and 
sciden,  Forsoth  John  dide  no  signc  ;^ 
forsothe  alle  thingis  what  cuere  John 
seide  of  this,  weren  sothe. 

42  And  many  bileueden  in  to  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


r)07 


Chap.  XI.     i  Forsothe  ther  was  sum 


shall  eny  man  pluekc  them  out  off  my 
hondo. 

29  j\[y  father  wich  gave  them  me,  is 
greatter  then  all  men  ;  and  no  man  is 
able  to  take  thorn  out  oil'  my  fathers 
honde. 

30  And  I  and  my  fiither  are  one. 

31  TliLU  the  Icwcs  agiiync  toke  vppc 
stones,  to  stone  hym  with  all. 

32  Jesus  answered  them.  Many  goode 
workes  have  I  shewed  you  from  my 
father,  for  which  off  them  wyll  ye  stone 
me  ? 

33  The  lewes  answered  hym,  sayingc, 
For  thy  goode  workes  .sake  we  stone  the 
not,  but  for  thy  blasjihemy,  and  be 
cause  that  thou,  beinge  a  man,  makesfc 
thy  silfe  God. 

34  Jesus  answered  them,  Is  it  not 
written  in  youre  lawe,  I  have  sayde,  Yc 
are  goddes  1 

35  Yf  he  called  them  goddes,  vnto 
whom  the  worde  of  God  was  spoken, 
and  the  scripture  can  nott  be  broken, 

36  Saye  ye  then  to  hym,  whom  the 
father  hath  sanctiticd,  and  sent  into  the 
worlde.  Thou  blasphemcst,  because  I 
sayd,  I  am  the  sonne  of  God  1 

37  Yf  I  do  not  the  workes  off"  my 
father,  beleve  me  not ; 

38  Butt  .  .  .  though  ye  beleue  not 
me,  yett  beleve  the  workes ;  that  ye 
maye  knowe  and  beleve,  that  the  father 
is  in  me,  and  I  in  hym. 

39  Agayne  i\\Qy  went  aboute  to  take 
hym,  but  he  escaped  out  of  their  hondes. 

40  And  went  awaye  agayne  bcyondc 
Jordan,  into  the  ])lace  where  Jhon  be- 
fore had  baptised,  and  there  aboode. 

41  And  many  resorted  vnto  hym,  and 
sayd,  Jhon  did  no  miracle  ;  butt  all 
thyngcs  that  Jhon  spake  of  this  man, 
are  true. 

42  And  there  many  bcleved  on  hym. 


Chap.  XL       i  A  ccrtavne  man  was 


508 


GOTHIC,  360. 


Lazarus  af  Bejianias,  us  liaimai  Mai-yius 
yah  Marjjius,  swlstrs  izos. 

2  "\Vasuli  |)an  Marya,  soei  salboda 
Frauyan  l)alsana,  yah  biswarb  fotuns 
is  skufta  seinamma,  jjizozei  broj'ar  Laz- 
arus siuks  was. 

3  Insandidedun  |;an  jjos  swistryus  is 
du  imma,  qi[)andeins,  Frauya,  sai !  J^anei 
friyos,  siuks  ist. 

4  I|)  is  gahausyauds  qa]),  So  siukei  nist 
du  daut^au,  ak  i'n  hauheinais  Gujis,  ei 
liauhyaidau  suuus  Gu[;s  |;airh  Jmta. 

5  Friyoduh  |au  Itesus  Marjjau,  yah 
swistar  izos,  yah  Lazaru. 

6  Swe  liausida,  |)atei  siuks  was,  J'anuh 
])an  salida  in  Jjammel  was  stada  twans 
dagaus. 

7  pa''roh  })an  afar  |)ata  qa|)  du  sipon- 
yaiu,  Gaggam  in  ludaian  ai'tra. 

8  Qejjun  du  inima  }'ai  siponyos,  Piab- 
bei,  nu  sukidedun  [juk  afwairpan  stainam 
ludaieis,  yah  aftra  gaggis  yaind  1 

9  Andhof  lesus,  Niu  twalif  sind  wheilos 
dagis  1  Yabai  wlias  grcggi])  in  dag,  iii 
gast'ggqi)),  uute  liuhaj)  ])is  iairwhaus  ga- 
suiwlii]'. 

10  Aj^l'an  yabai  whas  gnggij)  in  naht, 
gastiggqij),  unte  liuhad  nist  in  imma. 

11  po  qa)),  yah  afar  Jjata  qij'if'  du  im, 
Lazarus,  friyonds  unsar,  gasaizlep,  akei 
gaggani  ei  uswakyau  ina. 

1 2  Panuli  qc})un  J^ai  siponyos  is,  Frauya, 
yabai  slepi[;,  liails  wairjdl'. 

13  Qajiuh  |ian  lesus  bi  dau|iu  is  ;  ijj 
yainai  hugidedun,  ])atei  is  bi  slep  qe|n. 

14  panuh  ]'an  qaj)  du  im  lesus  swi- 
kun];aba,  Lazarus  gaswalfc ; 

15  Yah  fagino  in  izwara,  ei  galaub- 
yai[',  unte  ni  was  yainar;  akei  gaggam 
du  imma. 

t6  panuh  qa|)  pomas,  saei  haitada 
Didimus,  jiaim  gahlailnxm  seinaim,  Gagg- 
am yah  weisj  ei  gaswiltaima  mijj  imma. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

man  wpes,  genemncd  Lazarus  of  Bethania, 
of  Marian  ceastre  and  of  Marthan,  his 
swustra. 

2  Hit  WKS  seo  Maria,  cte  smj^rede 
Drihten  mid  Clsere  sealfe,  and  drigde 
his  let  mid  hyre  1  cecum,  Lazarus  hyre 
brctTer  wpes  ge-yfelod. 

3  His  swustra  sendon  to  him,  and 
cwccdon,  Drihten,  nu  I  is  seoc,  se  de  clu 
lufcist. 

4  Da  se  Hselend  ctset  gehyrde,  da  cw0e)> 
he  to  him,  Nys  deos  untruinnys  na  fur 
dea})e,  ac  for  Godes  wukb-e,  diet  Godes 
sunu  sig  gewuldrod  })urh  hyne. 

5  Sojjlice  se  Heelend  lufode  Marthan, 
and  hyre  swustor  Marian,  and  Lazarum 
hyra  broder. 

6  AVitodlice  lie  wpes  twe^-en  dajras  on 
dajre  sylfan  stowe,  da  he  gehyrde,  dtet 
he  seoc  wa?s. 

7  TEfter  dyssum  he  cwtej)  to  his  leorning- 
enihtura,  Uton  faran  eft  to  ludea  lande. 

8  His  leorning-cnihtas  cwsedon  to  him, 
Lareow,  mi  da  ludeas  sohton  de  doet 
hig  woldun  de  hrenan,  and  wylt  dil  eft 
faran  dyder  1 

9  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode  and 
cwjej),  Hii  ne  synd  twelf  tida  d;es  dseges  1 
Gif  hwa  gsej)  on  dveg,  ne  a3t-spyrn}j  he, 
fordam  he  gesyhj)  dyses  middan-eardes 
leoht. 

10  Gif  he  gee})  on  nilit,  lie  set-spyrn]', 
fordam  de  da?t  leoht  nis  on  hyre. 

1 1  Djs  Jjing  he  cwtejj,  and  syddan  he 
cwjej)  to  him,  Lazarus,  ui'e  freond,  sleep)', 
ac  ic  wylle  gan  and  uwreccan  hyne  of 
sleepe. 

12  His  leorning-cnihtas  cwacdon,  Driht- 
en, gif  he  sleep]),  he  by})  hal. 

13  Se  Heelend  hit  cwa?])  be  his  deaj^e  ; 
hi  wendon  s6|)lice,  diet  he  hyt  ssede  be 
swefnes  slsepe. 

14  Da  cwoej)  se  Heelend  openlice  to 
him,  Lazarus  ys  dead  ; 

15  And  ic  eom  blijje  for  eowrum  j'ing- 
um,  deet  ge  gelyfon,  fordam  ic  noes  dara ; 
ac  uton  gan  to  him. 

1 6  Da  cwae])  Thomas to  hys 

geferum,  Uton  gan,  and  sweltan  mid 
him. 


XL  j-i6.]   WVCLTFFE,  1389. 

syk  mail.   Lazarus  of  llcthanyo,  of  tlic 
castel  of  Mary  and  Martha,  his  sistris. 

2  Forsoth  Mary  it  was,  which  anoyntide 
the  Lord  with  oyiicnu'iit,  and  wipte  his 
foot  with  hir  hooris,  whos  brothor  Laza- 
rus was  syk. 

3  Thorl'iire  liis  sistris  sonton  to  him, 
seyinu^o,  Lord,  lo !  he  whom  thou  louest, 
is  syk. 

4  Forsoth  Jhesu  hccringc  seide  to  hem, 
Tliis  sickncsse  is  not  to  the  decth,  but 
for  tlie  j^lorie  of  God,  that  Goddis  sone 
be  gloiitiod  bi  it. 

5  tSothli  Jhesu  louede  Mailha,  and  hir 
sistir  Marye,  and  Lazarus, 

6  Thcrfore  as  Jlicsu  herde,  for  he  was 
syk,  thanne  sothli  he  dwellide  in  the 
same  ])hice  tweye  dayes. 

7  Therof  aftir  thes  thiugis  he  seide  to 
liis  disciplis,  Go  we  eft  in  to  Judoc. 

8  Disciplis  seyeu  to  him,  Eaby,''"  now 
the  Jewis  soujten  for  to  stooue  thee, 
and  eft  thou  gost  thidur] 

9  Jhesu  answeride,  Wlier  ther  ben  not 
twelue  ouris  of  the  day  1  If  ony^  man 
schul  wandre  in  the  day,  lie  hirtith  not, 
for  he  seeth  the  li3t  of  this  world. 

10  Sothli  if  he  schal  wandre  in  the 
nyjt,  he  hirtith,  for  li5t  is  not  in  him. 

I  I  He  seith  thes  tliingi>,  and  aftir  thes 
thingis  he  seith  to  hem,  Lazarus,  oure 
frend,  slepith,  but  I  go  for  to  reyse  him 
fro  slope. 

12  Thcrfore  his  disciplis  seiden.  Lord, 
if  he  slopith,  he  schal  be  saf. 

13  Forsothe  Jhesu  hadde  scid  of  his 
dcetli ;  but  thei  gessiden,  that  he  seide 
of  the  slepinge  of  sleep. 

1 4  Thanne  therfore  Jhesu  seide  to  hem 
opynii,  Lazarus  is  deed  ; 

1 5  And  I  enioye  for  50U,  that  50  be- 
leue,  for  I  was  uot  there ;  but  go  we 
to  him. 

16  Thei-fore  Thomas,  tliat  is  seid  Didy- 
mus,  seide  to  cueu  disciplis,  And  go  we, 
thiit  we  deye  with  him. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


509 


siokc,  named  Lazarus  of  Bothania,  the 
touiie  oft'  Mary,  and  her  sister  Martha. 

2  It  Avas  that  Mary,  which  annoyntcd 
Jesus  with  oyntmont,  and  wept  his  fete 
with  her  lieere,  whose  brother  Lazarus 
was  sioke. 

3  And  his  sister  sent  vnto  hym,  say- 
inge,  Lorde,  behold  !  he  whom  thou 
lovest,  is  sicke. 

4  When  Jesus  that  heixlc  he  sayd,  This 
infirmite  is  not  vnto  dcth,  but  for  the 
laude  of  God,  that  the  sonne  off  God 
niyght  be  praysed  by  the  reason  of  it. 

5  Jesus  loved  IMartha,  and  her  sister, 
and  Lazarus. 

6  After  he  herde,  thatt  he  was  sicke, 
then  aboodc  he  two  dayes  still  in  the 
same  place  where  he  was. 

7  Then  after  that  sayd  he  to  his  dis- 
ciples, Let  vs  goo  into  lewry  agayne. 

8  His  disciples  sayde  vnto  hym.  Master, 
the  lewes  lately  sought  meanes  to  stone 
the,  and  wilt  thou  goo  thither  agayne  1 

9  Jesus  answered,  Are  there  not  twelve 
houres  in  the  daye  1  Yf  a  man  walke 
in  the  daye,  he  stoinblcth  not,  because 
he  seith  the  light  of  this  wurlde. 

10  Y''i  a  man  walke  in  the  nyght,  he 
stombleth,  be  cause  there  is  no  light  in 
hym. 

1 1  This  sayd  he,  and  after  that  he 
sayde  vnto  them,  Oure  frende  Lazarus 
slepeth,  but  I  goo  to  wake  hym  outt  of 
slope. 

1 2  Then  sayde  his  disciples,  Lorde,  iff 
he  slope,  then  shall  he  do  wele  ynough. 

13  Jesus  spake  of  his  deeth  ;  but  they 
thought,  that  he  had  spoken  of  the 
naturall  slepe. 

14  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  them  playnly, 
Lazarus  is  deed ; 

1  5  And  I  am  gladde  for  youre  sakcs, 
that  I  was  not  there,  be  cause  ye  maye 
beleve ;  neverthelesse  let  vs  goo  vnto 
hym. 

16  Then  sayde  Thomas,  which  is  called 
Didimus,  vnto  the  disciples,  Let  vs  also 
goo,  that  we  maye  deye  with  him. 


510 


GOTHIC,  360. 


17  Qimands  ))an  lesus,  bic>at  i'na  yu- 
J)an  fidwor  dagans  habaudau  111  Idaiwa. 

18  Wasuli  Jmn  Bc})ania  newlia  lairii- 
saulwmiam,  swaswe  ana  spaurdiiu  limf- 
taihunim. 

19  Yah  managai  ludaie  gaqemun  bi 
Maij^an  yah  IMaryan,  ei  galirafatidedeina 
iyos  bi  Jjana  bvojjar  izo. 

_2o  Ij^  Mar])a  sunsei  liauslda,  j^atei 
lesus  qimijj,  wi]>rau!dya  uia  ;  i]?  ilarya 
in  garda  sat. 

2 1  panuh  qaJ3  Mav];a  dii  Icsua,  Frauya, 
i{)  weseis  her,  ni  |)au  gadaujinodedi  bro];- 
ar  meins. 

22  Akci  yali  nu  -wait,  ei  J)iswhah  Jjei 
bidyis  Gu]>,  gibij)  j)us  Gu]?. 

23  Qa})  i'zai  Icsus,  Usstandi];)  bi-o]'ai' 
];eins. 

24  Qa}^  du  imma  Marj^a,  AYait,  J^atci 
usstandi]>  in  usstassai  in  jjamma  sped- 
istin  daga. 

25  QaJ)  ])au  lesus,  Ik  im  so  usstass  yah 
libains  ;  saei  galaubei]>  du  mis,  ])auh  ga- 
ba-dauj)ni]),''  libaid ; 

26  Yali  whazuh  saei  libail',  yah  ga- 
]aubcil>  du  mis,  ni  gadauj'nij)  aiw.  Ga- 
laubeis  )'ata  1 

27  Qaj)  imma,  Yai,  Fi-auya,  ik  galaub- 
ida,  })atei  ]>n  is  Christus,  suuus  Gu])S, 
sa  in  Jjana  fairwhu  qimanda. 

28  Yah  Jjata  qif^andei,  galai]',  yah  Avop- 
idaMaryan,  swistar  seina,  })iubyo,  qijjand- 
ei,  Laisareis  qam,  yah  haitij>  ]>nk. 

29  Ij)  yaina,  sunsei  hausida,  urrais 
sprauto,  yali  iddya  du  imma, 

30  Niji-jjan  nauli})anuh  qam  lesus  in 
weihsa,  ak  was  nauhjjanuh  in  ))amma 
stada,  Jjarei  gamotida  imma  ]\Iar])a. 

31  ludaieis  \>H,n  ]jai  wisandans  mijj  izai 
in  garda,  jn-afstyandans  iya,  gasaiwhand- 
ans  Maryan,  j:atei  sprauto  ussto]j,  yah 
usiddya,  iddyedunuh  afar  izai,  qij)and- 
ans,  patei  gaggij>  du  hlaiwa,  ei  greitai 
yainar. 

32  Ij>  Marya,  sunsei  qam  Jjarei  was 
lesus,  gasaiwhandei  ina  draus  imma  du 
fotum^   qijsandei   du   imma,   Frauya,    'ip 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

17  Da  for  se  Ha-lend,  and  gemette 
dtet  he  wtfis  forjj-faren,  and  for  feower 
dagum  bebyrged. 

18  ]5etliania  ys  gehende  Hierusalera, 
ofer  fyftyne  furlang. 

1 9  Manega  ctai-a  ludea  comon  to  Mar- 
than  and  to  Marian,  diet  big  Avoldon  hi 
frefrian  for  hyra  brodor  ))ingum. 

20  Da  Martha  geliyrde,  cJset  se  H*lend 
com,  cla  arn  hco  ongean  hyne  ;  and 
Maria  sset  set  ham. 

21  Da  c\va?|>  Martha  to  dam  Hselende, 
Driliten,  gif  du  Aveere  her,  nsere  min 
brodor  dead. 

22  And  eac  ic  wat  nii  da,  d^t  God  de 
sjl\>,  SNva  hwset  swa  du  hyne  bitst. 

23  D;i  cwpe))  se  Hselend  to  hyre.  Din 
brodor  arist. 

24  And  Martha  cyvselp  to  him,  Ic  Wcit, 
dset  he  arlst  on  dam  ytemestan  dsege. 

25  And  se  Htelend  cwfe[>  to  hyre,  Ic 
eom  seryst  and  h"f ;  se  de  gclyfj'  on  me, 
deah  he  dead  sy,  he  leofaj? ; 

26  And  ne  swylt  nan  dara,  de  leofa]?, 
and  gelyfj)  on  me.     Gelyfst  du  dyses] 

27  Heo  cwse)'  to  him,  Witodlice,  Driht- 
en,  ic  gelyfe,  dajt  du  eart  Crist,  Codes 
suuu,  de  on  middan-eai'd  come. 

28  And  da  heo  das  ]>'mg  ssede,  heo 
code,  and  clypode,  digoUice,  Marian,  hyre 
swustoi*,  dus  cwedende,  Her  is  lire 
lareow,  and  clypa])  de. 

29  Da  heo  da^t  gehyrde,  heo  aras  rade, 
and  com  to  him. 

30  Da  gyt  ne  com  se  Hselend  binnau 
da  ceastre,  ac  wees  da  gyt  on  djiere 
stowc,  dier  ]\Iartha  him  ongean  com. 

3  I  Da  ludeas  de  waron  mid  hyre  on 
huse,  and  hi  frefrodon,  da  big  gesawon, 
dtet  ]\Iaria  ai'as,  and  mid  ofeste  ut-eode 
big,  fyligdon  hyre,  dus  cwedende,  Heo 
gaejj  to  his  byrgene,  dset  heo  wepe  dara. 

33  Da  Maria  com  dar  se  Hselend  wses, 
and  heo  bine  geseah,  heo  feoU  to  his 
fotum,  and  cwajjj  to  him    Drihten,  gif 


XL  17-32.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

I  7  And  so  Jliosu  cam,  and  fond  liini 
liauyngc  now  fourc  dayes  in  the  grauo. 

18  Sotldi  Bcthanye  was  bisydis  Jeru- 
salem, as  fiftene  fuvlongis. 

19  Forsotlio  nianye  of  Jewis  camcn  to 
!Marie  and  ^lavtlia,  foi*  to  coniforte  licni 
of  her  brothel". 

20  Thcrfore  as  Martha  horde,  for  Jhcsu 
cam,  she  rcnnoth  to  him  ;  ]Marie  for- 
sothe  sat  at  horn. 

21  Therforo  ]Nrartha  seidc  to  Jhesu, 
Lord,  if  thou  haddist  be  here,  my  bro- 
ther hadde  not  be  deed. 

22  But  and  now  I  woot,  that  Avhat 
euere  thingis  thou  schalt  axe  of  God, 
God  schal  5yue  to  thee. 

23  Jhcsus  seith  to  hir,  Thi  brother 
schal  ryse  ajen. 

24  Martha  seith  to  him,  I  woot,  for  he 
schal  ryse  a5en  in  the  a^enrysing  in  the 
laste  day. 

25  Jhcsu  seith  to  hir,  I  am  a5cnrisyng 
and  lyf ;  he  that  bilcueth  in  me,  5he,  if 
he  schal  be  deed,  schal  lyue ; 

26  And  cell  that  lyucth,  and  bileueth 
in  me,  schal  not  dcic  with  outcu  endc. 
Bileuyst  thou  this  thing  ] 

27  fShe  seith  to  him,  Forsothc,^  Lord, 
I  hauc  bilenyd,  for  thou  art  Crist,  the 
sone  of  quyk  God,  that  hast  come  in  to 
this  world. 

28  And  whanne  she  hadde  seide  this 
thing,  she  wente,  and  clepicle  Marie,  hir 
sistir,  in  silence,^  scyinge,  The  maistir 
cometh,  and  clepith  thee. 

29  She,  as  she  herde,  roos  anon,  and 
cam  to  him. 

30  Sothli  Jhcsu  cam  not  5it  in  to  the 
castel,  but  he  was  5it  in  that  place,  wher 
Martha  hadde  comcn  a5cns  him. 

31  Thcrfore  the  Jewis  that  wercn  with 
liir  in  the  lions,  and  comfortiden  hir, 
whanne  thci  si5en  Marie,  for  soone  she 
roos,  and  wcnte  out,  sucdcn  hir,  scyinge, 
For  she  goth  to  the  graue,  for  to  wepe 
there. 

32  Forsothe  Marie,  whanne  she  hadde 
seyn  wher  Jhesu  was,  seynge  him  felde 
to  his  feet,  and  seide  to  him,  Lord,  if 


TYNDALE,  ir,2  6. 


511 


17  Then  went  Jesus,  and  founde  that 
he  had  lyne  in  his  grave  foure  dayes 
alredy. 

18  Bcthani  was  ncyc  vnto  Jerusalem, 
aboute  .xv.  furlongcs  of. 

19  And  many  of  the  Icwcs  cam  to 
!Martha  and  ^lary,  to  confortc  theni  over 
their  brother. 

20  Martha  as  sone  as  she  herde,  thiit 
Jesus  was  commynge,  went,  and  nict 
hym  ;  Mary  sate  stillc  at  home. 

21  Then  sayde  Martha  vnto  Jesus, 
Lorde,  yii"  thou  haddcst  bene  her,  my 
brother  had  not  bene  deed. 

22  But  ncverthclcsse  I  knowe,  tliat 
whatsoever  thou  axcst  of  God,  God  will 
geve  it  the. 

23  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Tliy  brothci* 
shall  i-yse  agayne. 

24  jMartha  sayde  vnto  hym,  I  knowe 
wele,  he  shall  i-yse  agayne  in  the  resui'- 
reccion  att  the  last  daye. 

25  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  I  am  the 
rcsurrcccion  and  lyfe  ;  whosoever  be- 
leveth  on  me,  ye,  though  he  were  deed, 
yet  shall  he  lyve  ; 

26  And  whosoever  livctli,  and  bclcvctli 
on  me,  shall  never  deye.  Bclc^xst  thou 
this? 

27  She  sayde  vnto  hym,  Ye,  Lorde,  I 
bclcve,  thatt  thou  arte  Christ,  the  sonne 
oiT  God,  which  shall  cosnc  in  to  the 
worlde. 

28  And  as  sone  as  she  soo  had  sayde, 
she  went  her  waye,  and  called  her  si.'?tcr, 
secretly,  sayinge.  The  master  is  come, 
and  calleth  for  the. 

29  She,  as  sone  as  she  herde  thatt,, 
arose  quickly,  and  cam  vnto  hym. 

30  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the 
toune,  but  was  in  the  place,  where 
Martha  mctt  hym. 

31  The  lewes  then  which  were  with 
her  in  the  housse,  and  comforted  her, 
when  they  sawe  Mary,  that  she  rose 
vppc  hastely,  and  went  out,  folowcd  her, 
sayng.  She  goeth  vnto  the  grave,  to 
wepe  there. 

32  Then  when  Mary  was  come  where 
Jesus  was,  and  sawe  hym,  she  fell  doune 
at  his  fete,  sayinge  vnto  hym,  Lorde,  if 


512  GOTHIC,  3^0. 

M'ciseis    her,    ni    |auh    gaswultl    meins 
brojjar. 

33  panuli  lesus  sunsei  gasawli  iya 
greitandein,  yah  ludaiuus  ))aiei  qemuu 
mij)  i'zai  gretamlans,  iurauhtida  aliniiii, 
yah  "inwagida  sik  silban, 

34  Yah  qaj),  Whar  lagidedun  ina^  Qe- 
})uu  du  imnia,  Frauya,  hiri  yah  saiwh. 

35  Yah  tagi-ida  lesus. 

36  paruh  qelnui  ])ai  ludaieis,  Sai  ! 
■\vhaiwa  frioda  "ina. 

37  Sumai  }'an  ize  qe|)Un,  Niu  niahta 
sa,  izei  uslauk  augona  ]?amma  blindiu, 
gatauyan  ei  yah  sa  ui  gadauj-nodedi  1 

38  paiiuh  lesus  aftra  invauhtijjs  "in  sis 
silbin,  gaggi|)  du  jjamma  hhuwa.  Wasuh 
j;aii  hukiudi,  yah  staina  ufarlagida  was 
ufaro. 

39  Qajj  lesus,  Afnimij?  j^ana  stain.  Qaj? 
du  imiiia  swistir  |iis  dau))ins,  Mar[)a, 
Frauya,  yu  fuls  ist,  fidurdogs  auk  ist. 


40  Qajj  i'zai  lesus,  Niu  qaj)  ]>\\s,  jjatei 
yabai  galaubeis,  gasaiwhis  wul|-u  Gujjs  1 

41  TJshofun  ])&n  jjana  stain  );arel  was. 
Ijj  lesus  uzuldiof  augona  iup,  yah  qa]?, 
Atta,  awiliudo  })us,  unte  andhausides 
mis ; 

42  Yali  })an  ik  wissa,  Jnatei  sinteino 
mis  andhauseis,  akei  in  manageins  ))izos 
bistandandeins,  qa]?,  ei  galaubyaina,  J'atei 
})U  mik  insandides. 

43  Yah  [lata  ql|)ands,  stibnai  mikilai 
hropida,  Lazaru,  hiri  ut. 

44  Yah  urrann   sa  dau})a,  gabundans 

lianduns  yah  fotuns  faskyam, 

....  yah  whts  is  auralya  bibundans. 
Qajj  du  im  lesus,  AndbindiJ)  ina,  yah 
letijj  gaggan. 


45  pauuh  managai  j)ize  Yudaiei  |)ai 
qimandans  at  Maiyin,  yah  saiwhandans 
}>atei  gatawida,  galaubidedun  imma. 

46  Sumaijj-Jjan  ize  gali])un  du  Farei- 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Joi:n  • 
CI  wsere  her,  nsere  min  brcdor  dead. 

33  Da  se  Htelend  geseali  dset  heo 
weop,  and  cltet  cla  ludefis  weopon  tte 
mid  liyre  comon,  he  geon  ro  le  on  hys 
gaste,  and.gedrefde  hyne  s\  Itiie, 

34  And  cwaj}),  Hwar  lede  go  liine? 
Hig  cwsedon  to  h!m,  Drihten,  ga  and 
geseoh, 

35  And  se  Hselend  weop. 

36  And  da  ludeas  cwsedon,  Loca  nu  ! 
hu  he  hyne  lufode.   , 

37  SuTne  hi  cwsedon,  Ne  mihte  des,  de 
ontynde  bhndes  eagan,  doii  eac  d^et  des 
nsere  dead  ? 

38  Eft  se  Hselend  geomrode  on  him 
sylfum,  and  com  to  d?ere  byrgene.  Hit 
wfes  un  sc'ia?f,  and  dar  w£es  an  stan  on- 
uppan  geled. 

39  And  se  Hselend  cw?e)?,  Do})  aweg 
done  stan.  Da  cwtej)  Martha  to  him, 
dajs  swustor  de  dar  dead  wees,  Drihten, 
mi  he  stinc]),  he  wses  for  feovver  daguin 
dead. 

40  Se  Hselend  cwse))  to  byre,  Hu  ne 
SBede  ic  de,  diiet  du  gesyhst  Godes  wuhlor, 
gif  du  gelyfst  ? 

41  Da  dydon  hig  ilweg  done  stan.  .  . 
.  .  .  Se  Hselend  ahof  his  eagan  up,  and 
cwa3|j.  Feeder,  ic  do  })ancas  de,  fordam 
du  gehyrdest  me ; 

42  Icwat,  dfet  du  me  symle  gehyrst,  ac 
ic  cw^J),  for  dam  folce  de  her  yinbiitan 
stent,  dset  hi  gelyfon,  dset  dii  me  ^send- 
est. 

43  Da  he  das  ])ing  ssede,  he  clypode 
myceb-e  stefne,  Lazarus,  ga  ut. 

44  And  s5iia  stop  for)),  se  de  dead 
Wfes,  gebiinden  handum  and  fotum,  .  .  . 
....  and  hys  neb  wa?s  mid  swat-hne 
gebiinden.  Da  cwaej)  se  Haelend  to 
him,  Uubinda])  hine,  and  Iseta})  gan. 


45  Manega  dara  ludea  de  comon  to 
Marian,  and  gesawon  da  ])ing  de  he 
dyde,  gelyfdon  on  hine. 

46  Hi  sume  foron  to  dam  Phariseon, 


XI.  33-46.]   WYCLIFFE,i389. 

thou  hiuldist  be  here,  my  brother  liadtle 
not  be  ileetl. 

^2  Therfore  as  Jhcsu  s'l-^  hir  wepynge, 
aiul  the  Jewis  that  wereu  with  liir  wep- 
inge,  he  made  noyse  iu  spirit,  and 
troublide  him  silf, 

34  And  seido,  Wher  han  5e  putt  liim  1 
Tiiei  seyeu  to  him,  Lord,  come  aud  se. 

35  And  Jhesu  wepte. 

36  Tiierfore  the  Jewis  seiden,  Lo  !  hou 
l»e  louede  him. 

37  Forsothe  summe  of  hem  seiden, 
^Vher  this  man  that  opcnyd  the  yjen  of 
the  born  blynde,  mi5te  not  make  that 
aud  this  deiede  uot  ] 

38  Therfore  Jhesu  eft  makynge  noyse 
in  him  silf,  cam  to  the  graue.  For- 
sothe tlier  was  a  dcnne,  and  a  stoon  was 
l)ut  theroii. 

39  Jhesu  seith.  Take  56  a  wey  the 
stoon.  !Martha,  the  sistir  of  him  that 
was  deed,  seith  to  him.  Lord,  lie  stynk- 
itli  now,  sothli  he  is  of  foure  dayes. 

40  Jliesus  seith  to  hir,  Wher  I  haue 
not  seid  to  thee,  for  if  thou  schalt  l)i- 
leue,  thou  schalt  se  the  glorie  of  God  1 

41  Therfore   thei    tooken    a  wey  the 

stoon Forsothe  the  y3cn  reysid 

vpward,  Jhesu  seide,  Fadir,  I  do  thank- 
yiigis  to  thee,  for  thou  herdist  me  ; 

42  Forsoth  I  wiste,  for  thou  euere 
heerest  me,  but  for  the  peple  that 
stondith  aboute,  I  seide,  that  thei  bileue, 
for  thou  liast  sent  me. 

43  AVhanne  he  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
he  criede  with  greet  vois,  Lazarus,  come 
thou  out. 

44  And  anoon  lie  that  was  deed,  cam 
forth,  bounden  the  hondis  and  feet  with 
bondis,  ....  and  his  face  was  boundun 
with  a  sudarie.^  Jhesu  seith  to  hem, 
Vnbyude  je  him,  and  suffre  36  go  awey. 


45  Therfore  manyc  of  the  Jewis  that 
camen  to  Marie  and  Martha,  and  sy3en 
what  thingis  he  dide,  bileueden  in  to 
him. 

46  Sothli   summe   of  hem  wentcn   to 


TYND  ALE,  1526.  513 

thou  liaddest  bene  here,  my  Ijrother  had 
not  bene  deed. 

33  When  Jesus  sawe  lier  wcpe,  and 
the  lewes  also  wej)e  whyeh  cam  witli 
her,  he  groned  in  liis  spret,  and  vexed 
hym  silfe, 

34  And  sayde,  Where  have  ye  layed 
hym?  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  Lorde, 
come  and  se. 

35  And  Jesus  wept. 

36  Then  sayde  the  lewes,  Beholde  ! 
howe  he  loved  hym. 

37  Some  off  them  sayde,  Coulde  not  he 
which  openned  the  eyes  of  the  blynde, 
liave  made  also  that  this  man  shulde 
uot  have  deyed  ] 

38  Jesus  agayne  gronynge  in  hym  silfe, 
cam  to  the  grave.  It  was  a  cave,  and 
a  stone  layde  on  it. 

39  Jesus  sayd.  Take  ye  awaye  the  stone. 
Martha,  the  sister  of  hym  that  was  deed, 
sayde  vnto  him,  Lorde,  by  this  tyme  be 
stenketh,  for  he  had  bene  deed  foure 
dayes. 

40  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Sayde  I  not 
vnto  the,  that  if  thou  didde.st  belcve, 
thou  shuldest  se  the  glory  of  God  1 

41  Then  they  toke  awaye  the  stone 
from  the  place  where  the  deed  was  layde. 
Jesus  lifte  vppe  his  eyes,  and  sayd. 
Father,  I  geve  the  thankes,  be  cause 
that  thou  hast  herde  me  ; 

42  I  knewe  wcle,  that  thou  hearest  me 
all  wayes,  but  because  of  the  people  that 
stonde  by,  I  sayde  it,  that  they  niyght 
beleve,  that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

43  And  when  he  thus  had  spoken,  he 
ci'yed  with  a  loud  voyce,  Lazarus,  come 
forthe. 

44  And  he  that  was  deed,  cam  forth, 
bounde  hand  and  fote  with  bondes,  after 
the  manner  as  they  were  wonte  to  bynde 
their  deed  with  all,  and  his  face  was 
bounde  with  a  impkyn.  Jesus  s.iyde 
vnto  them,  Loose  hym,  and  lett  hym 
goo. 

45  Then  many  of  the  Jewes  which  cam 
to  Mary,  and  had  sene  the  thynges  which 
Jesus  did,  beleved  on  liym. 

46  But  some  off  them  went  their  wayes 

Li 


51-4  GOTHIC,  360. 

samm,  yali  qej)un  du  am,  ];atei  gatawkla 
lesus. 

47  Galesun  |)an  l^ai  auhumistans  gud- 
yans  yah  \>ixi  Farei    •     t    •    • 


Chap.  XII.     i 


tv 


in  Bejjaniyin, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

and  ssedon  liiin,  cla  }'ing  de  se  HEelend 
dyde.''" 

47  Witodllce  da  bisceopas  and  da 
Pliavisei  gaderodon  gemot,  and  cwajdon, 
Hwset  d5  Ave  1  fordam  cies  man  AvyrcJ) 
mycele  tacna. 

48  Gif  we  liine  forlivta}>,  ealle  gelyfajj 
on  liine  ;  and  Komane  cumajj,  and  nimaj) 
ure  land  and  urne  Jjeodscipe. 

49  Hyra  Cm  wjbs  genemned  Caiplias, 
se  wpes  da  on  geai-e  l)isceop,  and  cw8ej> 
to  him,  Ge  nyton  nanj)ing, 

50  Ne  ne  ge]?encea|),  dset  us  ys  betere, 
deet  an  man  swelte  for  folce,  and  eall 
jjcod  ne  forwurde. 

51  Ne  cwpejj  he  dset  of  him  sylfum,  ac 
da  he  wa?s  dajt  gear  bisceop,  he  witegode, 
dset  se  Heelcnd  soeolde  sweltan  for  dajre 
jseode, 

52  And  na  synderlice  for  dsere  jjeode, 
ac  dset  he  wolde  gesomnian  toga?dere 
Godes  beam  de  todrifene  vveeron. 

53  Of  dam  daege  hig  )johton  daet  hi 
woldon  hyne  ofslean. 

54  Da  ne  for  se  Hselend  na  openHce 
gemang  dam  Indeum ;  ac  for  on  dset 
land  wid  dset  Avesten,  on  da  bnrh,  de 
ys  genemned  EfFrem,  and  wunode  dser 
mid  his  leorning-cnilitum. 

55  ludea  eastron  Avseron  gehende,  and 
manega  foron  of  dam  lande  to  Hieru- 
salem  ser  dam  eastron,  dst  hig  woldon 
hig  sylfe  gelialgian. 

56  Hig  sohton  done  Hselend,  and 
sprgecon  him  betwynan.  daer  hig  stodon 
on  dam  temple,  and  dus  cwsedon,  Hwiet 
wene  ge,  dfet  he  ne  cume  to  freols- 
dsege  1 

57  Da  bisceopas  and  da  Pharisei 
hsefdon  beboden,  gif  hwa  Aviste  hwar 
he  WEere,  dset  he  hyt  cydde,  dset  hig 
mihton  hine  niman. 


Chap.  XII.    '''i  Se  Haelend  com  syx 
dagum   jer   dam   eastron  to   Bethania, 


XL47--XII.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

rimrisccs,    ami    soideu   to    hem,    what 
tliinjTis  he  iliclc. 

47  Therforc  the  bischoiis  and  Pharisees 
gech-idcii  a  counceil  a^ens  Jhesu,  and 
sciden,  What  don  we  {  for  this  man 
tloth  many  signes.^ 

48  If  we  leeue  him  thus,  allc  men 
schulen  bileue  in  to  him  ;  and  Romayns 
schulen  come,  and  schulen  take  oure 
[»h»cc  and  flok. 

49  Forsoth  oon  of  hem,  Cayfas  l)y 
name,  whannc  he  •was  bischoj)  of  that 
5eer,  scide  to  hem,  3c  witen  no  thing, 

50  Xethir  thenkcn,  for  it  spedith  to 
50U,  that  o  man  deie  for  the  peple,  and 
that  alle  folk  pcrisehc  not. 

51  Forsoth  ho  seide  not  this  thing  of 
him  silf,  but  whannc  he  was  bischop  of 
that  5eer,  he  prophesicde,  for  Jhcsu  was 
to  deyinge  for  the  folk, 

52  And  not  oonly  for  the  folk,  but 
tliat  he  schulde  gedere  in  to  oon  the 
>oncs  of  God  that  wercn  scaterid. 

.-3  Therfove  fro  that  day  thei  tliou5ten 
for  to  sle  hiiu. 

",4  Therfore  Jhesu  walkide  not  now 
opynli  at  the  Jewis  ;  but  he  wente  in  to 
a  cuntree  bisydis  the  desert,  in  to  a 
ritee,  that  is  seid  Effrem,  and  there  he 
dwelte  with  his  disci plis. 

,^5  Foi"sothe  the  pask  of  Jewis  was 
next,  and  many  of  the  cuntree  sti5eden 
vp  to  Jerusalem  the  day  biforc  pask,  for 
to  halowe  hem  selue. 

56  Therfore  thei  sou3ten  Jhesu,  and 
s])aken  to  gidei-e,  stoiulinge  in  the  tem- 
ple, What  gessen  5e,  for  he  coraeth  not 
to  the  feestc  day  1 

57  Forsothe  the  bischopis  and  Pharisees 
hadden  50uun  a  maundcment,  that  if  ony 
man  knew  wlier  he  is,  he  schcwe,  that 
thei  taken  hym. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


515 


Chap.  XII.     i  Therforc  Jhcsu  biforc 
sixe  dayes   of  jjask   cam  to   Bethanyc, 


to  tlic  Pharises,  and  tolde  them,  what 
Jesus  had  done. 

47  Then  gadercd  the  hye  prestes  and 
Pharises  a  counsel),  and  sayde,  What  do 
we  1  this  man  doeth  many  miracles. 

48  Yf  we  lett  hym  scape  thus,  all  men 
will  bclcve  on  hym  ;  and  the  Romaynes 
shall  come,  and  take  awaye  oure  couutre 
and  pco])le. 

49  And  won  of  them,  named  Cayphas, 
which  was  the  hye  ])rest  that  same  yeare, 
sayde  vnto  them.  Ye  2)erceave  nothyngc 
att  all, 

50  ]!s^or  yett  consider,  that  it  is  expe- 
dient for  vs,  that  won  man  deye  for  the 
people,  and  nott  that  all  the  people 
I^erisshe. 

51  This  spake  he  nott  of  hym  silfe, 
butt  beynge  hye  pi'cste  that  same  yeare, 
jirophesicd  he,  that  Jesus  shulde  deye 
for  the  peoj)le, 

52  And  not  for  the  peo])le  only,  but 
tliat  he  shulde  gadder  to  geilder  in  Avon 
the  children  of  Gud  which  were  scattered 
abroode. 

53  From  that  dny  kept  they  a  counsell 
togedder  for  to  ])ut  hym  to  deeth. 

54  Jesus  therfore  walked  no  more 
openly  amouge  the  lewes  ;  butt  went  his 
waye  thence  vnto  a  countre  ny  to  a 
wilderues,  into  a  cite,  called  Effraym, 
and  there  haunted  with  his  disciples. 

55  Tlie  lewes  ester  was  neye  att  bond, 
and  many  went  out  of  the  countre  vppe 
to  Jerusalem  before  the  ester,  to  purify 
them  selves. 

56  Then  sought  they  for  Jesus,  and 
spake  bitwene  them  selves,  as  they  stode 
in  the  temple,  What  thynke  ye,  seynge 
he  commeth  not  to  the  feast  ] 

57  The  hye  prestes  and  Pharises  had 
geven  a  comniaundment,  that  yf  eny 
man  knew  where  he  were,  he  shulde 
shewe  it,  that  they  myght  take  hym. 


Chap.  XII.    i  Then  Jesus  before  sixe 
dayes  of  ester  cam  to  Bethany,  where 

L  1  2 


516 


GOTHIC,  360. 


I'avei  was  Lazarus  sa  daujja,  jiauei  ur- 
raisida  us  daujjuim  lesus. 

2  paruh  gawaurhtedun  iinma  nalitamat, 
yainar  yah  Marj^a  andbahtida  ;  'i\>  Lazar- 
us was  sums  J)ize  auakumbyandane  mi]) 
imma. 

3  Ijj  Marya  nam  pund  balsanis  nardaus 
pistikeinis  filugalaubis,  yah  gasalboda 
fotuns  lesua,  yah  biswarb  fotuns  is 
skufta  seinamma  ;  \]>  sa  gards  fulls  war]) 
dauiiais  Jjizos  salbouais. 

4  Qa|>  )ian  aius  j'ize  siponye  'is,  Yudas 
Seimonis,  sa  Iskarlotes,  izei  skaftida  sik 
du  galewyan  ina, 

5  Duwhe  }:ata  balsan  ni  frabauht  Avas 
in  .t.  skatte,  yah  fradailij)  wesi  jjarbam  1 

6  patu)j-};an  qa}),  ni  jjeei  ina  |)ize  Jiarb- 
ane  kara  wesi,  ak  unte  ])iubs  was,  yah 
arka  habaida  yah  Jjata  iuuwaurpano  bar. 

7  Qa})  [an  lesus,  Let  iya,  in  dag  ga- 
filhis  meinis  fastaida  Jjata  ; 

8  IJ/  l^ans  unledans  sinteino  habaij)  m\\> 
izwis,  ij)  mik  ni  sinteino  habai]). 

9  Fan])  \)an  manageins  fiUi  ludaie,  ))atei 
lesus  yainar  ist ;  yah  qemun,  ni  in  les- 
uis  ainis,  ak  ei  yali  Lazaru  sewheiua, 
Jianei  urraisida  us  daujjaiin. 

10  Munaidedunu})-))an  auk  J)ai  auhum- 
istans  gudyans  ei  yah  Lazarau  usqcm- 
eina, 

1 1  Unte  managai  in  ))is  garunnun  lu- 
daiei,  yah  galaubideduu  lesua. 

12  Iftumin  daga  manageins  filu,  sei 
qam  at  duljjai,  gahausyandans  j^atei 
qimi])  lesus  in  lairausaulwmai, 

13  Nemun  astans  peikabagme,  yah  ur- 
runnun  wij)ragamotyan  imma,  yah  hrop- 
idedun,  Osanna,  ]3iu[)ida  sa  qimanda  in 
namin  Frauyins,  j)iudans  Israelis. 

14  Bigat  jjan  lesus  asilu,  gasat  ana 
ina,  swaswe  ist  gamelij), 

15  Ni   ogs   ])us,    dauhtar   Sion ;  sai ! 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

dar  Lazarus  wses  dead,  de  se   Hselend 
awrelite. 

2  Hig  worhton  him  deer  gebeorscipc, 
and  Martha  |)enode ;  Lazarus  wa'S  an 
daera  de  mid  him  stet. 

3  Maria  nam  an  piind  deorwyrjiic 
sealfe  mid  dam  wyrt-gemange  de  liig 
nardus  hata|>,  and  smyrede  dses  Hsel- 
endes  fet,  and  drigde  mid  hyre  loccum  ; 
and  dset  bus  waes  gefylled  of  dsere  sealfe 
swsecce. 

4  Da    cwse])    an    liis    leorning-cnihta, 

ludas  Scariod, de  hine  be- 

Isewde, 

5  Hwi  ne  sealde  heo  das  sealfe  wid 
]>rym  hundred  penegum,  dset  man  mihtc 
syllan  Jjearfum  1 

6  Ne  CAVsej)  he  na  d.iet,  foi'dig  de  him 
gebyrode  to  dam  (learfum,  ac  fordam  de 
he  wses  )ie6f,  and  Iia'fde  serin  and  ba^r 
da  |)ing  de  man  sende. 

7  Da  cwsep  se  Haelend,  Lset  hig,  djet 
heo  healde  da  of  done  doeg  de  man  me 
bebyrige  ; 

8  Ge  liabba})  symle  ))earfan  mid  eow, 
ac  ge  nabbaj)  me  symle. 

9  Micel  msenigeo  dara  ludea  gecneow, 
dset  he  waes  daer  ;  and  hig  comon,  uses 
na  for  dees  Hselendes  ))ingon  synderlice, 
ac  dset  liig  woldon  geseon  Lazarum,  de 
he  awehte  of  deajje. 

10  Dara  sacerda  ealdras  Jjchton  diet 
hig  woldon  Lazarum  ofslean, 

1 1  Fordam  de  manega  foron  fram  dam 
ludeum  for  liis  j^ingon,  and  gelyfdon  on 
done  Hselend. 

1 2  On  morgen  mycel  msenigeo,  de  com 
to  dam  freols-diege,  da  hig  gehyrdon 
dset  se  Hselend  com  to  Hierusalem, 

13  Hi  namon  palm-treowa  twlgu,  and 
eodon  ut  ongean  hine,  and  clypodon. 
Si  Israhela  cing  hal  and  gebletsod,  de 
com  on  Drihtnes  naman. 

14  And  se  Hselend  gemette  Tmne  assan, 
and  rad  on-uppan  dam,  swa  hit  awriten 

15  Ne  ondrBed  du,  Siones  duhter ;  nii ! 


Xir.  2-15]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

wher   Lazarus  was  ilecil,   wluim  Jliesu 
reyside. 

2  Forsotli  tlioi  niadon  to  liiin  a  sopcre 
there,  ami  Martlia  inynistriile  to  liyin  ; 
Lazarus  foisothc  was  oon  of  men  sit- 
tinge  at  tlie  mote  with  him, 

3  Therforc  ^larie  took  a  poimd  of 
oyneinent  spikenanl,^  precious,  and  an- 
oyntide  the  feet  of  Jhesu,  and  wiptc  liis 
feete  witii  her  heeris ;  and  the  hous  is 
tilHd  of  the  sauour  of  oygncment. 

4  Therfore  Judas  Scarioth,  ....  oon 
of  his  diseiplis,  that  was  to  bitraynge 
hym,  seiih% 

5  Whi  this  oygncment  is  not  seek!  for 
thrc  hundrid  pens,  and  is  5ouun  to  ncdy 
men  1 

6  Forsoth  lie  scide  this  thing,  not  for 
it  perteynede  to  him  of  nedy  rrien,  but 
for  he  was  a  theef,  and  he  hau}nge 
pursis  baar  tho  tiiingis  that  weren  sent. 

7  Therfore  Jhesu  seide,  Suttre  50  hir, 
that  in  to  the  day  of  my  biiying  sche 
ke\)e  that  ; 

8  Forsothe  50  schulen  euer  haue  pore 
men  with  50U,  sotldi  5e  schulen  not 
euere  haue  me. 

9  Therfore  myche  cumpany  of  the 
Jewis  knewe,  that  Jhesu  was  there  ; 
and  thei  camen,  not  oonly  for  Jhesu, 
but  for  to  se  Lazarus,  whom  he  reysede 
fro  deede  men. 

I  o  Forsothe  the  princes  of  pi*estis 
tlHm5tcu  for  to  sle  Lazarus, 

I I  For  manye  of  the  Jewis  for  li3Mn 
wente  awci,  and  beleueden  in  to  Jhesu. 

1 2  Forsothe  on  the  morwe  a  myche 
cumpan}',  that  cam  to  gidere  at  the 
feeste  day,  whanne  thei  liadden  herd, 
for  Jhesu  cometh  to  Jerusalem, 

I  ;;^  Tooken  brauncliis  of  palmes,  and 
cameu  foitii  a5ens  him,  and  crieden,  O- 
8anna,  blessid  is  he,  that  cometh  iu  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  king  of  Israel. 

14  And  Jhesu  fond  a  litil  asse,  and  sat 
on  him,  as  it  is  writun, 

15  The    dou  tir    of   Syon,    nyle    tlicu  , 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


517 


Lazarus    which    Avas    deed    was,    whom 
Jesus  rayscd  from  dcoth. 

2  Tliore  they  made  him  a  supper,  and 
I\lartha  served  ;  butt  Lazarus  was  won 
of  them  that  sate  at  the  tal>lc  with  hym. 

3  Then  toke  Mary  a  pounde  off  oynt- 
mcnt  called  nardus,  perfecte  and  pre- 
cious, and  anoynted  Jesus  fete,  and 
\vei)t  his  fete  with  her  heer  ;  and  all 
the  housse  smelled  oft'  the  savre  off"  the 
oyntment. 

4  Tlien  sayde  won  of  his  disciples, 
named  Judas  Iscariot,  Simons  sonne, 
which  after  wardc  betrayed  hym, 

5  Why  was  not  this  oyntment  solde 
for  thre  hondrcde  pence,  and  geven  to 
the  povre 1 

6  This  saydc  he,  not  that  he  cared  for 
the  pover,  butt  be  cause  he  was  a  thefe, 
and  kei")t  the  bagge  and  bare  that  which 
was  geven. 

7  Then  sayde  Jesus,  Lett  her  alone, 
agaynst  the  daye  off"  my  buryinge  she 
kept  it ; 

8  The  povre  all  wayes  shall  ye  have 
with  you,  butt  me  shall  ye  uott  all 
waj'cs  have. 

9  Moche  people  off"  the  lewes  had  know- 
ledge, that  he  was  there  ;  and  they  cam, 
nott  for  Jesus  sake  only,  butt  that  they 
myglit  se  Lazarus  also,  whom  he  rayscd 
from  deeth. 

10  The  hye  prestes  held  a  counsell  that 
they  myght  put  Lazarus  to  deeth  also, 

1 1  Be  cause  that  for  his  sake  many  of 
the  lewes  went  awaye,  and  beleved  on 
Jesus. 

1 2  On  the  morowe  moche  people,  Avhicli 
cam  to  the  feast,  when  they  herde  that 
Jesus  shulde  come  to  Jerusalem, 

13  Toke  braunches  off'palme  trees,  and 
went  and  mett  hym,  and  cryed,  Ho- 
sianna,  blessed  is  he,  that  in  the  name 
of  the  Lorde  commeth,  kynge  of  Isra- 
hell. 

14  Jesus  gott  a  yonge  asse,  and  sate 
theron,  acordynge  to  that  wich  was 
written, 

15  Feare  nott,  doughtcr  of  Sion ;  be- 


518 


GOTHIC,  560. 


I'iiulans   peins  qiinij>,   sitands   ana  fulin 
asilaus. 

16  patu])-]5an  ni  kunj^eclun  slponyos  is 
fruniist,  ak  bij^e  gasweraijjs  was  lesus, 
])anuh  ganumdeduii,  })atei  |ata  was  du 
J)amma  gameli]?,  yah  ]jata  gatawideduu 
imma. 

17  Wcitwodida  |-an  so  managei,  sei  was 
niij)  iiiiina,  Jjuii  Lazavii  wopida  us  lilaiwa, 
yah  urraisida  i'lia  us  dauj-'aini. 

18  Du)5|ie  iddyedun  gamotyan  imnia 
managei,  unte  hausidedun  e;  gatawidedi 
]>o  talkn. 

19  panuh  }>ai  Fareisaieis  qe])un  du  sis 
misso,  SaiwhiJ/,  Jjatei  ni  bui^i|>  waiht  ; 
sai !  so  manaseds  afar  imma  gakijj. 

20  Wesunu)3-jjan  sumai  jjiudo,  )ize  ur- 
rinnandane  ei  inwiteina  in  |jizai  dul|)ai. 

21  pai  at'iddyedun  du  Filippau,  |jamma 
fram  Bejjsaeida  Galeilaie,  yah  bedun  ina, 
qijiandans,  Fi-au^'a,  wileima  lesu  gasai- 
■\vhan. 

22  GaggiJ?  Filippus,  yah  qij?i}'  du  An- 
draiin  ;  yah  aftra  Andraias  yali  Filippus 
qe})un  du  lesua. 

23  Ij)  lesus  andhof  im,  qif^ands,  Qam 
wheila,  ei  sweraidau  sunus  mans. 

24  Amen,  amen,  qijja  izwis,  nibai 
kaurno  whaiteis  gadriusando  in  airj^a 
gaswilti|>,  silbo  ainata  af1ifni|5 ;  iJ)  yabai 
gaswilti]',  manag  akrau  baii'ijj. 

25  Saei  friyo]>  saiwala  seina,  fraqisteij? 
izai  ;  yah  saei  fiai|)  saiwala  sein'a  in 
}iamma  fairwhau,  in  libainai  aiweinon 
bairgi})  izai. 

26  Yabai  mis  whas  audbahtyai,  mik 
laistyai ;  yah  fnirci  im  ik,  j^aruh  sa  and- 
bahts  meins  wisan  habaij?.  Yah  yabai 
"whas  mis  andbahteij),  sweraij)  ina  atta. 

27  Nu  saiwala  meina  gadrobnoda,  yah 
wha  qijjau  1  Atta,  nasei  mik  us  j'izai 
"wheilai ;  akei  dujjjjc  qani  in  |nzai  wheilai; 

28  Atta,  hauhei  namo  jjeinata.  Qam 
]'an  stibna  us  himina,  Yah  hauhida,  yah 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

j  din  cing  cym]^,  uppan  assan  folan  sitt- 
ende. 

16  Ne  undergeton  hys  leorning-cnihtas 
dels  f>lng  airest,  ac  da  se  Heelend  wa»s 
gewuldrod,  da  gemundon  liig,  dset  das 
]:ing  waeron  awritene  be  him,  and  das 
jiing  hig  dydon  him. 

17  Seo  mfenigeo  de  wses  mid  him,  dii 
he  Lazarum  clypode  of  da^re  byrgene, 
and  hine  awehte  of  deaj'e,  cydde  gc- 
witnesse. 

18  And  fordi  him  com  seo  meenigeo 
ongean,  fordam  de  li'i  gehyrdon  dset  he 
woihte  daet  tacn. 

1 9  Da  Pharisei  cwsedon  betwux  him 
sylfum,  We  geseoj),  diet  we  nanjiing  no 
fremia])  ;  nu  !  wyle  eall  middan-eard 
seftcr  him, 

20  Sume  de  AvtCron  h?edene,  de  furou 
drefc  big  woldon  hi  gcbiddan  on  dam 
freols-diege. 

21  Da  genealteiiton  to  Philippe,  se  wees 
of  dfere  Galileiscan  Bcthsaida,  and  hi 
bsedon  bine,  and  cwsedon,  Leof,  we 
wyllajj  geseon  done  Hselend. 

22  Da  eode  Philippus.  and  fpcde  hit 
AndrejB  ;  and  eft  Andreas  and  Pliilippus 
hit  Sivdon  dam  Heelende. 

23  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  and 
cwa?]j,  Seo  tid  cym]?,  dset  mannes  suuu 
by])  geswutelod.''' 

24  Sojilice,  ic  secge  eow,  da3t  hwsetene 
corn  wunajj  ana,  buton  hyt  fealle  on 
eorj'an  and  sy  dead  ;  gif  hit  by]j  dead, 
hit  bring])  mycelne  wiiestm. 

25  Se  de  lufa])  his  sawle,  forspil)?  hig ; 
and  se  de  hata|)  his  sawle  on  disum 
mi(klan-earde,  gehylt  hi  on  ecum  life. 

26  Gif  hwd  jenige  me,  fylige  me  ;  and 
m;n  jieu  bi]j  daer,  dser  ic  eom.  Gif  mo 
liwii  J;ena|),  miu  feeder  hine  wurjjaj). 


27  Nil  min  sawl  ys  gedrefed,  and  hAVivt 
seege  ic  1  Fteder,  gehsGl  me  of  disse 
tide  ;  ac  for  dam  ic  com  on  das  tid  ; 

28  Fanler,  gewuldra  d'nne  naman.  Da 
com    stefu    of   heofone,   dus    cwedcnde, 


XII.  i6-2S.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

drcdo  ;  lo  I  till  king  comctli,  sittiugc  on 
tlio  colt  of  a  schc  n^se. 

16  His  disciiilis  kncwen  not  first  tlics 
thingis.  but  wlianiie  .Iliosu  is  glorified, 
thanne  tlici  rccordiilen,^  for  tlios  thingis 
worcn  writoii  of  liini,  and  tlios  thiugis 
thei  diden  to  liini. 

1 7  Tlicrfore  tlic  cumpany  baar  wit- 
nessing, that  Avas  with  him,  whannc  he 
clepide  Lazarus  fro  the  graue,  and 
reyside  him  fro  deede  men. 

1 8  Therfore  and  the  cumpany  cam 
nictingc  to  him,  for  thei  horden  him 
to  haue  don  this  signo. 

19  Therfore  the  riiarisccs  seiden  to 
hem  solue,  3e  seen,  for  we  profitcn  no 
thing  ;  lo  !  al  the  world  weute  aftir  him. 

20  Forsothe  ther  wercn  summe  hcthen 
men,  of  hom  that  hadden  st}  5ed  vp  for 
to  worschipe  in  the  feeste  day. 

21  Therfore  thes  camen  to  Philip,  that 
Avas  of  Bethsaida  of  Galilee,  and  preieden 
him,  seyinge,  Sire,  we  wolen  se  Jhesu. 

22  Philip  Cometh,  and  scith  to  /\ndrew; 
eft  Andrew  and  Philip  seiden  to  Jhesu. 

23  Sothli  Jhesu  answeride  to  hem,  sey- 
inge, The  our  cometh,  that  manuis  sone 
be  clarified. 

24  Treuli,  trculi,  I  seie  to  50U,  no  but 
a  corn  of  whete  fallinge  in  to  the  erthe 
schal  be  deed,  it  dwellith  aloone  ;  sothli 
if  it  schal  be  deed,  it  bringith  moche 
fruyt. 

25  lie  that  loueth  his  soule,^  schal 
leese  it;  and  he  that  hatith  his  soule''' 
in  this  world,  kepith  it  in  to  euere- 
lasting  lyf. 

26  If  ony  man  scnilth  to  me,  sue  he 
me  ;  and  where  I  am,  there  and  my 
mynystre^  schal  be.  If  ony  man  schal 
mynistre  to  me,  my  fadir  schal  worschipe 
him. 

27  Xow  my  soule  is  troublid,  and  what 
schal  I  seye  1  Fadir,  saue  me  fro  this 
our  ;  but  for  that  thing  I  cam  in  to  this 
our  ; 

28  Fadir,  clarifie  thi  name.  Therfore 
a  vois  cam  fro  heuene,  seyinge,  And  I 


TYND  ALE.  1/^26. 


519 


holde  !  thy  kynge  commcth,  sittynge  on 
an  asses  coolte. 

16  These  thynges  vndorstode  not  his 
disciples  at  the  fyrst,  but  when  Jesus 
was  gloryfied,  then  remcniljryd  they, 
that  soche  thynges  were  written  of  hym, 
and  that  soche  thynges  they  had  done 
vnto  hym. 

17  The  ]ieoplc  that  was  with  hym, 
Avhen  he  called  Lazarus  out  off  his  grave, 
and  raysed  hym  from  deeth,  bare  rc- 
corde. 

1 8  Therfoi'C  met  hym  the  pcple,  be 
cause  they  herde  that  he  had  dune  soche 
a  myracle. 

1 9  The  Pharises  thcrfoi'C  sayde  amonge 
them  selves,  Ye  se,  that  we  prevayle  no 
thynge  ;  loo  !  all  the  worldc  goth  after 
hym. 

20  There  were  certaync  grekcs,  amonge 
them  which  cam  to  praye  at  the  feast. 

21  The  same  cam  to  Philip,  Avhich  was 
of  Pcthsayda  a  cite  in  Galile,  and  de- 
sired hym,  sayinge,  Syr,  Ave  Avolde  faync 
se  Jesus. 

22  Philip  cam,  and  tolde  Andrew  ;  and 
agayne  AndrcAv  and  Philip  tolde  Jesus. 

23  And  Jesus  ansAvered  them,  sayinge, 
The  houre  is  come,  that  the  sonue  of 
man  must  be  glorified. 

24  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you, 
except  the  wheate  corne  fall  into  the 
grounde  and  deye,  it  bydeth  alone  ;  yf 
it  deye,  it  brengeth  forth  moche  frute. 

25  He  that  loveth  his  life,  shall  de- 
stroye  it ;  and  he  that  hateth  his  lyfe 
in  this  Avorlde,  shall  kepe  it  vnto  lyfe 
eternall. 

26  Yf  cny  man  mynistcr  vnto  me,  lett 
hym  foloAve  me  ;  and  Avhere  I  am,  there 
shall  also  my  minister  be.  And  if  eny 
man  minister  vnto  me,  hym  Avill  my 
father  honoure. 

27  NoAve  is  my  soule  troubled,  and 
what  shall  I  saye  I  Father,  delyvre  me 
from  this  houre  ;  but  therfore  cam  I 
vnto  this  houre  ; 

28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.  Then 
cam  there  a  voyce  from  heven,  I  have 


520  GOTHIC,  360. 

aftra  hauliya. 

29  jNIanagei  ]?an  sei  sto}',  galiausyandei, 
qejjun,  Jjeiwhou  wairjjau  ;  sumaih  qejjun, 
aggilus  du  imma  rodida. 

30  Andhof  lesus,  yah  qajj,  Ni  in  melna 
so  stibna  war)),  ak  in  izwara. 

31  Nu  staua  ist  ])izai  manasedai,  nu  sa 
reiks  jjis  fairwhaus  uswaiq^ada  ut. 

32  Yah  Tk  yabai  ushauhyada  af  alrj;ai, 
alia  atj^insa  du  mis. 

33  patu})-]3an  qa]?,  handwyands  'whileik- 
amma  daujjau  skulda  gadau})iian. 

34  Andhof  imma  so  managei,  Weis 
hausidedum  ana  witoda,  ]?atei  Christus 
siyai  du  aiwa  ;  yah  whaiwa  ]>u  qijjis, 
patei  skulds  ist  ushauhyan  sa  suuus 
mans  1     Whas  ist  sa  sunns  mans  1 

35  Q^l'  {'^11  du  im  lesus,  Nauh  leitll 
mel  liuha)?  in  izwis  ist  ;  gaggi)',  l^ande 
liulia|j  habaijj,  ei  riqiz  izwis  ni  gafahai ; 
yah  saei  gaggij?  in  riqiza,  ni  wait  wha|) 

36  pande  liuha])  habai}),  galaubei])  du 
liuhada,  ei  snnyus  liuhadis  wair)jai}>. 
pata  rodida  lesus,  yah  galai]>,  yah  ga- 
falh  sik  faura  im. 

37  Swa  fihi  imma  taikne  gatauyandin 
in  andwairjiya  ize,  ni  galaubidedun  im- 
ma ; 

38  Ei  Jiata  waurd  Esaeiins,  praufetaus, 
usfullnodedi,  Jjatei  qa}),  Frauya,  whas 
galaubida  hauseinai  unsarai,  yah  arms 
Frauyins  whamma  andhulij^s  war]>  ] 

39  Du])]3e  ni  mahtedun  galaubyan,  unte 
aftra  qa)?  Esaeias, 

40  Gablindida  ize  augona,  yah  gadaub- 
iila  ize  hairtona,  ei  ni  gaumidedeina 
augam,  yah  frojieina  hairtin  ;  yah  ga- 
wandidedeina,  yah  ganasidedyau  ins. 

41  pata  qaj)  Esaeias,  |jan  sawh  wuljm 
is,  yah  rodida  bi  ina. 

42  panuh  Jjan  swe};auh  yah  us  j^aim 
reikam  maiiagai  galaubidedun  du  iinma, 
akei  faura  Fareisaium  ni  andhaihaitun, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

And  ic  gewuldrode,   and  eft  ic  gewul- 
drige. 

29  Seo  nipeuigeo  de  Clser  stod,  and  ttset 
gebyrde,  Sciedon,  dset  hyt  J)unrode  ;  sume 
ssedon,  dset  engel  spsece  wid  hyne. 

30  Se  Hselend,  him  andswarode,  and 
c\v8e]7,  Ne  com  deos  stefen  for  minum 
j>ingum,  ac  for  eowrum  Jjingum. 

31  Nu  ys  middan-eardes  d5m,  nu  by^i 
dyses  middan-eardes  ealdor  ut-aworpen. 

32  And  ,gif    ic   beo   up-Hiafen    fram    ] 
eorJ)an,  ic  teo  ealle  |jing  to  me  sylfum. 

33  Dset  he  ssede,  and  tacnode  hwylcum 
dea|)e  he  wolde  sweltan. 

34  Seo  msenigeo  him  andswarode  and 
cweeji.  We  gehyrdon  on  da?re  se,  daet 
Crist  bi))  on  ecnysse  ;  and  humeta  segest 
du.  Hit  gebyraj)  dset  mannes  sunu  beo 
up-ahafen  1  Hwset  ys  des  mannes  sunu  1 

35  Da  cw3e)>  se  Hselend,  Nu  gyt  ys 
lytel  leoht  on  eow ;  ga)?,  da  hwile  de  ge 
leoht  habljon,  da;t  })ystro  eow  ne  befon  ; 
se  de  gsej)  on  )?ystrum,  he  nat  hwjxler 
he  gaef). 

36  Da  hwile  de  ge  leoht  habbon,  ge- 
lyfaj)  on  leoht,  dset  ge  syn  leohtes  beam. 
Das  jjing  se  Hselend  him  ssede,  and 
code,  and  bediglode  hine  fram  him. 

37  Da  he  swa  mycele  tiicn  dyde  be- 
foran  him,  hi  ne  gelyfdon  on  hyne  ; 

38  Doet  dses  witegan  word,  Isaias,  weere 
gefylled,  de  he  cwie)^,  Drihten,  hwa  ge- 
lyfde  dt¥S  de  we  geliyrdon,  and  hwam 
W0es  Drihtnes  strencj?  geswutelod  1 

39  Fordi  hi  ne  mihton  gelyfan,  fordam 
Isaias  cwpe))  eft, 

40  He  tiblende  hyra  eagan,  and  ahyrde 
hyra  heortan,  dset  hi  ne  geseon  mid 
hyra  eagon,  and  mid  hyra  heortan  ne 
ongyton  ;  and  syn  gecyrrede,  and  ic  hig 
gehsele. 

41  Isaias  saede  das  ))ing,  dl  he  geseah 
hys  wuldor,  and  sprsec  be  him. 

42  And  deah  manega  of  dam  ealdron 
gelyfdon  on  hyne,  ac  hi  hit  ne  cj'ddon 
fur  dtera   Pharisea  j^ingum,   de-la?s  hig 


Xir.  29-42.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
liaue  clarificil,  ami  eft  I  sclial  "clarific. 

20  Tlierforc  the  cumpany  tliat  stood, 
ami  lierde,  seide,  thumlir  to  be  niaad  ; 
otiiere  men  seideu,  an  aiingol  si)ak  to 
him. 

30  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide,  This 
vois  cam  not  for  me,  but  for  50U. 

31  Now  is  dom  of  the  world,  now  the 
jirince  of  this  woi'ld  schal  be  cast  out. 

32  And  if  I  schal  be  onliaunsid  fro  the 
orthe,  I  schal  drawe  alle  thingis  to  my 
gilf. 

33  Sothli  he  seide  this  thinc^,  signifi- 
ynge  bi  what  deeth  he  was  to  deiynge. 

34  The  cumpany  answeride  to  him, 
AVe  han  herd  of  tiie  lawe,  for  Crist 
<l\vellith  in  to  with  outen  ende  ;  and 
hou  seist  thou,  It  bihoueth  mannis  sone 
for  to  be  arerid  1  Who  is  this  mannis 
sone  ? 

35  Therfore  Jhesu  scitli  to  hcni,  5ifc  «• 
litil  li5t  is  in  50U  ;  watke  ;e,  the  while 
^e  han  li5t,  that  derknessis  catche  not 
50U  ;  and  he  that  wandiith  iu  derknessis, 
woot  nere  whidur  he  goth. 

36  The  while  50  han  li5t,  byleue  ^e  in 
to  li5t,  that  56  be  the  sones  of  li3t. 
.liiesu  spak  tlies  thingis,  and  wente, 
and  hidde  liim  fro  hem. 

37  Sothiiwjjanne  hehadde  don  somanye 
signes^  Ijyfoi-e  hem,  tliei  bileuedeu  not 
in  to  him  ; 

38  That  the  word  of  Ysaie,  the  ]iro- 
j)hete,  sclmlde  be  fillid,  wliicii  he  seide, 
Lord,  who  bileucde  to  oure  heering, 
and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
schcwid  1 

39  Therfore  thei  my5ten  not  bilcue, 
for  eft  Ysaye  seide, 

40  He  hath  blyndid  her  yxen,  Vtnd  he 
hath  endurid^  tlie  lierte  of  hem,  that 
thei  sc  not  with  y5en,  and  vndirstonde 
riot  with  herte  ;  and  that  thei  be  con- 
uertid,^  and  1  iieele  hem. 

41  Ysaie  seid  thes  thingis,  whanne  he 
sy5  the  glorie  of  hym,  and  spak  of  him. 

42  Xetheles  and  of  the  princes  manye 
l)ileueden  in  to  him,  but  for  the  Farisees 
thei  knowlechideu  not,  that  thei  sclmld- 


TYNDALE,  1526.  r>2l 

glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  agayne. 

29  Tiicn  sayde  the  people  that  stode 
by,  and  herde,  it  tlu)undreth  ;  other 
sayde,  an  angell  spake  to  hym. 

30  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde,  This 
voyce  cam  nott  be  cause  of  me,  but 
for  youre  sakes. 

31  Nowe  is  the  iudgement  of  this 
worlde,  nowe  shall  the  jirynce  off  this 
woi'lde  be  cast  out  a  dores. 

32  And  I  yf  I  were  lifte  vppc  from 
the  crtiie,  will  drawe  all  men  vnto  me. 

33  This  sayde  Jesus,  signifyingc  what 
deeth  he  shulde  deye. 

34  The  people  answered  hym.  We  have 
herde  of  the  lawe,  that  Christ  bydetli 
ever  ;  and  howe  sayest  thou  then,  That 
the  Sonne  of  man  must  be  lifte  vppe  1 
Who  is  that  soune  of  man  1 

35  Jesus  sayde  vnto  tliem.  Yet  a  lytell 
Aviiyle  is  the  light  with  you ;  walke, 
whill  ye  have  lightt,  lest  the  darcknes 
come  on  you  ;  he  that  walkcth  in  the 
darke,  wotteth  not  whither  he  goeth. 

36  Whyll  ye  have  light,  beleve  on  the 
light,  that  ye  maye  be  the  children  of 
light.  These  tliynges  spake  Jesus,  and 
departed,  and  hid  hym  silfe  from  them. 

37  And  though  he  hade  done  soo  many 
myracles  before  them,  yet  beleved  not 
they  on  hym  ; 

38  That  the  sayinge  of  Esayas,  the 
proi)het,  myght  be  fulfilled,  that  he 
spake,  Lorde,  who  shall  beleve  oure  say- 
inge, and  to  whom  ys  the  arme  off  the 
Lorde  declared  ? 

39  Therfore  eoulde  they  not  beleve,  be 
cause  that  Esaias  sayth  agayne, 

40  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
Jiardened  their  hertes,  that  they  shukl 
not  se  with  their  eyes,  and  vnderstonde 
with  their  hertes  ;  and  shulde  be  con- 
verted, and  I  shulde  heale  them. 

41  Soche  thynges  sayde  E.saias,  when 
he  sawe  hys  g'ory,  and  spake  of  him. 

42  Xeverthelesse  amonge  the  chefe 
rulers  many  beleved  on  hym,  but  be- 
cause of  the  Phariscs  they  wolde  not  be 


522 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ei  us  swnagogein  ni  uswaurpanai  waiir])- 
eina ; 

43  Fiiyodedun  auk  mais  liaulieiu  man- 
niska,  pau  haulieiu  Gujis. 

44  i|)  lesus  liropida,  yak  qa]',  Saei  ga- 
laubeil?  du  mis,  ui  galaubeij^  du  mis,  ak 
du  painma  saudyandin  mik. 

45  Yah  saei  saiwhijj  mik,  saiwhij)  pana 
sandyaudan  mik. 

46  Ik  liuliad  in  J)amma  fairwliau  qam, 
ei  whazuh  saei  galaubyai  du  mis,  iu 
riqiza  ni  wisai. 

47  Yah  yabai  Avhas  meinaim  hausyai 
Avaurdam,  yah  galaubyai,  ik  ni  stoya 
ina ;  nili  ]jan  qam,  ei  stoyau  manased, 
ak  ei  ganasyau  mauased. 

48  Saei  frakann  mis,  yah  ni  andnimij) 
"wauvda  meina,  liabaid  j^ana  stoyandan 
sik  ;  Avaurd  Jiatci  rodida,  j^ata  stoyi]?  iua 
in  sj^edistin  daga. 

49  Unte  ik  us  mis  silbin  ni  rodida,  ak 
saei  sandida  mik,  atta,  sah  mis  anabusn 
at  ...  . 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.    [St.  John 
man  ut-adrife  of  hyra  gcsomnunge  ; 

43  Hi  lufodon  manna  Avuklor,  SAvidor 
donne  Godes  Avuldor. 

44  Se  Hselend  clypode,  and  CAVfe})  to 
him,  Se  de  gelyfj>  on  me,  ne  gelyfj)  he 
na  on  me,  ac  on  done  de  me  sende. 

45  And  se  de  me  gesyh)?,  gesyhjj  done 
de  me  sende. 

46  Ic  com  to  leohte  on  middan-eard, 
and  nan  dara  de  gelyfjj  on  me,  ne  AvunaJ) 
on  Jjystrum. 

47  And  gif  hwa  gehyrpi  mine  Avord, 
and  ne  gehylt,  ne  deme  ic  hine  ;  ne  com 
ic  middan-eard  to  demanne,  ac  da^t  ic 
gehftle  middan-eard. 

48  Se  de  me  forhig{>,  and  mine  Avord 
ne  under-feh|i,  he  hief))  hwa  him  deme  ; 
seo  spsec  de  ic  sppec,  seo  him  dem])  on 
dam  ytemestan  dsege. 

49  Fordam  de  ic  ne  spece  of  me  sylf- 
um,  ac  se  fseder,  de  me  sende,  he  me 
behead,  hwset  ic  cwede,  and  hwa^t  ic 
spece. 

50  And  ic  Avat.  dset  his  bebod  ys  ece 
hf ;  da  ])ing  de  ic  sprece,  ic  sprece,  swa 
fosder  me  stjede. 


Chap.  XIIT.'''  i  ^'r  dam  easter-freols- 
dsege  se  Hcclend  Aviste,  dtet  his  tid  com, 
dset  he  Avohle  gCAvitan  of  dysum  middan- 
earde  to  his  feeder,  da  he  lufode  his 
leorning-cnilitas  de  Aveeron  on  middan- 
eai'de,  od  cnde  he  hig  hifode. 

2  And  da  Drihtnes  Jienung  AA'ses  ge- 
macod,  da  for  se  deofol  on  ludas  heortan 
Scariothes,  .  .  .  dtet  he  hine  bel^wde, 

3  He  AA'iste  dset  faeder  sealde  ealle  }^iug 
on  his  handa,  and  dset  he  com  of  Gode, 
and  cym|)  to  Gode, 

4  He  artts  fram  his  jjenuiige,  and  lede 
his  reaf;  and  nam  Hnen  hrsegel,  and 
begyrde  hyne. 

5  .^fter  dam  he  dyde  AVteter  on  fiet, 


XII.  43--XIII.5]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 
on  not  be  cast  out  of  the  synugogc  ; 

43  Foi-sothe  tlu'i  loueilcn  the  glorie  of 
men,  more  than  the  glorie  of  God. 

44  Foi-sothe  Jhcsii  crycile,  ami  seiilc, 
lie  that  bileueth  in  to  nie,  hilonoth  not 
in  to  me,  but  in  to  hin\  tliat  sente  nie. 

45  He  that  secth  nie,  seeth  him  that 
sente  me. 

46  I  li5t  cam  in  to  the  world,  that  ech 
man  that  bileueth  in  to  me,  dwelle  not 
in  derknessis. 

47  And  if  ony  man  schal  hecrc  my 
Avordis,  and  scluil  not  kepe,  I  deme  not 
him ;  foi-soth  I  cam  not,  that  I  deem 
the  Avorld,  but  that  I  make  the  world 
saf. 

48  He  that  dispisith  me,  and  takith 
not  my  wordis,  hath  him  that  schal 
iugc  him  ;  the  word  that  I  haue  spoken, 
that  sehal  denie  him  in  the  laste  day. 

49  For  I  haue  no5t  spokun  of  my  silf, 
but  the  fadir,  that  sente  me,  gaf  to  me 
a  maundement,  what  I  schal  seie,  and 
what  I  schal  speke. 

,",0  And  I  woot,  for  his  maundement  is 
euerelasting  lyf  ;  therfore  tho  thingis 
that  I  speke,  as  the  fiidir  seide  to  me,  so 
I  speke. 


CiiAP.  XIII.  I  Forsothe  biforc  the 
feeste  day  of  pask  Jhesu  witincre,  fur  his 
our  Cometh,  that  he  passe  of  this  world 
to  the  fadir,  whanne  he  liadde  loued 
liise  that  weren  in  the  world,  in  to  the 
ende  he  louede  hem. 

2  And  the  souper  maad,  whanne  the 
deuel  hadde  sent  now  in  to  the  herte 
0/ Judas,  that  Judas  of  Symount  Seari- 
oth  schulde  bitraye  him, 

3  He  witinge  for  the  fadur  ^af  al!e 
thingis  to  him  in  to  hondis,  and  that  he 
wente  out  fro  God,  and  goth  to  God, 

4  Ilis'th  fro  the  soupor,  and  puttith  his 
clothis  ;  and  whanne  he  liadde  tukuu  u 
Jyimen  cloth,  he  bifore  girde  him. 

5  Aftir\vard   he   sente  water  in  to  a 


TYNDALE,  1526.  r,23 

a  knowou-off  it,  lest  they  shulde  be  cx- 
connnunicate  ; 

43  For  they  loved  the  i)rayse  that  is 
geven  off  men,  more  then  the  prayse 
that  commcth  of  God. 

44  Jesus  cryeil,  and  sayd,  lie  that  bc- 
levi'th  on  me,  bclcveth  nott  on  me,  butt 
on  hym  that  sent  me. 

45  And  he  that  secth  me,  seeth  hyni 
that  sent  me. 

46  I  am  come  a  light  into  the  worlde, 
that  whosoever  beleveth  on  me,  shuldo 
nott  byde  in  darckncs. 

47  And  yf  cny  man  hcare  my  wordes, 
and  beleve  nott,  I  iudgc  hym  not ;  for 
I  cam  not  to  iudge  the  worlde,  butt  to 
save  the  worlde. 

48  He  that  putteth  me  a  wave,  and 
receaveth  nott  my  wordes,  bathe  won 
that  iudgeth  hym  ;  the  wordes  that  I 
have  spoken  shall  iudge  hym  in  the  last 
daye. 

49  For  I  have  not  spoken  off  my  silfe, 
but  my  father,  which  sent  me,  gave  me 
a  commaundment,  what  I  shulde  saye, 
and  what  I  shulde  speake. 

50  And  I  knowe  wele,  that  his  com- 
maundment ys  lyfe  everlastynge  ;  what- 
soever I  speake  therfore,  even  as  my 
father  bade  me,  so  I  sjieake. 


.  Chap.  XIII.  i  Before  the  feast  off 
ester  when  Jesus  knewe,  that  hys  houre 
Avas  come,  thatt  he  shulde  dei)arte  out 
of  this  worlde  vnto  the  father,  when  he 
loved  his  which  were  in  the  worlde,  vnto 
the  ende  he  loved  them. 

2  And  when  supper  was  ended,  after 
that  t!ie  devyil  had  jiut  in  the  hert  off 
Judas  Iscariot,  Simons  sonne,  to  be 
traye  him, 

3  Jesus  knowynge  that  the  father  had 
geven  him  all  thinges  into  his  hondes, 
and  that  he  was  come  from  God,  and 
went  to  God, 

4  He  rose  from  supper,  and  laydc  a 
syile  hys  vpper  garmentes ;  and  toke  a 
towel!,  and  '^yrd  hym  sylfe. 

5  After  that  poured  he  water  into  a 


524 


GOTHIC,  360. 


7t 

qaji,  Ni  allai 

lirainyai  si^uj). 

12  Bi|]eli  }^an  iisjjwoh  fotuns  ize,  yah 
nam  Avastyos  seinos  ;  anakumbyands 
aftra,  qaj>  du  'im,  Witudu  wha  gatawida 
I'zwis  ] 

13  Yus  wopeid  niik  laisarcis  yali  frauya, 
wail  a  (\^\ii\> ;  im  auk. 

14  Yabai  iiu  usjnvoh  izwis  fotuns,  frau- 
ya  yah  laisaveis,  yah  yus  skuki})  i'zwis 
misso  |)\valian  fotuns  ; 

15  Du  frisahtai  auk  atgaf  izwis,  ei  swa- 
swe  ik  gatawida  izwis,  swa  yus  tauyaij). 

16  Amen,  amen,  qij;a  izwis,  iiist  skalks 
maiza  frauyiii  seinamma,  nih  apaustaulus 
inaiza  Jjamma  sandyandin  sik. 

17  pande  jiata  wituj),  audagai  siyu}^, 
yabai  tauyij)  ^ata. 

18  Ni  bi  allans  izwis  qi|ja,  ik  wait 
whavyans  gawalida;  ak  ei  usfuUijj  waur[)i 
|>ata  ganielido,  Saei  matida  mijj  mis 
li!aib,  ushof  ana  mik  fairzna  seina. 

19  Fram  himma  qi)>a  i'zwis,  faur))izei 
waurj>i,  ei  bi];e  wair})ai,  galaubyaijj  Jjatei 
ik  im. 

20  Amen,  amen,  qit^a  izwis,  saei  and- 
nimi])  jiana  j^anei  ik  insandya,  mik  and- 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  Johx 

and  {jwch  his  leorning-cnihta  fet,  and 
dngde  liig  mid  dsere  lin-wsede,  de  he 
Wfes  mid  begyrd. 

6  Da  com  he  to  Simone  Petre,  and 
Petrus  cwEe|)  to  him,  Drihten,  scealt  dii 
J)\vean  ni'ne  fet  1 

7  Se  Hselend  andswarode,  and  cw?ej> 
to  him,  Du  n^'st  mi,  Cttet  ic  d5  ;  ac  cJii 
vfi'.st  syddan. 

8  Petrus  cw.'?)?  to  him,  Ne  })wyhst  du 
nsefre  mine  fet.  Se  Hselend  liim  and- 
swarode and  c\v8e|j,  Gif  ic  de  ne  J)wea, 
nsefst  da  uanne  dsel  myd  me. 

9  Da  cwse])  Simon  Petrus  to  him, 
Drihten,  ne  J;weh  dii  uT  mine  fet  ane, 
ac  eac  min  heafod  and  mine  lianda. 

TO  Da  cwse]>  se  Hselend  to  him,  Se  de 
clsene  by|>,  ne  be]earf  buton  dtet  man 
his  fet  })wea,  ac  ys  eall  clivne ;  and  ge 
synd  sume  chtne,  n?es  nil  ealle. 

1 1  He  wi.ste  witodlice,  hwa  hyne  sceokle 
belsewan  ;  furdam  lie  cwoe]',  Ne  synd  ge 
ealle  cltcne. 

1 2  Syddan  he  hsefde  hyra  fet  a}>wogene, 
he  nam  his  reaf;  and  dl  he  sjet,  he 
cwfejj  eft  to  him,  Wite  ge  hwset  ic  eow 
dyde  1 

I  3  Ge  clypiab  me  lareow  and  drihten, 
and  wel  ge  cweda]? ;  swa  ic  eom  s6]jlice. 

14  Gif  ic  Jjwch  eowre  fet,  [ic  de  eom 
eower  lareow  and  eower  hlafurd,  and  ge 
sceolon  eac  jjwean  eower  gelc  cdres  fet  ;'''] 

15  Ic  eow  sealde  bysne,  dset  ge  don, 
swa  ic  eow  dyde. 

16  SoJ'lice,  ic  eow  secge,  nys  se  |;eowa 
furdra  donne  se  hlaford,  ne  se  serend- 
raca  nys  mserra  donne  se  de  hyne  sende. 

1 7  Gif  ge  das  |)ing  witon,  ge  beo]'  ead- 
ige,  gif  ge  hig  d6\\ 

18  Ne  secge  ic  be  eow  eallon,  ic  wat 
hwylce  ic  geceas  ;  ac  dset  da?t  halige 
gewrit  sy  gefylled,  de  cwyl>,  Se  de  ytt 
hlaf  mj'd  me,  aliefj)  liys  ho  ongean  me. 

1 9  Nu  ic  eow  secge,  jerdam  de  hyt 
gewurde,  dset  ge  gelyfon  donne  hyt  ge- 
worden  h\\>,  dset  ic  hit  eom. 

20  Sol',  ic  eow  secge,  se  de  underfeh[> 
dtene  de  ic  sende,  underfehj?  me  ;  and  se 


XIII.  6-20.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

basyn,  and  l)ip;au  for  to  waisclie  tlisciplis 
feet,  aiul  to  wyiie  witli  the  lyunen  clotli, 
■with  which  he  was  bifore  i^hd. 

6  Theifore  he  cam  to  Syniount  Petre, 
ami  I'etro  scith  to  him,  Loril,  waischist 
thou  to  me  the  feet  ? 

7  Jhesu  answeiide,  and  seide  to  him, 
A\  liat  thini,'is  I  do,  thou  woost  not  njw  ; 
forsothe  thou  schalt  wife  aftirwaid. 

8  Petre  soith  to  liim,  Thou  sclialt  not 
waische  to  me  the  feet,  in  to  with  outcu 
enile.  Jhesu  answcride  to  him,  If  I 
schal  not  waische  thee,  thou  schalt  not 
haue  part  with  me. 

9  Symount  Petre  seith  to  him,  Lord, 
not  oonly  my  feet,  but  and  the  hondis 
and  the  heed. 

10  Jhesu  seide  to  him,  He  that  is 
waischun,  hath  no  nede  no  but  that  he 
Maische  t!ie  feet,  but  he  is  clene  al  ;  and 
30  ben  clene,  but  not  alle. 

1 1  Forsothe  he  wiste,  who  schulde 
bitraye  him  ;  therfore  he  seide,  3e  ben 
not  clene  alle. 

12  Therfore  aftir  that  he  waischide  the 
feet  of  hem,  he  took  his  clothis  ;  and 
whanne  he  hadde  restid  a^en,  eft  he 
Slide  to  hem,  }e  witen  what  I  haue  done 
to  50U. 

13  5e  clopen  me  maistir  and  lord,  and 
5e  seyn  wel ;  forsoth  I  am. 

14  Therfore  if  I,  lord  and  maistir, 
haue  waische  50ure  feet,  and  50  owen  to 
waische  another  the  totlieris  feet  ; 

15  For  I  haue  ^ouun  ensaumple  to  50U, 
that  as  I  haue  dun  to  50U,  so  and  ^e  do. 

16  Treuli,  treuli,  I  seie  to  50U,  the  ser- 
uaunt  is  not  more  than  his  lord,  neither 
apostle  is  more  than  he  that  sente  him. 

17  If  5e  witen  thes  thingis,  56  schulen 
be  blessid,  if  50  schulen  do  hem. 

18  I  seie  not  of  alle  5()U,  I  woot  whiche 
I  haue  chosun  ;  but  that  the  scripture 
be  fillid,  He  that  etith  my  breed,  schal 
reyse  his  heele  a3ens  me. 

19  Treuli,  treuli,  I  seie  to  50U,  bifore  it 
be  don,  that  whanne  it  schal  be  don,  je 
bileue  for  I  am. 

20  Treuli,  treuli,  I  seye  to  50U,  he  that 
takcth  whom  euere  I  schal  sende,   rc- 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


52.3 


basyn,  and  began  to  waslic  hys  disciples 
fete,  and  to  wyj)pe  them  with  tlie  towell, 
where  with  he  was  gyrde. 

6  Then  cam  he  to  Simon  Peter,  and 
Peter  saydc  to  him,  Lorde,  shalt  thou 
wesshe  my  fete  ? 

7  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto  hym, 
AVhat  I  do,  thou  wottest  nott  nowe ; 
thou  shalt  knowe  here  after. 

8  Peter  sayd  vnto  hym,  Thou  shalt  not 
wesshe  my  fete,  whill  the  worlde  stond- 
eth.  Jesus  answered  him,  YtV  I  wasshe 
not  thy  fete,  thou  shalt  have  no  part 
with  me. 

9  Simon  Peter  sayde  vnto  h3'm,  Lorde, 
nott  my  fete  only,  butt  also  my  hondes 
and  my  heeil. 

10  Jesus  saydc  to  hym,  lie  that  is 
wesshetl,  ncdetli  not  but  to  wesshe  his 
fete,  but  is  clene  every  whit ;  and  ye 
are  clene,  bntt  nott  all. 

1 1  For  he  knewe  his  betrayer  ;  ther- 
fore sayde  he,  Y'e  are  not  all  clene. 

1 2  After  he  had  wesshcd  their  fete, 
and  I'eceaved  his  clothes,  and  was  sett 
doune  agayne,  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Wot 
ye  what  I  have  done  to  you  1 

13  Y^e  call  me  master  and  lorde,  and 
ye  save  wele  ;  for  soo  am  I. 

14  Yf  I  then,  youre  lorde  and  master, 
have  wesshen  youre  fete,  ye  alsoo  ouglat 
to  wesshe  one  anothers  fete ; 

15  For  I  have  gcven  yon  an  ensamplc, 
that  ye  shulde  do,  as  I  have  done  to  yoo. 

16  Verely,  vcrely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  the 
servaunt  is  not  gretter  then  hys  master, 
nether  the  messenger  gretter  then  he 
that  sent  hym. 

17  Y'"f  ye  vnderstonde  these  thynges, 
ha])py  are  ye,  yf  ye  do  them. 

1 8  I  speake  not  oft"  you  all,  I  knowe 
whom  I  have  chosen  ;  but  that  the 
scripture  be  fulfilled.  He  that  catetli 
breed  with  me,  hath  liftc  vppe  his  hele 
againste  me. 

19  Nowe  tell  I  yon,  before  it  come, 
that  when  yt  is  come  to  passe,  yc  myght 
beleve  that  I  am  he. 

20  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  lie 
that  receaveth  whomsoever  I  sende,  re- 


526 


GOTHIC,  0^60. 


niml)) ;  'i]>  sael  mlk  andiiimip,  andnimi}) 
jjana  sandyandaii  mik, 

21  pata  qijiands  lesus,  indrobnoda 
ahmin,  yali  weitwodida,  yah  qa}',  Amen, 
amen,  qi))a  izwis,  J^atei  ains  i'zwara  ga- 
leweijj  mik. 

22  panuh  sewhun  du  sis  niisso  ]>a{  sip- 
ouyos,  J^agkyandans  bi  Avharyana  qej^i. 

23  Wasuli  ]?an  anakumbyands  ains  })ize 
siponye  is  in  barma  lesuis,  jjauei  friyoda 
jiesus. 

24  Bandwiduh  ]'an  }iamma  Seimon 
Paitrus,  du  fraihnan,  Whas  wesi,  bi  j'anei 
qaH 

25  Anakumbida  ];an  yains  swa  ana 
barma  lesuis,  qaJ)uU  imma,  Frauya,  whas 
"ist  ? 

26  Andhof  lesus,  Sa  ist,  Jmmmei  ik 
lufdaupyands  [ana  hlaif  giba.  Yah  uf- 
daupyands  I'ana  hlaif,  gaf  ludin  Seimonis 
Skaviotau. 

27  Yah  afar  })amma  hlaiba,  };an  galaij) 
in  yainana  Satana.  Qa|j  );an  du  imma 
lesus,  patei  tauyis,  tawei  sprauto. 

28  patuh  |)an  ainshun  ni  wissa  })ize  an- 
akumbyandane,  duwhe  qa]j  imma. 

29  Sumai  mundedun,  ci  unte  arka 
liabaida  ludas,  j-atei  qcjii  imma  lesus, 
Bugei  ])izei  Jiaurbeima  du  dulj^ai,  aijjjjau 
J)aim  unledam  ei  wha  gibau. 

30  Bi)5e  andnam  pana  hlaib  yains,  suns 
galaijj  ut ;  wasuh  ]jan  nahts. 

31  pan  galai}>  ut,  qajj  j^an  lesus,  Nu 
•gasweraids  Avar]>  sunns  mans,  yah  Gu)) 
liauhij^s  ist  in  imma. 

32  Yabai  nu  GuJ)  hauhijss  i'st  in  imma, 
yah  Gu|>  hauheij)  ina  in  sis,  yah  suns 
iiauhida  ina. 

33  Barnilona,  nauh  leitil  mel  mij)  izwis 
ira ;  sokeijj  mik,  yah,  swaswe  qa]j  du 
ludaium,  Ei  |'adei  ik  gagga,  yus  ni 
maguj)  qiman  ;  yah  izwis  qijja  nu. 

34  Anabusn  niuya  giba  izwis,  ei  friyo]) 
izwis  misso,  swe  ik  friyoda  izwis,  pei 
yah  yus  friyoj)  misso  izwis. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

de  underfehj)  me,  underfehjj  dtene  de  me 
sende. 

21  Da  se  Hselend  das  )jing  sttde,  he 
wfes  gedrefed  on  gaste,  and  cydde,  and 
cwa^j).  So}',  ic  eow  secge,  dset  eower  an 
me  beleew);. 

22  Da,  leorning-cnihtas  beheold  hyra 
selc  oderne,  and  him  twynode  be  hwam 
he  hit  ssede. 

23  A'n    dajra    leorning-cnihta    Idinode 
on  dres  Hselendes  bearme,  dsene  se  Hiel-  i 
end  lufode. 

24  Simon  Petrus  bicnode  to  disum, 
and  cwjBJj  to  him,  Hwtet  ys,  se  de  he 
hyt  big  segl?  1 

25  Witodlice  da  he  hlinode  ofer  dses 
Hcclendes  breostum,  lie  cwaej)  to  him, 
Drihten,  hwset  ys  he  1 

26  Se  Haelend  him  andswarode  and 
cwa^jj.  He  ys,  se  de  ic  rsece  bedyppedne 
hlaf.  And  da  da  he  bedypte  done  Idaf, 
he  sealde  hyne  ludas  Scai"i6the  .... 

27  And  da  a?fter  dam  bitan,  Satanas 
eode  on  hyne.  Da  cwx])  se  Heelend  to 
him.  Do  rade,  dat  dii  don  wylt. 

28  Nyste  nan  dai'a  sittendra,  to  hwam 
he  da:;t  ssede. 

29  Sume  wendon,  fordam  ludas  hiefde 
serin,  dfet  se  Hadend  hit  cwsede  be  him, 
Bige  da  piing,  de  us  |iearf  sy  to  dam 
freols-d?ege,  odde  da^t  he  sealde  sum 
|)ing  I'earfendum  mannum. 

30  Da  he  nam  da?ne  bitan,  he  eode  iit 
dar-rihte  ;  hit  wits  uiht. 

31  Da  he  ut-eode,  and  se  Hselend 
cwa'|>,  Nu  ys  mannes  sunu  geswutelod, 
and  God  ys  geswutelod  on  him. 

32  Gyf  God  ys  geswutelod  on  him,  and 
God  geswutehi]>  hine  on  hym  sylfum.  ,  . 


33  ■'La  beam,  mi  gyt  ic  com  gehwcede 
tid  mid  eow ;  ge  me  secaji,  and,  swa  ic 
dam  ludeum  saede,  Ge  ne  magon  faran, 
dar  dar  ic  fare ;  and  mi  ic  eow  secge. 

34  Ic  eow  sylle  niwe  bebod,  da^t  ge 
lufion  eow  betwynan,  swa  ic  eow  lufode, 


Xlir.  21-34.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

oeyiieth  me  ;  forsotlie  he  tlint  rcccyucth 
me,  reccyuctli  hiiu  tluit  SLMitc  mo. 

21  AVhanne  Jhosu  hiulilc  soiil  thcs 
thingis,  he  was  trobliil  in  spirit,  smd 
witnessidc,  and  seide,  Trciili,  treidi,  I 
seie  to  50U,  0011  of  5011  schal  hitrayc  me. 

22  Thorfore  the  disciplis  lokidcu  to 
gidere,  doutyngo  of  wliom  lie  scido. 

23  Therfore  oon  of  his  disciplis  was 
rcstingc  in  the  bosum  of  Jhesii,  whom 
Jhesn  louede. 

24  Therfore  Symount  Pctre  bekenyde 
to  him,  and  scith  to  him,  Who  is  it,  of 
which  he  seith  I 

25  And  so  whanne  he  hadde  restid 
a3en  on  the  brcst  of  Jhcsu,  he  seith  to 
him,  Lord,  who  is  it  1 

26  Jhesu  aiiswcridc,  He  it  is,  to  whom 
I  schal  drcsse  breed  dipped  yn.  And 
whanne  he  had  dippid  yn  breed,  he  5af 
to  Judas  of  Symount  Scariot. 

27  And  aftir  the  morsel,  thanne  Sa- 
thanas  entride  in  to  him.  And  Jhesu 
scith  to  him,  What  thing  thou  dost,  do 
thou  sunnere. 

28  Forsoth  no  man  sittinge  at  the 
mete  wiste  this  thing,  to  what  thing  he 
seide  to  him. 

29  Forsothe  summe  gessiden,  for  Judas 
hadde  pursis,  that  Jhesu  hadde  seid  to 
him,  Bye  thou  tho  thingis,  that  ben 
uedeful  to  vs  at  the  foeste  day,  or  that 
he  schulde  5yue  sum  thing  to  nedy  men. 

30  Therfore  whanne  he  hadde  take  the 
morsel,  he  wente  out  a  non  ;  forsoth  it 
was  ny5t. 

31  Therfore  whanne  lie  hadde  gon  out, 
Jhesu  seide,  Now  mannis  sone  is  clari- 
fied, and  God  is  clarified  in  him. 

32  If  God  is  clarified  in  him,  and  God 
schal  clarifye  him  in  him  silf,  and  a  non 
he  schal  clarifie  him. 

33  Litil  sones,  5it  a  litil  I  am  with  50U ; 
30  schulen  soke  me,  and,  as  I  seide  to  the 
Jewis,  Whidur  I  go,  5e  mown  not  come; 
and  to  50U  I  seie  now. 

34  I  5}'uc  to  50U  a  newe  maundement, 
that  50  loue  to  gidere,  as  I  louede  30U, 
that  and  50  loue  to  gedere. 


TYNDALE,i526, 


527 


ceaveth  me  ;  and  he  that  reccavcth  me, 
rcceaveth  hym  that  sent  me. 

21  When  Jesus  had  thus  sayde,  he  was 
troubled  in  his  sprete,  and  testified,  say- 
inge,  Vercly,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you, 
that  won  ott'you  shall  betraye  me. 

22  Tlien  the  disciples  lokcd  won  on 
another,  doutinge  of  whom  he  spake. 

23  There  was  one  of  his  disciples  which 
leaned  on  Jesus  besomc,  whom  Jesus 
loved. 

24  To  hym  beckencd  Simon  Peter, 
that  he  shulde  axe  who  it  was,  off" 
whome  he  sjiake  ? 

25  He  then  as  he  leaned  on  Jesus 
brest,  sayde  vnto  hym,  Lorde,  who  ys  it  ? 

26  Jesus  answered.  He  yt  ys,  to  whom 
I  geve  a  soppe  when  I  have  dept  hit. 
And  he  wet  a  soppe,  and  gave  ytfc  to 
Judas  Iscarioth  Simons  Sonne. 

27  And  after  the  soppe,  Satan  entred 
into  hym.  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  hym, 
Thatt  thou  dost,  do  quycly. 

28  That  wist  noo  man  at  the  tabic,  for 
what  intent  he  spake  vnto  hym. 

29  Some  ofr  them  thought,  be  cause 
Judas  had  the  bagge,  thatt  Jesus  had 
sayd  vnto  hym.  By  those  thynges,  that  we 
have  nede  of  against  the  feast,  or  that  he 
shulde  geve  some  thynge  to  the  povre. 

30  As  sone  then  as  he  had  receaved 
the  soppe,  he  went  immediatly  out  ;  and 
it  was  nyght. 

31  When  he  was  gone  out,  Jesus  sayde, 
Nowc  is  the  sone  of  man  glorified,  and 
God  is  gloi-ified  by  hym. 

32  Yf  God  be  glorified  by  him,  God 
shall  also  glorify  him  in  him  sylfe,  and 
shall  strayght  waye  glorify  hym. 

33  Deare  children,  yet  a  lytcU  whylc 
am  I  with  you  ;  ye  shall  soke  me,  and, 
as  I  sayde  vnto  the  Icwcs,  Whither  I 
goo,  thither  can  ye  nott  come  ;  alsoo  to 
you  saye  I  nowe. 

34  A  newe  commaundment  geve  I  vnto 
you,  that  ye  love  to  gcdder,  as  I  have 
loved  you,  that  even  soo  ye  love  one 
another. 


528 


GOTHIC,  360. 


35  Ei  })amma  ufkunnanda  allai,  J^ei 
meinai  siponyos  siju)?,  yabai  friajjwa 
habaid  mi))  izwis  niisso. 

36  paiiuh  qa|)  du  imma  Seinioii  Paitnis, 
Frauya,  whad  gaggis  1  Andhafyands  le- 
sus  qaj),  padei  ik  gagga,  ni  inagt  mik  nu 
laistyau,  i})  Li])e  laisteis. 

37  pandi  Paitrus  qa|)  du  "imma,  Frauya, 
duwhe  ni  mag  })uk  laistyan  nu  1  >Sai\vala 
meina  faur  ))uk  lagya. 

38  Andhof  lesus,  Saiwala  })eina  faur 
mik  lagyis  1  Amen,  amen,  qi[)a  [jus,  ]>ei 
liana  ni  hrukei}),  unte  ]>u  mik  afaikis 
kunnan  J^rim  sinjam. 


Chap.  XIV.     i 

Ni  iudrobnai  izwar 

liairto;    ....  galaubeij)  du  GuJ^a,  yah 
du  mis  galaubeij). 

2  In  garda  attins  meinis  salijjwos  man- 
agos  siud  ;  al)|)an  niba  weseina,  aijjpau 
qejjyau  du  izwis,  gagga  manwyan  stad 
izwis. 

3  Yah  l^an  yabai  gagga,  manwya  VzAvis 
stad,  aftra  qima,  yah  franima  izwis  du 
mis  silbin,  ei  ]jarei  im  ik,  paruh  aiyxxp 
yah  yus. 

4  Yah  jjadei  ik  gagga,  kunnu]?,  yah 
J)ana  wig  kunnuj). 

5  paruh  qaJ)  imma  pomas,  Frauya,  ni 
witum  wha[)  gaggis,  yah  whaiwa  magum 
Jjana  wig  kunnan  1 

6  QaJ)  imma  lesus,  Ik  im  sa  Avigs,  yah 
sunya,  yah  libains  ;  ainshun  ni  qimi]j  at 
attin,  niba  Jjairh  mik. 

7  Ij)  kunjiedeip  mik,  aij)))au  kunjjedei)) 
yah  attan  meinana  ;  yah  Jian  frani 
himma  kunnu})  ina,  yah  gasaiwhi])  iua. 

8  1\>  Filippus  qa])uh  du  imma,  Frauya, 
augei  unsis  Jiana  attan,  |)atuh  ganah 
unsis. 

9  paruh  qajj  imma  lesus,  Swalaud 
melis  mi];  izwis  Avas,  yah  ni  ufkun})es 
mik  1  Filipjiu,  saei  gasawh  mik,  ga- 
sawh  attan.  Yah  Avhaiwa  ]>\i  qij^is,  Augei 
unsis  jiana  attan  1 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

35  Be  dam  oncnawa))  ealle  men,  dset 
ge  synd  mine  leorning-cnihtas,  gif  ge 
habbajj  lufe  eow  betwynan. 

36  Simon  Petrus  cwse]>  to  him,  Drihten, 
hwyder  gsest  tlu  ?  Se  Htelend  him 
andswarode  and  cw8e]>,  Ne  miht  du  me 
fylian,  dyder  ic  nu  fare,  du  feerst  eft 
softer  me. 

37  Petrus  cwse])  to  him,  PIavi  ne  mfeg 
ic  de  ml  fyhan  1     Ic  sylle  niin  lif  for  de. 

38  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode  and 
CAvae}),  Din  lif  dii  sylst  for  me  1  SoJ), 
ic  de  secge,  ne  crsewj)  se  coco,  ser  du 
Avid-sa3cst  me  jjriwa. 


Chap.  XIV.  '''i  And  he  cwse]>  to  liis 
leorning-cnihtum,  Ne  sy  eoAA-er  heorte 
gedrefed ;  .  .  .  ge  gelyfa})  on  God,  and 
gelyfa])  on  me. 

2  On  mhies  feeder  liuse  synd  manega 
eaixlung-stoAva ;  ne  ssede  ic  coaa',  hyt  ys 
lytles  Avana,  dset  ic  fare  and  Avylle  eow 
eardung-stoAve  gegearwian. 

3  And  gif  ic  fare,  and  eow  eai'dung- 
stowe  gegearwige,  eft  ic  cume,  and  nime 
eoAv-  to  me  sylfum,  dset  ge  syn,  dter  ic 
eom. 

4  And  ge  Aviton,  hwyder  ic  fare,  and 
ge  cunnon  done  Avee:. 

5  Thomas  CAva?)?  to  him,  Drihten,  we 
nyton  hwyder  dii  feerst,  and  hu  mage 
Ave  done  Aveg  cunnanl 

6  Se  Hselend  CAVseJ)  to  him,  Ic  eom 
Aveg,  and  soj^fiestnys,  and  lif ;  ne  cym|) 
nfm  to  feeder,  buton  })urh  me. 

7  Gif  ge  cudon  me,  Avitodlice  ge  cudon 
minne  fa?der  ;  and  heonon-foij)  ge  hyne 
gecnaAvaJ),  and  ge  hine  gesaAA'on. 

8  Philippus  cw?e})  to  him,  Diibten,  pet- 
yw  us  done  feeder,  and  aa'c  habbaj)  gench. 

9  Se  Hselend  CAA'se})  to  him,  Philippus, 
swa  lange  tid  ic  AA'ses  mid  eoAv,  and  ge 
ne  gecneoAvon  me?  Se  de  me  gesyh|5, 
gesyh))  minne  feeder.  Humeta  cwyst  dii, 
^t-yAv  us  dinne  feeder  1 


i 


Xril.  35.-XIV.  9.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

35  In  tliis  thing  alle  men  schulcn 
linoM'c,  for  5e  ben  my  disciplis,  if  je 
schulon  liaue  loue  to  giilere. 

36  Symount  Petrc  seith  to  liym,  Lonl, 
uliiilir  jioist  thou  ]  Jliesu  answcrich', 
Wliidir  I  go,  thou  maist  not  sue  mc 
uow,  but  thou  schalt  sue  aftirwartl. 

37  Petre  seith  to  him,  "NVhi  may  I  not 
sue  thee  now  ]  I  schal  putte  my  soule^ 
for  thee. 

38  Jhesu  answcriile,  Thou  schalt  putte 
thi  soule^  for  me?  Treuli,  tioiiU.  I  seie 
to  thee,  the  koc  schal  not  crowc,  til 
ihou  schalt  denye  me  thries. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


529 


Chap.  XIV.  i  And  he  seith  to  his 
disciplis.  Be  not  30ure  herte  disturblid, 
nether  drede  it  ;  50  bileuen  in  to  God, 
and  bileue  56  in  to  me. 

J  In  the  hous  of  my  fadir  ben  many 
(Iwellingis  ;  if  any  thing  lesse,  I  hadde 
.s).-id  to  50U,  for  I  go  for  to  make  redy 
to  50U  a  ])lace. 

3  And  if  I  schal  go,  and  schal  make 
ledy  to  50U  a  place,  eftsoone  I  schal 
come,  and  I  schal  take  50U  to  my  silf, 
that  where  I  am,  and  56  be. 

4  And  whidur  I  go,  ^e  witcn,  and  50 
witen  the  wey. 

5  Thomas  seith  to  him.  Lord,  we  witen 
not  whidur  thou  goist,  and  hou  mown 
>\'e  wite  the  weye  1 

6  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  I  am  weye, 
trcuthe,  and  lyf ;  no  mau  cometh  to  the 
fadir,  no  but  by  me. 

7  If  5e  hadden  knowen  me,  sothli  50 
hadden  knowen  and  my  fadir  ;  and  aftir- 
ward  5e  schuleu  knowe  him,  and  30  han 
.scyn  him. 

8  Philip  seith  to  him,  Lord,  schewe  to 
\  s  the  fadir,  and  it  suffisith  to  vs. 

9  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  So  moche  tyme 
I  ani  with  30U,  and  han  36  not  knowun 
me  1  Philip,  he  that  seeth  me,  secth 
and  the  fadir.  Hou  scist  thou,  Schewe 
to  vs  the  fadir  1 


35  By  thys  sliall  all  men  knowe,  that 
ye  are  my  disciples,  yf  ye  shall  have 
love  won  to  a  notlier. 

36  Simon  Peter  sayd  vnto  hyni,  Lordc, 
whither  gocst  thou  ]  Jesus  answered 
hym,  Whither  I  goo,  thou  canst  not 
folowc  me  nowe,  thou  shalt  folowe  me 
afterwardcs. 

37  Peter  sayd  vnto  hym,  Loide,  why 
cannot  I  folowe  the  nowe?  I  will  geve 
my  lyfe  for  thy  sake. 

38  Jesus  answered  hym,  Wilt  thou  geve 
thy  lyfe  for  my  sake  ?  Verely,  verely,  I 
saye  vnto  the,  the  cocke  shall  nott  crowe, 
till  thou  have  denyed  me  thryse. 


Chap.  XIV.  i  And  he  sayde  vnto 
hys  disciples,  Lett  nott  youre  hcrtcs  be 
trubled;  .  .  .  beleve  in  God,  and  beleve 
in  me. 

2  In  my  fiithers  houssc  are  many  man- 
sions ;  if  it  were  not  soo,  I  wolde  have 
tolde  you,  I  goo  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you. 

3 

I  wdl  come  agayne, 

and  rcceve  you  even  vnto  myselfe,  that 
where  I  am,  theare  maye  ye  be  also. 

4  And  whither  I  goo,  ye  knowe,  and 
the  waye  ye  knowe. 

5  Thomas  sayde  vnto  him,  Lorde,  we 
knowe  not  whyther  thou  goest,  also 
howe  is  it  possible  for  vs  to  knowe  the 
waye  1 

6  Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym,  I  am  the 
waye,  verite,  and  lyfe  ;  no  man  commeth 
vnto  the  fatl)er,  but  by  me. 

7  Yf  ye  had  knowen  me,  ye  liad 
knowen  my  father  alsoo  ;  and  nowe  ye 
knowe  hym,  and  ye  have  sene  hym. 

8  Phillip  said  vnto  him,  Lorde,  shew 
vs  thy  father,  and  it  suffisuth  vs. 

9  Jesus  sayde  vnto  him.  Have  I  bene 
so  longe  time  with  you,  and  yet  hast 
thou  not  knowen  me  ]  Philip,  he  that 
hath  sene  me,  hath  sene  the  father. 
And  howe  sayest  thou  then,  Shewe  vs 
the  father  ] 

M  m 


530  GOTHIC,  360. 

10  Niu  galfiubeis,  [latei  'ik  'in  attin,  yah 
atta  in  mis  ]st1  po  waurda  j^oei  ik 
rodya  izwis  af  mis  silbin  ni  rodya ; 
ak  atta  saei  in  mis  ist,  sa  taiiyij^  ])0 
•yvaurstwa. 

1 1  Galaubeij'  uiis,  jiatei  ik  in  attin,  yali 
atta  in  mis.  1\)  yabai  ni,  in  j?ize  waurst- 
Ave  galaubeij)  mis. 

12  Amen,  amen,  qijja  izwis,  saei  ga- 
laubeid  mis,  j-o  waurstwa  })oei  ik  tauya 
yah  is  tauyi); ;  yah  maizona  Jjaim  tauyi}>, 
unte  ik  du  attin  gagga. 

13  Yah  ])atei  wha  bidyi|)  in  namin 
meinamma,  jjata  tauya,  ei  hauhyaidau 
atta  in  sunau. 

14  Yabai  whis  bidyij?  mik  in  namin 
meinamma,  ik  tauya. 

1 5  Yabai  mik  friyoj',  anabusnins  meinos 
fastaid. 

16  Yah  ik  bidya  attan,  yah  anj^arana 
parakletu  gibijj  izwis,  ei  siyai  mi)?  izwis 
du  aiwa, 

17  Ahma  sunyos  ;  Jjanei  so  manascij'S 
ni  mag  niman,  unte  ni  saiwhi[>  ina,  nih 
kann  ina.  Ij)  yus  kunnuj)  ina,  unte  is 
mi})  izwis  wisij>,  yah  in  izwis  ist. 


18  Ni  leta  izwis  widuwairnans,  qima 
at  izwis. 

19  Nauh  leitil,  yah  so  manaseifis  mik 
ni  {janaseilis  saiwhi}? ;  'ip  yus  saiwhij)  mik, 
Jjatei  ik  liba,  yah  yus  libaij). 

20  In  yainamma  daga  ufkunnaij?  yus, 
Jjatei  ik  in  attin  meinamma,  yah  yus  in 
mis,  yah  ik  in  izwis. 

21  Saei  habaid  anabusnins  meinos,  yah 
fastaij)  I'os,  sa  ist  saei  friyoj;  mik ;  yah 
pan  saei  friyoj)  mik,  friyoda  fram  attin 
meinamma,  yah  ik  friyo  ina,  yah  ga- 
bairhtya  imma  mik  silban. 

22  paruh  qaj)  imma  ludas,  ni  sa  Is- 
karyotes,  Frauya,  wha  war  J),  ei  unsis 
munais  gabairhtyan  J)uk  silban,  ij)  Jjizai 
manasedai  ni  1 

23  Andhof  iesus,  yah  qaj)  du  imma, 
Yabai  whas  mik  friyoj),  yah  waurd  mein 
fastaij) ;  yah  atta  meins  friyoj)  ina,  yah 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

10  Ne  gelyfst  du  ctoet  ic  eom  on  ftieder, 
and  fteder  ys  on  me  1  Da  word  de  ic 
to  eow  sprece  ne  sprece  ic  hi  of  me 
sylfum ;  se  feeder  de  wunaj)  on  me,  he 
wyrcj)  da  weorc. 

1 1  Ne  gelyfe  ge,  da^it  ic  eom  on  feeder, 
and  feeder  ys  on  me  1  GelyfaJ)  for  dam 
weorcum. 

12  SoJ),  ic  eoAv  secge,  se  de  gelyfj)  on 
me,  lie  wyrcj)  da  weorc  de  ic  wyrce ; 
and  he  AvyrcJ)  maran  donne  da  synd, 
fordam  de  ic  fare  to  feeder. 

13  And  ic  do,  swa  hweet  swa  ge  biddaj> 
on  minuni  naman,  deet  feeder  sig  ge- 
wuklrod  on  suna.  , 

14  Gif  ge  hwaet  me  biddaj)  on  minum 
naman,  deet  ic  do."^ 

15  Gif  ge  me  lufiaj),  healdaj)  mine  be- 
bodu. 

16  And  ic  bidde  feeder,  and  he  sylj) 
eow  oderne  frefriend,  deet  beo  eefre  mid 
eow, 

17  Sojifeestnysse  gnst ;  de  des  middan- 
eard  ne  meeg  underfon,  he  ne  can  hyne, 
fordam  de  he  ne  gesyhj)  hyne.  Ge  hyne 
cunnon,  fordam  de  he  wunaj>  mid  eow, 
and  bij)  on  eow. 


18  Ne  Isete  ic  eow  steop-cild,  ic  cume 
to  eow. 

1 9  Nii  gyt  ys  an  lytel  fyrst,  and  middan- 
eard  me  ne  gesyhj) ;  ge  me  geseoj),  fordam 
ic  lybbe,  and  ge  lybbaj). 

20  On  dam  deege  ge  gecnaAvaJ),  dset  ic 
eom  on  minum  feeder,  and  ge  synd  on 
me,  and  ic  eom  on  eoAV. 

21  Se  de  heefj)  mine  bebodu,  and  hylfc 
da,  he  ys  de  me  lufaj) ;  min  feeder  lufaj) 
dajne  de  me  lufaj',  and  ic  lufige  hyne, 
and  geswutelige  him  me  sylfne. 


22  ludas  cweej)  to  him,  nees  na  se 
Scarioth,  Drihten,  hweet  ys  gewordcn, 
deet  du  Avylt  de  sylfne  geswutelian  us, 
nees  middan-earde  ? 

23  Se  Heelend  andswarode,  and  cweeJ) 
to  him,'''  Gif  hwa  me  lufaj),  he  hylt  mine 
sprsece  ;  and  min  feeder  lufaj)  hine,  and 


XIV.  IO-23.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

10  Bilouosfc  not  tliou,  for  I  am  in  tlic 
fuilir,  aiul  the  fiulir  is  in  nie  ]  I  speke 
not  of  my  silf  the  Avonlis  tliat  1  spckc 
to  5on  ;  sotlili  the  fiulir  ilwcllingc  in  me, 
he  doith  the  workis. 

1 1  In'Ieuo  5c  not,  for  I  am  in  the  fiulir, 
and  the  fadir  is  in  me  ?  Ellis  bilcue  50 
for  thilke  workis. 

1 2  Troiili,  treiili,  I  seie  to  50U,  he  that 
bilcuctli  in  to  me,  and  he  schal  do  the 
workis  that  I  do  ;  and  he  schal  do  moi'e 
workis  than  thcs,  for  I  go  to  the  fadir. 

13  And  what  euere  thing  5e  schulen 
axe  the  fadir  in  my  name,  I  schal  do 
this  thing,  that  the  fadir  be  glorified  in 
the  sonc. 

J 4  If  5e  schulen  axe  ony  thing  in  my 
name,  I  schal  do  it. 

15  If  5e  louen  me,  kepe  30  my  co- 
maundementis. 

16  And  I  schal  preie  the  fadir,  and 
he  sclial  5yue  to  5011  another  coum- 
fortour, 

1 7  The  s|)ii-it  of  treuthe,  that  he  dwclle 
with  50U  into  with  outcn  cnde ;  which 
spirit  the  world  may  not  take,  for  it 
seetli  not  him,  neither  woot  him.  For- 
sothe  56  schulen  knowe  him,  for  he 
schal  dwelle  at  50U,  and  he  schal  be 
in  50U. 

18  I  schal  not  leeue  50U  fadirlecs,  I 
schal  come  to  50U. 

19  3it  a  litil,  and  the  world  seeth  not 
me  now  ;  forsoth  50  schulen  se  me,  for 
I  lyue,  and  ■^g  schulen  lyue. 

20  In  that  day  50  schulen  knowe,  for 
I  am  in  my  fadir,  and  5ce  in  me,  and  I 
in  50U. 

2 1  He  that  hath  my  comaundementis, 
and  kcpith  hem,  he  it  is  that  louetli 
me  ;  sothli  he  that  loueth  me,  schal 
be  loucd  of  my  fadir,  and  I  schal  loue 
him,  and  I  schal  schewe  to  him  my  silf. 

22  Judas  seith  to  him,  not  he  of 
Scarioth,  Lord,  what  is  don,  for  thou 
art  to  schewe  to  vs  thi  silf,  and  not 
to  the  world  1 

23  Jhesus  answeride,  and  seide  to  him, 
If  ony  man  loueth  me,  he  schal  kepe  ray 
word  j  and  my  fadir  schal  loue  him,  and 


TYIfDALE,  1526. 


531 


TO  rSelevcst  thou  nott,  that  I  am  ia 
the  father,  and  the  father  in  me  1  The 
wordcs  that  I  speake  vnto  you,  I  speake 
not  of  my  silfe  ;  but  the  fixthcr  dwellinge 
in  me,  is  he  that  doeth  the  workes. 

1 1  IJelcve  that  I  am  in  the  father,  and 
the  father  in  me.  Att  the  leest  beleve 
me  for  the  very  workes  sake. 

12  Vcrely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you, 
whosoever  beleueth  on  me,  the  workes 
that  I  doo  the  same  shall  he  do  ;  and 
gretter  woi-kes  then  these  shall  he  do. 
be  cause  I  go  vnto  my  father. 

13  And  whatsoever  ye  axe  in  my  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  father  might  be 
glorified  by  the  sonne. 

14  Yf  ye  shal  axe  eny  thynge  in  my 
name,  I  will  do  it. 

1 5  Yf  ye  love  me,  kepe  my  commaund- 
mentes. 

16  And  I  Avill  praye  my  father,  and  he 
shall  geve  you  a  nother  comforter,  that 
he  maye  byde  with  you  ever, 

17  Which  is  the  sprete  of  truthe, 
Avhome  the  Avorlde  cannot  reccave,  be 
cause  the  worlde  seyth  him  not,  nether 
knoweth  hym.  Butt  ye  knowe  him, 
for  he  dwelletli  with  you,  and  shalbe 
in  you. 

18  I  will  nott  leave  you  comfortlesse, 
I  will  come  vnto  you. 

19  Hit  is  yet  a  litell  whyle,  and  the 
worlde  seyth  me  noo  moare  ;  but  ye 
shall  se  me,  for  I  live,  and  ye  shall  live. 

20  That  daye  shall  ye  knowe,  that  I 
am  in  my  father,  and  my  father  in  me, 
and  I  in  you. 

21  He  tluvt  hath  my  commaundmentes, 
and  kepeth  them,  the  same  is  he  that 
loveth  me  ;  and  he  that  loveth  me, 
shalbe  loved  of  my  father,  and  I  will 
love  him,  and  will  showe  myne  awne 
silfe  vnto  him. 

22  Judas  sayd  vnto  him,  not  Judas 
Iscarioth,  Lorde,  what  is  the  cause,  that 
thou  wilt  shewe  thy  silfe  vnto  vs,  and 
not  vnto  the  worlde  ] 

23  Jesus  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Yf  a  man  love  me,  and  wyll  kepe 
my  sayingcs ;   my  father  also  will  love 

51  m  2 


532 


GOTHIC,  360. 


du  iuima  galeijjos,  yah  salijjwos  at  I'm- 
ma  gatauyos. 

24  1\>  saei  ni  frioj)  nilk,  |;o  waiirtla 
meina  ni  fastaij? ;  yah  |)ata  waurd  )?atei 
liauseij),  iiist  mein,  ak  })is  sandyandins 
mik,  attins. 

25  pata  rodida  izwis,  at  izAvis  wisands  ; 

26  A]?]3an  sa  parakletus,  Ahma  sa 
Weiha,  Jianei  sandeij)  atta  in  naniin 
meinamma,  sa  izwis  laisei|)  allata,  yah 
gamaudei);  izwis  allis,  Jatei  qa\>  du  iz- 
wis. 

27  Gawair]?i  bileij^a  izwis,  gawair|>i 
mein  giba  izwis  ;  ni  swaswe  so  manase['S 
gibi}',  ik  giba  izwis  ;  ni  indrobnaina 
izwai-a  hairtona,  nih  faurhtyaina. 

28  Hausidedu)?,  ei  ik  qajj  izwis,  Ga- 
]ei|;a,  yah  qima  at  izwis.  Yabai  friyo- 
dedeijj  mik,  aij5]3au  yus  faginodedei)),  ei 
ik  gagga  du  attin,  unte  atta  ineins 
maiza  mis  ist. 

29  Yah  nu  qajj  izwis,  faur])izei  waurj)i, 
ei  bijie  wairjjai,  galaubyaijj. 

30  panaseijjs  filu  ni  ma))lya  mi|j  izwis ; 
qimij)  saei  Jjizai  manasedai  reikinojj,  yah 
in  mis  ni  bigiti)?  waiht. 

31  Ak  ei  ufkunnai  so  manaseps,  j^atei 
ik  friyoda  attan  meinana,  yali  swaswe 
anabaud  mis  atta,  swa  tauya.  Urreisij), 
gaggam  J>a}iro. 


Chap.  XV.      i  Ik  im  weinatriu  Jjata 
sunyeino,  yah  atta  meins  waurstwya  ist. 

2  All  taine  in  mis  unbairandane  akran 
gob,  usnimi[)  ita  ;  yah  all  akran  baii'and- 
ane,  gahraineij)  ita,  ei  managizo  akrau 
bairaina. 

3  Yu  yus  hrainyai  siyujj,  in  l)is  waurdis 
}>atei  rodida  du  izwis. 

4  Wisaij)  in  mis,  yah  ik  in  izwis  ;  swe 
sa  Aveinatains  ni  mag  akran  bairan  af 
sis  silbin,  niba  ist  ana  weinatriwa,  swah 
nih  yus,  niba  in  mis  siyu]j. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

we    cumaj?    to    him,    and    we    wyrca|> 
eardung-stowa  mid  him. 

24  Se  (Je  me  ne  lufa)>,  ne  hylt  he  mine 
sprseca  ;  and  nis  l)yt  min  spreec,  de  ge 
geliyrdon,  ac  daes  feeder,  de  me  sende. 

25  Das  ]>mg  ic  eow  ssede,  da  ic  mid 
eow  wunode  ; 

26  Se  Halga  Frofre  Gast,  de  fajder 
sent  on  miuum  naman,  eow  leerjj  ealle 
\>ing,  and  he  Iserjj  eow  ealle  da  Jjing,  de 
ic  eow  sece:e. 


27  Ic  Ictfe  eow  sibbe,  ic  sylle  eow  mine 
sibbe  ;  ne  sylle  ic  eow  sibbe,  swa  middan- 
eard  syl{) ;  ne  sy  eower  heorte  gedrefed, 
ne  ne  forhtige  ge. 

28  Ge  gehyrdon,  dset  ic  eow  saede,  Ic 
ga,  and  ic  cume  to  eow.  Witodlice  gif 
ge  me  lufedon,  ge  geblissodon,  fordam 
de  ic  fare  to  feeder,  fordam  feeder  ys 
mai-a  donne  ic. 

29  And  mi  ic  eow  ssede,  serdam  de  hit 
gewurde,  dset  ge  gelyfon,  donne  hit  ge- 
worden  h\\>. 

30  Ne  sprece  ic  mi  na  fela  wid  eow ; 
dysses  middan-eardes  ealdor  cymj),  and 
he  nsefjj  nan  Tping  on  me. 

31  Ac  dset  middan-eard  oncnawe,  dset 
ic  lufige  feeder,  and  ic  d5,  swii  feeder  me 
behead.     Aiisa)>,  uton  gan  heonon. 


Chap.  XV.     '''i  Ic  eom  s6]>  wm-eard, 
and  min  feeder  ys  eorJ)-tilia. 

2  He  de})  eelc  twig  aweg  on  me,  de 
bleeda  ne  byr}?  ;  and  he  feormaj)  eelc 
dara,  de  bleeda  byr|),  deet  hyt  here  bleeda 
de  swidor. 

3  Nu  ge  synd  claene,  for  dserc  spreece 
de  ic  to  eow  sprsec. 

4  Wunia))  on  me,  and  ic  on  eow ;  swa 
twig  ne  meeg  bleeda  beran  him  sylf, 
biiton  hit  ■wunige  on  win-earde,  swa  ge 
ne  magon  eac,  buton  ge  wunion  on  me. 


XIV.  24.-XV.  4-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

we  sclmlcn  come  to  liini,  ami  wc  scliulen 
make  dwelliiiLfe  at  hiui. 

24  He  that  loueth  me  not,  kopitli  not 
my  worilis  ;  and  the  word  which  ;c  han 
lit-rd,  is  not  myn,  but  his  that  sentc  me, 
the  fach-is. 

2f,  Thes  thingis  I  haue  sjiokun  to  50U, 
dwellin<,fe  at  50U  ; 

26  Forsoth  tlie  Hooly  Gost,  coum- 
fortour,  whom  the  fadii*  schal  sende  in 
my  name,  he  sclial  teche  3011  alle  thingis, 
and  schal  schewe'''  to  5011  alle  thiiigis, 
what  euer  thingis  I  schal  seye  to  50U. 

27  Pecs  I  leeue  to  50U,  my  pees  I  5yue 
to  50U  ;  not  as  the  world  5yueth,  I  5yue 
to  50U  ;  be  not  5om-e  herte  disturblid, 
neither  drede  it. 

28  3e  han  herd,  for  I  seide  to  50U,  I 
go,  and  come  to  50U.  If  ■^e  louedyn 
me,  forsoth  30  scluiUlen  hane  ioye,  for  I 
go  to  the  fadir,  for  the  fadir  is  more 
than  I. 

29  And  now  I  haue  scid  to  50U,  bifore 
it  be  don,  that  whanne  it  schal  be  don, 
ic  bileue. 

30  Xow  I  schal  not  spcke  ?nany  thingis 
to  30U  ;  forsoth  the  prince  of  this  world 
Cometh,  and  he  hatli  not  ony  thing  in 
me. 

31  But  that  the  world  knowe,  for  I 
loue  the  fadir,  and  as  the  fadir  5af  co- 
maundemcnt  to  me,  so  I  do.  Ilyse  3e, 
sro  we  hennis. 


TYNDALE,  J520. 


523 


Chap.  XV.     i  I  am  a  verrl  vync,  and 
my  fadir  is  an  erthe  tilier. 

2  Ech  syoun^  not  berynge  fruit  in  me, 
he  schal  do  a  wey  it;  and  ech  that  berith 
fi-uit,  he  schal  purge  it,  that  it  more 
here  fruit. 

3  Xow  5e  ben  clene,  for  the  word  that 
I  haue  spokuu  to  50U. 

4  Dwell  50  in  me,  and  I  in  50U  ;  as  a 
braunche  may  not  make  fruit  of  him 
silf,  no  but  it  schal  dwelle  in  the  vync, 
so  nether  5c,  no  but  3c  scliulen  dwcUe 
in  me. 


liim,  and  wc  woll  come  vnto  him,  and 
wyll  dwell  wyth  hym. 

24  He  that  lovcth  me  not,  kcpcth  nott 
my  sayinges;  and  the  wordes  which  ye 
licaie,  are  nott  myne,  but  my  fathers, 
which  sent  me. 

25  This  have  I  spoken  vnto  you,  beynge 
yett  jiresent  with  you  ; 

26  ]Jut  that  comforter,  which  is  the 
Holy  Gost,  whom  my  father  will  sende 
in  my  name,  shall  teache  you  all  thyngea, 
and  brynge  all  thynges  to  youre  re- 
membraunce,  whatsoever  I  have  tolde 
you. 

27  Peace  I  leve  witli  you,  my  peace 
I  geve  vnto  you ;  nott  as  the  worlde 
geveth,  geve  I  vnto  you ;  lett  not  youre 
hertes  be  greved,  nether  feare  ye. 

28  Ye  liave  herde,  howe  I  saide  vnto 
you,  I  goo,  and  come  agayne  vnto  you. 
Yf  }e  loved  me,  ye  wolde  verely  reioyce, 
be  cause  I  sayde,  I  goo  vnto  the  father, 
for  the  father  is  gretter  then  I. 

29  And  nowe  have  I  shewed  you,  l)e- 
fore  it  come,  that  when  it  is  come  to 
passe,  ye  myght  bcleve. 

30  Here  after  will  I  not  talke  many 
AYordes  vnto  you  ;  for  the  chefe  ruelar 
off  thys  worlde  commeth,  and  hath 
nought  in  me. 

31  But  that  the  worlde  maye  knowe, 
that  I  love  my  father,  and  as  my  father 
gave  me  commaundment,  even  soo  do  I. 
Kyse,  lett  vs  goo  hence. 


Chap.  XV.     i   I  am  the  true  vyne, 
and  my  father  ys  an  husbandeman. 

2  Every  braunche  that  bcareth  nott 
frute  in  me,  he  will  take  awaye ;  and 
every  braunche  that  bcareth  frute,  will 
he  pourge,  that  it  maye  bringe  moare 
frute. 

3  X'owe  are  ye  cleane,  be  the  meanes 
of  the  wordes  which  I  have  sjjoken  vnto 
you. 

4  l'>yde  in  me,  and  I  in  you  ;  as  the 
braunche  cannot  bcare  frute  off  it  sylfe, 
exccpte  it  bydc  in  the  vync,  no  more 
can  ye,  cxcepte  ye  abyde  in  me. 


534  GOTHIC,  360. 

5  Ik  im  I'ata  weinatriu,  'i\>  yus  weina- 
tainos.  Saei  wisijj  in  mis,  yah  ik  111 
imraa,  sa  bairijj  akran  manag,  Ipatei  iuuli 
mik  ni  raagujj  tauyan  ni  waiht. 

6  Niba  saei  wisijj  in  mis,  uswairpada 
ut  swe  weinatains,  yah  ga|jaursni|) ;  yah 
galisada,  yah  in  fon  galagyand,  yah 
i'nbranyada. 

7  Al)])an  yabai  siyuj)  in  mis,  yah  waurda 
meina  in  izwis  sind,  jjatawhah  Jjei  wilei]?, 
bidyijj,  yah  wair|jij)  izwis. 

8  In  ];amma  hauhi|js  ist  atta  meins,  ei 
akran  manag  bairaijj,  yah  wair];ai|)  meinai 
siponyos. 

9  Swaswe  friyoda  mik  atta,  swah  ik 
friyoda  izwis  ;  wisai])  in  friajjwai  meinai. 

10  Yabai  anabusnins  meinos  fastaid, 
siynjj  in  friaj^wai  meinai ;  swaswe  ik 
anabusnins  attins  meinis  fastaida,  yah 
wisa  in  friajjwai  is. 

1 1  pata  rodida  izwis,  ei  fahejjs  meina 
in  izwis  siyai,  yah  faheds  izwara  usfuU- 
yaidau. 

12  pata  ist  anabusns  meina,  ei  friyo]? 
izwis  misso,  swaswe  ik  friyoda  izwis. 

13  Maizein  })izai  fria|)wai  manna  ni 
Iiabai}),  ei  whas  saiwala  seina  lagyij>  faur 
friyonds  seinans. 

14  Yus  friyonds  meinai  siyu|),  yabai 
tanyi)>,  Jjatei  ik  anabiuda  izwis. 

15  panasei);s  izwis  ni  qijja  skalkans, 
mite  skalks  ni  Avait,  Avha  tauyij;  is  frauya; 
ijj  ik  izwis  qaj)  friyonds,  unte  all  jjatei 
hausida  at  attin  meinamma,  gakannida 
izwis. 

16  Ni  yus  mik  gawalidedu)?,  ak  ik  ga- 
walida  izwis  ;  .  .  .  ei  yus  sniwai}),  yah 
akran  bairai]?,  yah  akran  izwar  du  aiwa 
siyai  ;  ei  ];ata\vhah  }'ei  bidyaij)  attan  in 
namin  meinamma,  gibi}>  izwis. 

17  pata  anabiuda  izwis,  ei  friyo);  izwis 
misso. 

18  Yabai  so  manaseds  izwis  fiyai,  kun- 
nei]>,  ei  mik  fruman  izwis  fiyaida. 

19  Yabai  ])is  fairwhaus  weseib,  ai]'|?au 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  Jonif 

5  Ic  eom  wln-eard,  and  ge  synd  twigu. 
Se  de  wunaj)  on  me,  and  ic  on  him,  se 
byr])  mycle  blseda,  fordam  ge  ne  magon 
nan  jjing  don  butan  me. 

6  Gif  hwa  ne  Avuna})  on  me,  he  byj) 
aworpen  ut  swa  twig,  and  fordriiwaj? ; 
and  big  gaderia}>  da,  and  doj?  on  fyr, 
and  big  forbyrna]).''' 

7  Gyf  ge  wunia)?  on  me,  and  mine  word 
wuniaj)  on  eow,  bidda)>,  swa  hwsefc  swa 
ge  wyllon,  and  hyt  hy\>  cower. 

8  On  dam  ys  min  fseder  geswutelod, 
dset  ge  beron  mycele  blseda,  and  beou 
mine  leorning-cnihtas. 

9  And  ic  lufode  eow,  swa  feeder  lufode 
me  ;  wuniaj^  on  minre  lufe. 

10  Gif  ge  mine  bebodu  gehealda]?,  ge 
wunia])  on  minre  lufe  ;  swa  ic  geheold 
mines  feeder  bebodu,  and  ic  wunige  on 
hys  lufe. 

1 1  Das  piing  ic  eow  sa^de,  dset  min 
gefea  sy  on  eow,  and  eower  gefea  sy 
gefulled.'" 

12  Dis  ys  min  bebod,  dast  ge  lufion 
eow  gemgenelice,  swa  ic  eow  lufode. 

13  Nsef))  nan  man  maran  lufe  donne 
deos  ys,  daet  hwa  sylle  his  lif  for  his 
freondum. 

14  Ge  synd  mine  frynd,  gif  ge  do])  da 
))ing,  de  ic  eow  bebeode. 

15  Ne  telle  ic  eoAV  to  {^eowan,  fordam 
se  ])eowa  nat,  hwtet  se  hlaford  de}) ;  ic 
tealde  eow  to  freondum,  fordam  ic  cydde 
eow,  ealle  da  jjing  de  ic  gehyrde  set 
milium  feeder. 

1 6  Ne  gecure  ge  me,  ac  ic  geceas  eow  ; 
and  ic  sette  eow,  daet  ge  gan,  and  blseda 
beron,  and  eowre  blseda  gelseston  ;  dset 
fseder  sylle  eow,  swa  hwajt  swa  ge  biddaj) 
on  minum  naman.''' 

17  Das  j'ing  ic  eow  beode,  dset  ge 
lufion  eow  gemsenelice. 

18  Gif  middan-eard  eow  hata]),  wita}', 
dset  he  hatede  me  ser  eow. 

19  Gif   ge   of  middar.-earde   wseron, 


XV.  5-19]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

5  I  am  a  vvne.  5c  hen  the  hraunohis. 
He  tliat  (IwcUitli  in  mo,  and  I  in  him, 
this  berith  moclie  fruit,  for  with  outen 
ine  5c  mown  no  tiling  do. 

6  If  ony  man  schal  not  dwcllc  in  me, 
he  schal  be  scut  out  as  a  braunche,  and 
schal  wexe  drye ;  and  thei  schulen  ga- 
dere  him,  and  thei  schulen  sende  him  in 
to  the  fier,  and  he  brenneth. 

7  If  5e  schulen  dwclle  in  nie,  and  my 
wordis  schulen  dwclle  in  50U,  what  euere 
thing  5c  schulen  wilne,  5e  schulen  axe, 
and  it  schal  be  do  to  30U. 

8  In  this  thing  my  fadir  is  clarified, 
that  5e  brynge  moost  fruyt,  and  56  be 
maad  my  disciplis. 

()  xVs  my  fadir  loucdc  me,  and  I  louyde 
50U  ;  dwellc  56  in  my  loue. 

10  If  56  schulen  kepe  my  comaunde- 
mentis,  56  schulen  dwelle  in  my  loue ; 
as  and  I  haue  kept  the  comaundcmentis 
of  my  fiidir,  and  I  dwelle  in  his  loue. 

1 1  Thes  thingis  I  spak  to  50U,  that  my 
ioye  be  in  50U,  and  5oure  ioye  be  fillid. 

12  This  is  my  comaundement,  that  50 
loue  to  gidere,  as  I  louede  50U. 

13  No  man  hath  more  loue  than  this, 
that  ony  man  putte  his  soule'''  for  his 
frendis. 

14  5e  ben  my  frendis,  if  50  schulen  do 
tlio  thingis,  that  I  comaunde  to  50U. 

15  Now  I  schal  not  seye  50U  ser- 
uauntis,  for  the  seruaunt  woot  not,  wliat 
his  lord  schal  do  ;  forsothe  I  haue  seid 
50U  frendis,  for  alle  thingis  what  euere  I 
herde  of  my  fadir,  I  haue  maad  knowun 
to  50U. 

1 6  5e  ban  not  chosun  me,  but  I  chees 
50a ;  and  I  haue  i>ut  50U,  that  5e  go, 
and  brynge  fruit,  and  5ourc  fruit  dwclle; 
that  what  euere  thing  50  schulen  axe 
tl)e  fadir  in  my  name,  he  3yue  to  30U. 

17  Thes  thingis  I  comaunde  to  50U, 
that  5e  loue  to  gidere. 

18  If  the  world  hatith  50U,  wite  50, 
for  it  liadde  mc  in  hate  first  than 
50U. 

19  If  5e  huddcn  be  of  the  Avorld,  the 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


535 


5  I  am  the  vync,  and  ye  are  the 
braunchcs.  He  that  abydcth  iu  me, 
anil  I  in  hym,  the  same  bryngeth  forth 
moclio  frutc,  for  with  out  me  can  ye  do 
nothynge. 

6  Yrt"  a  man  bydc  nott  in  me,  he  ys 
cast  forthe  as  a  branncho,  and  is  wyd- 
dered  ;  and  men  gadder  them,  and  cast 
them  into  the  fyre,  and  they  burne. 

7  Yff  ye  byde  in  me,  and  my  wordes 
also  bide  in  you,  axe  what  3'e  will,  and 
it  shalbe  gevcn  you. 

8  Heare  in  is  my  father  glorified,  that 
ye  beare  moche  frutc,  and  be  made  my 
disciples. 

9  As  my  father  hath  loved  me,  even 
soo  have  I  loved  you ;  continue  in  my 
love. 

10  Yf  ye  shall  kepe  my  commaund- 
mentes,  ye  shall  byde  in  my  love  ;  even 
as  I  have  kept  my  fothers  commaund- 
mentes,  and  byde  in  his  love. 

Ti  These  thinges  have  I  spoken  vnto 
you,  that  my  ioye  myght  remayne  in 
you,  and  that  youre  ioye  myght  be  full. 

1 2  Tliys  ys  my  commaundnicnt,  that 
ye  love  togeildcr,  as  I  have  loved  you. 

13  Grctter  love  then  this  hath  no  man, 
then  that  a  man  bestowe  his  lyfe  for  his 
frendes. 

1 4  Ye  are  my  frendes,  yf  ye  do  what- 
soever I  commaunde  you. 

15  Hence  forth  call  I  you  nott  sei'- 
vauntes,  for  the  servaunt  knoweth  nott, 
what  hys  lorde  doeth  ;  butt  you  have  I 
called  frendes,  for  all  thynges  that  I  have 
herde  of  my  father,  I  have  opcnned  to 
you. 

16  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have 
chosen  you  ;  and  ordoyned  you,  that  ye 
goo,  and  bringe  forthe  frutc,  and  that 
youre  frute  remayne ;  that  whatsoever 
ye  shall  axe  off  my  father  in  my  name, 
he  shulde  geve  it  you. 

17  This  commaunde  I  you,  that  yo 
love  to  gedder. 

18  Yf  the  worlde  hate  you,  ye  knowe, 
that  he  hated  me  before  he  hated  you. 

19  Yf  ye   were   of   the   worlde,   the 


536  GOTHIC,  360. 

so  nianaseds  sAvesans  friyodecli ;  a|)|3an 
imte  us  jjamma  fairwliau  ni  siyuj?,  ak  ik 
gawalida  izwis  us  J)arama  fiiirwhau,  du])}:e 
iiyaid  "izwis  so  manasej'S. 

20  Ganuineil'  ]jis  waurdis,  l^atei  ik  qa]j 
du  izwis,  Nist  skalks  maiza  frauyin 
seinamma.  Yabai  mik  wrekun,  yah 
i'zwis  wrikand  ;  jabai  raein  waurd  fust- 
aidedeiua,  yah  izwar  fastaina. 

21  Ak  J^ata  allata  tauyand  izwis  in 
naniins  meinis,  unte  ni  kunnun  Jjana 
sandyandan  mik. 

22  Nih  qeniyau,  yah  rodidedyau  du 
im,  fiawaurht  ni  habaidedeina ;  i}>  nu 
inilons  ni  haband  bi  frawaurht  seina. 

23  Sael  mik  fiyai}>,  yah  attan  meinana 
fiyai)^. 

24  II?  |)0  waurstwa  ni  gatawidedyau  in 
im,  ))oei  an})ar  ainshun  ni  gatawida,  fra- 
Avauiht  ni  habaidedeina ;  ij)  nu  yah  ga- 
sewluiu  mik,  yah  fiyaidedun  yah  mik 
yuli  attan  meinana. 

25  Ak  ei  usfulhiodedi  waurd,  jjata  ga- 
melido  in  Avitoda  ize,  Ei  fiyaidedun  mik 
arwyo . 

26  A}i})an  }jan  qimijj  ])arakletus,  }anei 
ik  insandya  izwis  train  attin,  ahman 
sunyos,  izei  fram  attin  urrinnij),  sa  AA'eit- 
Avodeijj  bi  mik  ; 

27  Yah  |)an  yus  AveitAvodeiJj,  unte  fram 
fruma  mi])  mis  siyu{). 


Chap.  XVT.      i  pata  rodida  izAvis,  ei 
ni  afmarzyaindau. 

2  Us  gaqumjjim  dreiband  izwis,  akei 
qimijj  Avheila,  ei  sawhazuh  izei  usqimij) 
izAvis,  Jjuggkei])  hunsla  salyan  Gu';a. 

3  Yah  l^ata  tauyand,  unte  ni  ufkun])- 
cdun  attan,  nih  mik. 

4  Akei  jjata  rodida  iz\A'is,  ei  bi);e  qimai 
so  wheila  ize,  gamunei})  ))ize,  |)atei  ik 
qaj)  izwis.     Ij)  J)ata  izwis  fram  fruma  ni 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

middan-eard  lufode  cJset  his  Avaes;  fordam 
de  ge  ne  synd  of  middan-earde,  ac  ic  eoAV 
geceas  of  middan-earde,  forth  middan- 
eard  eow  hata}). 

20  Gemunaj)  minre  spreece,  cte  ic  eoAv 
ssede,  Nis  se  JjeoAva  niEerra  clonne  his 
hlaford.  Gif  hi  me  ehton,  hi  Avyllaj) 
ehtan  eower  ;  gif  hi  m'ne  sprsece  heokl- 
on,  hi  heaklaj)  eac  eowre. 

2  r  Ac  ealle  das  {)ing  hi  d6]>  eow  for 
minum  naman,  fordam  de  hi  ne  cunnon 
done  de  me  sende. 

22  Gif  ic  ne  come,  and  to  him  ne 
sprsece,  naefdon  hig  nane  synne  ;  mi  lii 
nabba]?  nane  lade  be  liyra  synne. 

23  Se  de  me  hata]?,  liata])  minne  feeder. 

24  Gif  ic  nane  AA'eorc  ne  AA'orlite  on 
him,  de  niin  oder  ne  Avorhte,  na^fdon  hi 
mine  synne  ;  nii  hi  gesawon,  and  lit 
hatedon  segder  ge  me  ge  minne  fteder. 

25  Ac  dset  seo  sprsec  sy  gefylled,  de 
on  hyra  se  aAvriten  ys,  Dast  hi  hatedon 
me  biitan  geAvyrhtum.'*' 

26  Donne  se  freh'iend  cym)7,  de  ic  eow 
sende  fram  fiieder,  sojjfiestnysse  g:'st,  do 
cymj?  fram  fajder,  he  cyj)  geAvitnesse  be 
me ; 

27  And  ge  cydaj)  gCAvitnesse,  fordam 
jre  Aveeron  fram  frumau  mid  me. 


Chap.  XVI.    7  Diis  ))ing  ic  eow  ssede, 
dset  ge  ne  swicion. 

2  Hi  do))  eow  of  gesomnuiigum,  ac  seo 
till  cyniji,  duet  selc  de  eow  ofslyhji,  Aven|> 
da?t  he  ])enige  Gode. 

3  And  ddS  jnng  hig  do)),  fordam  de  hi 
ne  ciidon  minne  fieder,  ne  me. 

4  Ac  das  ))ing  ic  eoAv  saede,  dset  ge 
gemunon,  donne  hyra  tid  cymj),  dset 
ic  hit  eoAV  ssede.     Ne  sscde  ic  eoAv  dis 


XV.  20.-XVI.  4.]    WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

world  scliuUle  loiic  that  tiling  tliat  was 
liis  ;  but  for  50  bou  not  of  the  world, 
but  I  clieos  ;ou  fro  the  world,  therforc 
the  world  liatith  50U. 

I'O  Haue  5c  inynde  of  my  word,  which 
1  seide  to  50U,  The  seruaunt  is  not  more 
than  his  lord.  If  thei  ban  pursuwed 
me,  and  tlici  schulen  innsue  ^ou  ;  if  thei 
han  kept  my  word,  and  thei  sehulen 
kcpe  50ure. 

21  But  thei  schulen  do  to  50U  allc  thes 
thinyis  for  my  name,  for  thei  witen  not 
him  that  sente  me. 

22  If  I  hadde  not  come,  and  hadde  not 
spoke  to  hem,  thei  schulden  not  haue 
synne  ;  forsoth  now  thei  han  not  excusa- 
cioun  of  her  synne. 

2  3  He  that  hatith  me,  hatith  and  my 
fadir. 

24  If  I  hadde  not  don  werkis  in  hem, 
whiebc  non  othir  man  dide,  thei  schulden 
not  haue  synne  ;  forsoth  now  and  thei 
han  seyn,  and  hatid  me  and  my  fadir. 

25  But  that  the  word  be  fillid,  that  is 
Avritr.n  in  the  lawe  of  hem,  For  thei 
haddcn  me  in  hate  with  outen  cause.^ 

26  Forsoth  whanne  the  cumfortour 
schal  conic,  which  I  schal  sende  to  50U 
fro  the  fadir,  a  spirit  of  treutlie,  the 
whiche  procedith'''  of  the  ladii*,  he  schal 
here  witnessing  of  me  ; 

27  And  5e  scimlen  here  witnessing,  for 
5e  ben  with  me  fro  the  bigynuyng. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


537 


Chap.  XVI.  i  Thes  thingis  I  haue 
spokuu  to  30U,  that  56  ben  not  sclaun- 
drid. 

2  Thei  schulen  make  50U  with  oute 
synagogis,  but  the  our  comcth,  that  ech 
man  that  slecth  50U,  deme  him  silf  for 
to  5yue  sacrifice  to  Uod. 

3  And  thei  schulen  do  to  ;ou  thes 
thingis,  for  thei  ban  not  knowc  the 
fadir,  ncthir  me. 

4  But  thes  thingis  I  spak  to  50U,  that 
whanne  the  our  of  hem  schal  come,  50 
naue  mynde,  for  I  seide  to  30U.     I  seide 


worldc  wolde  love  his  awne  ;  be  cause 
ye  are  not  of  the  worldc,  but  I  have 
chosen  you  out  of  the  worlde,  therfore 
hateth  you  the  worlde. 

20  llemend)er  my  sayinge,  that  I  sayde 
vnto  you.  The  scrvaunte  is  not  grcttcr 
then  liis  lorde.  Yf  they  have  persecuted 
me,  so  will  they  persecute  you  ;  ytt"  they 
have  kept  my  sayinge,  so  will  they  kcpe 
youres. 

21  But  all  these  thynges  will  they  do 
vnto  you  ibr  my  names  sake,  be  cause 
they  have  nott  knowen  hym  that  sent 
me. 

22  Yf  I  had  not  come,  and  spoken 
vnto  them,  they  shulde  have  no  .synne  ; 
butt  nowe  have  they  nothynge  to  cloke 
theyr  synne  with  all. 

23  He  that  hateth  me,  hateth  my 
father. 

24  Iff  I  had  nott  done  workes  amonge 
them,  which  none  other  man  did,  they 
shulde  be  with  oute  synne  ;  but  nowe 
have  they  sene,  and  yet  have  hated  bothe 
me  and  my  father. 

25  Even  thatt  the  sayinge  myght  be 
fultillcd,  that  is  written  in  theyr  lawe. 
They  hated  me  Avith  outt  a  cause. 

26  Butt  Avhen  the  comforter  is  come, 
whom  I  will  sende  vnto  you  from  the 
father,  wich  is  the  sprete  of  verite,  which 
proceadeth  off  the  father,  he  shall  testifie 
off  me  ; 

27  And  ye  shall  beare  witnes  also,  be- 
cause ye  have  bene  with  me  from  the 
begynnynge. 


Chap.  XVI.  i  These  thynges  have 
I  sayde  vnto  you,  be  cause  ye  shulde 
nott  be  hurte  in  youre  fayth. 

2  They  shall  excomunicat  you,  ye  the 
tyme  shall  come,  thatt  whosoever  killcth 
you,  will  thynke  that  he  doth  God  true 
service. 

3  And  suche  thynges  will  they  do  vnto 
you,  be  cause  they  have  not  knowen  the 
father,  nether  yet  me. 

4  These  thynges  have  I  tolde  you,  that 
when  that  houre  is  come,  ye  shulde 
remember  them,  that  I   tolde   you  so. 


538  GOTHIC,  360. 

qap,  unte  mi})  'izwis  was. 


5  I|)  nu  gagga  du  ])amma  sanclyandin 
mik,  yah  ainshun  us  'izwis  ni  fraiimij) 
mi  If,  Whajj  gaggis  1 

6  Akei  untc  (jata  rodida  'izwis,  gaurijja 
gadaubida  'izwar  hairto. 

7  Akei  'ik  sunya  izwis  qij^a,  batizo  'ist 
izwis,  ei  'ik  galeij^au ;  unte  yabai  ik  ni 
galeijja,  parakletus  ni  qimi|j  at  'izwis  ; 
a))J)an  yabai  gagga,  sandya  'ina  du  izwis. 

8  Yah  qimands  'is,  gasakij)  ]>o  manase]> 
bi  frawaurht,  yah  bi  garaihtij^a,  yah  bi 
staua. 

9  Bi  frawaurht  raihtis  j^ata,  J^atei  ni 
galaubyand  du  mis  ; 

10  If)  bi  garaihtijia,  jjatei  du  attin  mein- 
amma  gagga,  yah  ni  J^anaseijjs  saiwhij? 
mik ; 

11  I))  bi  staua,  l^atei  sa  reiks  J)is  fair- 
whaus  afdomijjs  war]). 

12  Nauh  ganoh  skal  qijjan  izwis,  akei 
ni  magu|)  frabairan  nu. 

13  1\>  |)an  qimi])  yains  ahma  sunyos, 
briggij)  'izwis  iu  allai  sunyai ;  nih  |)an 
rodei})  af  sis  silbin,  ak  swa  filu  swe 
hausei}),  rodei))  ;  yah  jjata  anawalrjio 
gateilii])  'izwis. 


14  Yains  mik  hauheij),  unte  us  mein- 
ainma  nimij),  yah  gateihij)  'izwis. 

15  All,  'patei  aih  atta,  mein  "ist ;  duhjje 
qaj),  ])atei  us  meinamma  nimiJ),  yah  ga- 
teihij) izwis. 

16  Leitil  nauh,  yah  ni  saiwhij)  mik; 
yah  aftra  leitil,  yah  gasaiwhij)  mik,  unte 
ik  gagga  du  attin. 

17  paruh  qe|)un  us  })aim  siponyam  du 
sis  misso,  Wha  ist  |)ata  patei  qi])i|)  unsis, 
Leitil,  ei  ni  saiwhij)  mik  ;  yah  aftra 
leitil,  yah  gasaiwhij)  mik,  yah  J)atei  ik 
gagga  du  attin  1 

18  Qe)junuh  )iata,  "VVha  siyai,  })atei 
qipij),  Leitil  1  ni  witum  wha  qij)ij). 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

|)ing  set  fruman,  fordam  do  ic  wses  mid 
eow.''' 

5  Nil  ic  fare  to  dam  de  me  scnde,  and 
eower  nan  ne  ucsaj)  me,  Hwyder  ic  fare  ] 

6  Ac  fordam  de  ic  sprajc  dils  ])iiig  to 
eow,  unrotnys  gefylde  eowre  heortan. 

7  Ac  ic  eow  secge  s5|)fjiestnysse,  eow 
fremaj),  dset  ic  fare ;  gif  ic  ne  fare,  ne 
cymj)  se  irefriend  to  eow  ;  witodlice  gif 
ic  fare,  ic  hyne  sende  to  eow. 

8  And  donne  he  cym}),  he  l^ywj)  dysne 
middan-eard  be  synne,  and  be  rihtwis- 
nesse,  and  be  dome. 

9  Be  synne,  fordam  hi  ne  gelyfdon  on 
me ; 

10  Be  rihtwnsnesse,  fordam  ic  fare  to 
fajder,  and  ge  me  ne  geseo))  : 

11  Be  dome,  fordam  dyses  middan- 
eardes  caldor  3's  gedemed. 

1 2  Gyt  ic  hfebbe  eow  fela  to  secgenne, 
ac  ge  hyt  ne  magon  nu  acuman. 

J  3  Donne  dajre  s6[)fa?stnysse  g.'st  cym|), 
he  Iser))  eow  ealle  so);fa?stnysse  ;  ne 
spryc))  he  of  him  sylfum,  ac  he  spryc)) 
da  ])ing  de  he  gehyrj) ;  and  cyj)  eow  da 
])iug  de  towearde  synd. 


14  He  me  geswiltela]',  fordam  he  nim]> 
of  minuni,  and  cy})  eow. 

15  Ealle  da  I'iiig,  de  min  feeder  hsefj), 
synd  mine ;  fordig  ic  cwasj),  dset  he 
nim))  of  minum,  and  cy])  eow.'*' 

1 6  Nu  ymbe  an  lytel,  ge  me  ne  geseo]) ; 
and  eft  ymbe  lytel,  ge  me  geseo]),  for- 
dam de  ic  fare  to  feeder. 

17  Da  cwffidon  hys  leorning-cnihtas 
him  betwynan,  Hwaet  ys  diiet  he  us  segj), 
Ymbe  lytel,  ge  me  ne  geseoj; ;  and  eft 
ymbe  lytel,  and  ge  me  geseo]',  and  dvet 
ic  fare  to  feeder  1 

18  Hig  cwsedon  witodUce,  Hweet  ys, 
deet  he  cwy]',  Ymbe  lytel  1  we  nyton 
hweet  he  spryc}>. 


XVI.  5-iS.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

not  to  ;ou  tlics  tlungfis  fro  the  bigyn- 
iiyng,  for  I  was  with  50U. 

5  And  now  I  go  to  him  that  scnte  me, 
anti  no  man  of  ;ou  askith  nie,  Whidur 
thou  goist  ] 

0  But  for  I  hauo  spokyn  to  50U  thes 
thingis,  sorwe^  hatli  fulfillid  jourc  hcrte. 

7  But  I  seie  to  50U  treuthc,  it  spedith 
to  50U,  that  I  go  ;  sothli  if  I  schal  not 
go  a  woy,  the  coumfortour  schal  not 
come  to  50U  ;  lorsoth  if  I  schal  go  a 
wey,  I  schal  sonde  hyni  to  50U. 

S  And  whanne  he  schal  come,  he  schal 
rojn-ouc  the  world  of  synne,  and  of  ri5t- 
fulnesse,  and  of  dom. 

()  Forsothe  oi  synne,  for  the!  han  not 
liileuyd  in  to  me  ; 

10  Ft)rsothc  of  ri3tfulnesse,  for  I  go  to 
the  fiidir,  and  now  5e  schulen  not  se  me  ; 

11  Forsothe  of  dom,  for  the  prince  of 
this  world  is  now  demyd. 

12  5it  I  haue  many  thingis  for  to  seie 
to  50U,  but  je  mowTi  not  bei'e  now. 

13  Sotheli  whanne  the  ilke  spirit  of 
trcuthe  schal  come,  he  schal  teche  30U 
ul  treuthe ;  sothli  he  schal  not  speke 
of  him  self,  but  what  euere  thingis  he 
schal  heere,  he  schal  spckc  ;  and  he 
schal  telle  to  50U  the  thingis  that  ben 
to  comynge. 

14  He  schal  clarifie  me,  for  of  myne 
he  schal  take,  and  schal  telle  to  50U. 

15  Alle  thingis,  what  euere  thingis  the 
fadir  hath,  ben  myne ;  therfore  I  seide 
to  30U,  for  of  myne  he  schal  take,  and 
schal  telle  to  50U. 

16  A  litil,  and  now  3e  schulen  not  se 
me ;  and  eft  a  litil,  and  50  schulen  se 
me,  for  I  go  to  the  fadir. 

17  Therfore  summe  of  his  disciplis 
seiden  to  gidere,  What  is  this  thing  that 
he  seith  to  vs,  A  litil,  and  50  schulen 
not  se  me  ;  and  eft  a  litil,  and  3e  schulen 
se  me,  for  I  go  to  the  fader  ] 

18  Therfore  thei  seiden,  What  is  this, 
that  he  seith  to  vs,  A  litel  1  we  witen 
not  what  he  spekith. 


TYXDALE,  1 5.? 6. 


r)39 


These  thynges  saydc  I  not  vnto  you  at 
the  bcgynnynge,  be  cause  I  was  present 
with  you. 

5  Butt  nowe  goo  I  my  waye  to  hym 
thatt  sent  me,  and  none  of  you  axcth 
me.  Whither  gocst  thou  ? 

6  But  be  cause  I  have  sayde  suchc 
thynges  vnto  you,  youre  hcrtcs  arc  full 
ofT  sorowe. 

7  Xcvcrthclcsse  1  tell  you  the  tructh, 
it  is  expedient  for  you,  that  I  goo  ;i 
waye  ;  for  yf  I  goo  nott  awaye,  that 
comforter  will  nott  come  vnto  you  ;  yft" 
I  de  parte,  I  will  sonde  hym  vnto  you. 

8  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will  rebuke 
the  worlde  off  synne,  and  of  rightwesncs, 
and  of  iudgement. 

9  Of  synne,  because  they  beleve  not 
on  me  ; 

10  Of  rightwesncs,  be  cause  I  goo  to 
my  father,  and  ye  shall  se  me  no  moare  ; 

1 1  And  of  iudgement,  be  cause  the 
chefc  rueler  of  this  worlde  is  iudged 
alredy. 

12  I  have  yet  many  thynges  to  sayc 
vnto  you,  but  ye  cannot  beare  them 
awaye  nowe. 

13  When  he  is  wons  come,  I  meane 
the  sprete  of  verite,  he  will  leade  you 
into  all  trueth  ;  he  shall  nott  speake  of 
hym  silfe,  but  whatsoever  he  shall  hearc, 
that  shall  he  speake  ;  and  he  will  shewe 
you  thynges  to  come. 

14  He  shall  glorify  me,  for  he  shall  re- 
ceave  of  myne,  and  shall  shewe  vnto  you. 

15  All  thynges,  that  my  father  hath, 
ar  myne  ;  therfore  sayd  I  vnto  you,  that 
he  shal  take  of  mine,  and  shewe  vnto 
you. 

16  After  a  whyle,  ye  shall  nott  se  me  ; 
and  agayne  after  a  whylc,  ye  shall  se 
me,  for  I  goo  to  my  father. 

17  Then  sayd  some  of  his  disciples 
bitwene  them  selves.  What  is  this  that 
he  sayth  vnto  vs,  After  a  whyle,  ye  shall 
not  se  me  ;  and  agayne  after  awhyle,  ye 
shall  se  me,  and  that  I  goo  to  my  father? 

1 8  They  sayde  therfore,  What  is  this, 
that  he  sayth.  After  a  while  1  we  cannot 
tell  what  he  saith. 


540 


GOTHIC,  360. 


19  1\>  iesus  wlssuli,  jjiitei  wikledun  ina 
fraihiian,  yah  qa})  im,  Bi  J-ata  sokei|) 
mi]j  izAvis  misso,  J:atei  qa[),  Leitil,  yali 
ni  sai\vlii[i  mik ;  yah  aftra  leitil,  yah 
gasaiwhijj  mik. 

20  Amen,  amen,  qij^a  izwis,  |iei  greitif) 
yah  gauuof)  yus,  1})  manase)-s  fegino)> ; 
yus  saurgandans  wair[)i}?,  akei  so  saurga 
izwara  du  fahedai  wairjji]?. 

21  Qino  \>an  bairi)?,  saui-ga  habaid,  unte 
qam  wlieila  "izos ;  ij?  bijje  gabauran  ist 
barn,  ni  Jianaseijjs  ni  gaman  })izos  aglons, 
faura  fahedai,  unte  gabaurans  warjj 
manna  in  faivwhau, 

22  Yah  ])an  yus  auk  nu  saurga  habaijj, 
)))  aftra  saiwha  izwis,  yah  faginoj)  izwar 
hairto,  yali  l)o  fahed  izwara  ni  ainshun 
nimij)  af  izwis. 

23  Yah  in  yainamma  daga  mik  ni 
fraihni})  waihtais  ;  amen,  amen,  qij^a  iz- 
wis, jjatei  ))iswhah  ]>ei  bidjij>  attan  in 
namin  meinamma,  gibij)  izwis. 

24  Und  liita  ni  bedujj  ni  waihtais  in 
namin  meinamma;  bid3'ail\  yah  nimi]', 
ei  fahe})s  izwara  siyai  usfullida. 

25  pata  in  gayukom  rodida  izwis  ; 
akei  qimi]?  wheila,  jjanuh  izwis  ni  l^an- 
asei))s  in  gayukom  rodya,  ak  andaugiba 
bi  attan  gateiha  izwis. 

26  In  yainamma  daga  in  namin  mein- 
amma bidyi|)  ;  yah  ni  qijja  izwis,  Jjei  ik 
bidyau  attan  bi  izwis  ; 

27  Ak  silba  atta  friyo]?  izwis,  unte  yus 
mik  friyodedu}),  yah  galaubidedu]',  }atei 
ik  fram  Gu|)a  urrann. 

28  Uzuhiddya  fram  attin,  yah  atiddya 
in  })ana  fairwhu ;  aftra  bileijja  Jjamma 
fairwhau,  yah  gagga  du  attin. 

29  paruh  qejjun  |)ai  siponyos  is,  Sai  ! 
nu  andaugiba  rodeis,  yah  gayukono  ni 
ainohun  qi})is. 

30  Nu  witum,  ei  \>\i  kant  alia  ;  yah  ni 
})arffc,  ei  |mk  whas  fraihnai.  Bi  Jjamma 
galaubyam,  ])atei  ];u  fram  GuJ?a  urrant. 


31  An'lhof  im  Iesus,  Nu  galaubei}). 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

19  Se   Hselend  wiste,  dfet  hi  woldoii 
hyne  acsian,  and  he  c\vse\>  to   him,  Be 
(1am  ge  smeagea|)  betwynan  eow,  fordam 
ic  S2ede,  Yinbe  lytel,  ge  me  ne  geseoj) 
and  eft  ymbe  lytel,  ge  me  geseoj). 

20  Sojj,  ic  eow  secge,  Civet  ge  heofia}> 
and  wepaj),  middan-eard  geblissa]) ;  and 
ge  beoj)  unrote,  ac  eower  unrotnys  byj> 
gewend  to  gefean. 

21  Dfenne  wif  cenj),  heo  hsefjj  unrot- 
nysse,  fordam  de  byre  tid  com ;  donne 
beo  cenjj  cnapan,  ne  geman  heo  dsere 
hefi nysse,  for  gefeun,  fordam  man  byj); 
ucenned  on  middan-eard. 

22  And  witodlice  ge  habbaj)  nu  unrot- 
nysse,  eft  ic  eow  geseo,  and  eower  heorte 
geblissa}),  and  nan  man  ne  nim])  eowerne 
gefean  fram  eow. 

23  And  on  dam  dsege  ge  ne  bidda);  me 
nanes  })inges  i'^  s6\>,  ic  eow  secge,  gif  ge 
liwiet  bidda])  minne  feeder  on  minum 
naman,  he  hyt  sylf)  eow. 

24  Od  dis  ne  bade  ge  nan  Jjing  on 
ininum  naman  ;  bidda]),  and  ge  under-  i 
f6[),  dset  eower  gefea  sy  full. 

25  Das  ()ing  ic  eow  ssede  on  bigspel- 
lum  ;  seo  tid  cymj),  donne  ic  eow  ne 
sprece  on  bigspellum,  ac  ic  cyde  eow 
openlicc  be  miuum  faeder. 

26  On  dam  dsege  ge  bidda])  on  minum 
naman  ;  and  ic  eow  ne  secge,  fordam  ic 
bidde  minne  fteder  be  eow  ; 

27  Witodlice  se  feeder  eow  lufa}),  for- 
dam de  ge  lufedon  me,  and  gelyfdon, 
dret  ic  com  of  Gode. 

28  Ic  for  fram  feeder,  and  com  on  mid- 
dan-eard ;  eft  ic  forlsete  middan-eard, 
and  fare  to  feeder. 

29  His  leorning-cnihtas  cweedon  to 
him,  Nii !  du  sprycst  openlicc,  and  ne 
segst  n;ui  bigspell. 

30  Nu  we  witon,  deet  du  wust  ealle 
])ing  ;  and  de  nis  n'n  J)earf,  deet  eenig 
de  acsige.  On  dysum  we  gelyfaj),  dset 
du  come  of  Gode. 

31  Se  Heelend  him  andswarode  and 
cwosp,  Nu  ge  gelyfaj). 


j  XVr.  19-31.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

TO  Forsothe  JIiosn  knew,  for  tlicl  wold- 
tii  a\o  him,  ami  he  scitle  to  horn,  Of 
this  thiiii;  ;e  sokou  11  mouiij  :;ou,  for  I 
scide,  A  litil,  aiul  ;e  sehulou  not  se  mc  ; 
and  eft  a  litcl,  and  5c  schulen  se  me. 

20  Trculi,  treuli,  I  seye  to  50U,  for  56 
schulen  morne  and  Avepc,  forsothe  the 
world  solial  enioye  ;  forsothe  50  schulen 
be  sorwful,  but  joure  sorwe  schal  turne 
in  to  ioye. 

21  Sothly  a  womnian  whanne  sche 
beritli  child,  hath  sorwe,  for  hir  our 
tometh  ;  forsothe  whanne  sche  hath 
borun  a  sone,  now  sche  thenkith  not  on 
the  pressure,^  for  ioye,  for  a  man  is 
borun  in  to  the  world. 

22  And  therfore  50  han  now  sorwe, 
sothli  eft  T  schal  se  50U,  and  50ure  herte 
schal  enioye,  and  no  man  schal  take  fro 
50U  50ure  ioye. 

2^  And  in  that  day  50  schulen  not  axe 
me  ony  thinjf ;  treuli,  treuli,  I  scie  to 
50U,  if  56  schulen  axe  the  fadir  ony 
thinrf  in  niy  name,  he  schal  5yue  to  50U. 

24  Til  now  5e  axiden  not  ony  thing  in 
my  name ;  axe  56,  and  3e  schulen  take, 
that  5oure  ioye  be  ful. 

25  I  haue  spokun  to  30U  thes  thingis 
in  prouerbis ;'''  the  our  cometh,  whanne 
nnw  I  schal  not  speke  to  50U  in  pro- 
uerbis, but  op}nly  of  my  fadir  I  schal 
telle  to  50U. 

26  In  that  day  58  schulen  axe  in  my 
uame  ;  and  I  seie  not  to  50U,  for  I  schal 
l)reye  the  fadir  for  50U  ; 

27  Forsothe  he  the  fadir  loueth  50U,  for 
56  han  loued  me,  and  han  bileuyd,  for  I 
wente  out  fro  God. 

2S  I  wente  out  fro  the  fadir,  and  I 
cam  in  to  the  world  ;  eftsoones  I  leeue 
the  world,  and  I  go  to  the  fadir. 

29  His  disciplis  seyen  to  him,  Lo  1 
now  thou  spekist  opynli,  and  thou  seist 
no  prouerbe. 

30  Now  we  witcn,  for  thou  wost  alle 
thingis  ;  and  it  is  no  nedc  to  thee,  that 
ony  man  axe  thee.  In  this  thing  we 
bileuen,  for  thou  wentist  out  fro  God. 

3 1  Jhesu  answeride  to  hem,  Xow  50 
Lileucn. 


TYND  ALE,  1526. 


541 


19  Jesus  ]>crceaved,  that  they  woUle 
axe  hym,  and  sayde  vnto  them.  This  is 
it  that  ye  cncpiyre  of  bitwene  yourc 
selves,  that  I  sayd,  After  a  whyle,  yc 
shall  nott  so  me ;  and  agayne  after  a 
whyle,  ye  shall  se  me. 

20  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  you,  ye 
shall  wepe  and  lament,  and  the  worldc 
shall  rcioyee  ;  ye  shall  sorowe,  but  youre 
sorowe  shalbe  tourned  to  ioye. 

21  A  woman  when  she  travcyletli, 
liath  sorowe,  be  cause  her  houre  is  come  ; 
but  as  sone  as  she  is  delivered  off  her 
chylde,  she  remembreth  no  moare  her 
auguysshe,  for  ioye,  that  a  man  is  borne 
in  to  the  worlde. 

22  And  ye  no  we  are  in  sorowe,  butt  I 
will  se  you  agayne,  and  youre  hertes 
shall  reioyce,  and  youre  ioye  shall  no 
man  take  from  you. 

23  And  in  that  daye  shall  ye  axe  me 
no  question  ;  verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto 
you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  axe  the  father 
in  my  name,  he  will  geve  it  you. 

24  Hetherto  have  ye  axed  no  thinge 
in  my  name ;  axe,  and  ye  shall  receave 
it,  that  youre  ioye  maye  be  full. 

25  These  thinges  have  I  spoken  vnto 
you  in  proverbes  ;  the  tyme  will  come, 
when  I  shall  no  moare  spake  to  you  in 
proverbes,  but  I  shall  sliewe  you  playnly 
from  my  father. 

26  At  that  daye  shall  ye  axe  in  myne 
name  ;  and  I  saye  not  vnto  you,  that  I 
will  speake  vnto  my  father  for  you  ; 

27  For  my  father  hym  silfe  loveth  you, 
be  cause  ye  have  loved  me,  and  beleved, 
that  I  cam  out  from  God. 

28  I  went  out  from  the  father,  and 
cam  into  the  worlde ;  I  Icvc  the  worlde 
agayne,  and  go  to  the  father. 

29  His  disciples  sayd  vnto  hym.  Loo  ! 
nowe  speakest  thou  playnly,  and  thou 
vsest  no  provcrbe. 

30  Nowe  knowe  we,  that  thou  vnder- 
stondest  all  thinges  ;  and  nedest  not, 
that  eny  man  shulde  axe  the  eny  ques- 
tion. Therfore  beleve  we,  that  thou 
camst  from  God. 

31  Jesus  answered  them,  Nowe  ye  do 
beleve. 


542 


GOTHIC,  360. 


32  Sai !  qimi])  wlieila,  yali  nix  qam,  ei 
distahyada,  Avharyizuli  du  seina,  yah 
mik  ainana  l)ilei|)il> ;  yah  ni  im  ains, 
unte  atta  mi])  mis  ist. 

33  pata  rodida  izwis,  |;ei  "iu  mis  ga- 
■\vairJ5i  aigei() ;  in  jiamma  fairwhau  aglons 
hahaid,  akei  })rafstei]j  izwis,  ik  gayiuk- 
aida  j^ana  fairwhu. 


Chap.  XVII.  i  pata  rodida  lesus, 
nzuhhof  augona  seina  du  himina,  yah 
qaj),  Atta,  qam  wheila,  hauhei  J^einana 
sunu,  ei  sunus  jjcius  hauhyai  jjuk. 

2  Swaswe  atgaft  imma  Avaldufui  allaize 
leike,  ei  all  jiatei  atgaft  imma,  gibai  im 
libain  aiweinon. 

3  Soil  })an  ist  so  aiweino  libains,  ei 
kunneina  ]5uk  ainana  sunya  Guj?,  yah 
J^anei  insandidcs,  lesu  Christu. 

4  Ik  |)uk  liauhida  ana  airjjai,  waurstAV 
ustauh,  |)atei  atgaft  mis  du  waurkyan. 

5  Yah  nu,  hauhei  mik  pu,  atta,  at  ])us 
silbin,  })annna  wull'au  }'anei  habaida  at 
})us,  faur])izei  sa  fairwhus  wesi. 

6  Gabairhtida  jjeinata  name  mannam, 
Jjanzei  atgaft  mis  us  J^amma  fairwhau  ; 
})einai  wesun,  yah  mis  atgaft  ins,  yah 
Jjata  Avaurd  j^einata  gafastaidedun. 

7  Nil  ufkun|)a,  ei  alia  Jjoei  atgaft  mis, 
at  ])us  sind. 

8  Unte  ])0  waurda  J^oei  atgaft  mis, 
atgaf  im ;  yah  eis  nemun  bi  sunyai, 
Jjatei  fram  [ms  urrann ;  yah  galaubi- 
dedun,  J^atei  J)U  mik  insandides. 

9  Ik  bi  ins  bidya,  ni  bi  ])0  manase)> 
bidya,  ak  bi  fians,  fianzei  atgaft  mis, 
unte  l^einai  sind. 

10  Yah  meina  alia  ]>eiua  sind,  yah  Jjeina 
meina  ;  yah  hauhijjs  im  in  })aim. 

1 1  Ni  |)anaseij3S  im  in  jjamma  fairwhau, 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  Joro 

32  Nu  !  com  tid,  and  cym]7,  dtet  ge  to- 
faron,  seghwylc  to  his  agenum,  and  for- 
liEton  me  anne ;  and  ic  ne  eom  ana 
forclam  min  fpeder  is  mid  me. 

33  Das  ])ing  ic  eow  ssede,  tiset  g( 
habbon  sibbe  on  me  ;  ge  habbajj  hefig( 
byrdene  on  middan-earde,  ac  getruwia]) 
ic  ofer-swidde  middan-eard. 


Chap.  XVII.  ^i  Das  ]nng  se  Hselend 
sprajc,  and  ahof  up  his  eagan  to  heof- 
cnum,  and  cwpe]',  Feeder,  tid  ys  cumen. 
geswiitela  ttiiine  sunu,  dajt  din  sunu  ge- 
swutelige  de. 

2  And  swa,  du  him  seaklest  anweald 
selces  mannes,  duet  he  sylle  ece  lif  eallum 
dam,  de  du  him  sealdest. 

3  Dis  ys  s5})lice  ece  lif,  diet  hi  oncnawon 
dset  dii  eart  an  s6[)  God,  and  se  de  du 
sendest,  Heelend  Crist. 

4  Ic  de  geswutelode  ofer  eor]>an,  ic  ge- 
endodc  da^t  weorc,  dxt  du  me  sealdest 
to  doune. 

5  And  nu,  du  feeder,  gebeorhta  me  mid 
de  sylfura,  dsere  beorhtnysse  de  ic  ha^fde 
myd  de,  serdam  de  middan-eard  wsere. 

6  Ic  geswutelode  dinne  naman  dam 
mannum,  de  du  me  sealdest  of  middan- 
earde  ;  hig  weeron  dine,  and  du  hi  seald- 
est me,  and  hi  geheoldou  dine  spraece. 

7  Nil  hi  gecneowon,  dtet  ealle  da  ])ing 
de  du  me  sealdest,  synd  of  de. 

8  Fordam  ic  sealde  him  da  word,  de  du 
sealdest  me ;  and  hig  underfengon,  and 
oncneowon  s5j)lice,  dset  ic  com  of  de ; 
and  hig  gelyfdon,  deet  dii  me  sendest. 

9  Ic  bidde  for  hig,  ne  bidde  ic  for  mid- 
dan-earde, ac  for  da,  de  du  me  sealdest, 
fordam  hi  synd  dine. 

10  And  ealle  mine  synd  dine,  and  dine 
synd  mine ;  and  ic  eom  geswutelod  on 
him.''' 

11  And   nil  ic  ne  com'''  on  middan- 


XVI.  3-v-XVII.  1 1]  AVYCLIFFE,  1389. 

32  Lo !  tlic  our  oonictli,  ami  now  it 
conietli,  tliat  5c  bo  ilisparplicV  t'fl»  in  to 
his  ownc  tliin^is,  and  locuo  nio  aloonc  ; 
and  I  am  not  aloonc,  for  the  fadir  is 
with  nie. 

33  Thcs  thingis  I  haue  spokun  to  50U, 
that  ;e  haue  pecs  in  nie ;  in  tlie  worhl 
^e  schulcu  haue  jircssing/  but  triste  3e, 
i  haue  ouercome  the  world. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


r>4:j 


CiiAP.  XVII.  I  Jlicsu  spak  thcs 
thingis,  and  the  y^cn  lift  vp  in  to  hc- 
uenc,  he  seido,  Fadir,  the  our  conicth, 
claritie  tin  sonc,  that  thi  sonc  clarihe 
thee. 

2  As  thou  hast  5ouun  to  him  power  of 
ech  Hciseh,^  that  al  thing  that  tliou  hast 
;ouun  to  hym,  he  5yue  to  hem  eucrlast- 
ing  lyf. 

3  Forsothc  this  is  euerlasting  lyf,  that 
thci  knowe  thee  aloonc  verry  God,  and 
whom  thou  sentist,  Jhesu  Crist. 

4  I  haue  clarifyed  thee  on  crthe,  I 
haue  endid  the  work,  that  thou  hast 
50UUU  to  mc,  that  I  do. 

5  And  now,  fadir,  clarifie  thou  nie  at 
thi  silf,  with  clerencsse  that  I  haddc  at 
thee,  bifore  the  world  was  maad. 

6  I  haue  schewid  thi  name  to  the  men, 
whiehc  thou  hast  50uun  to  me  of  the 
world  ;  thci  weren  thine,  and  thou  hast 
50uun  hem  to  me,  and  thci  han  kept  thi 
word. 

7  And  now  thci  han  kiaowun,  for  alle 
thingis  that  thou  hast  jouun  to  me,  ben 
of  tlicc. 

8  For  the  wordis  that  thou  hast  50uun 
ti)  me,  I  3af  to  hem ;  and  thei  han 
tiikun,  and  han  kno-wun  verili,  for  I 
wonte  out  fro  thee  ;  and  thei  bileuyden, 
lor  thou  sentist  me. 

9  I  ])reie  for  hem,  not  for  the  world, 
liut  for  hem,  that  thou  hast  50uun  to 
111c,  for  thei  ben  thine. 

10  And  alle  mync  thingis  ben  thine, 
and  thin  thingis  ben  myne ;  and  I  am 
clarified  in  hem. 

1 1  And  now  I  am  not  in  the  world, 


32  Beholde  !  the  houre  draweth  nye, 
and  ys  alredy  come,  that  ye  shalbe 
scatcred,  every  man  his  wayes,  and  shall 
leave  me  alone  ;  and  yet  am  I  not  alone, 
for  my  father  is  with  me. 

33  These  wordes  have  I  spoken  vnto 
you,  that  in  me  ye  niyght  have  peace  ; 
in  the  worlde  shall  ye  have  tribuiacion, 
but  be  of  good  cheai'c,  I  have  overcome 
the  worlde. 


Chap.  XVII.  1  These  wordes  spake 
Jesus,  and  lifte  vppe  his  eyes  to  heven, 
and  sayde,  Father,  the  houre  is  come, 
glorify  thy  Sonne,  that  thy  sonne  maye 
glorify  the. 

2  As  thou  hast  gevcn  hym  power  over 
all  fieshe,  that  he  shulde  geve  eternall 
life,  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  gevcn  him. 

3  This  is  life  eternall,  that  they  myght 
knowe  the  that  only  very  God,  and 
whom  thou  hast  sent,  -Jesus  Christ. 

4  I  have  gloryfied  the  on  the  erth,  I 
have  fynysshecd  the  worker,  wliych  thou 
gavcst  me  to  do. 

5  And  nowe,  glorify  me  thou,  fathei", 
in  thyn  awne  presence,  with  the  glory 
which  I  had  with  the,  yerre  the  worlde 
was. 

6  I  have  declared  thy  name  vnto  the 
men,  whych  thou  gavcst  mc  out  off  the 
worlde  ;  thyne  they  were,  and  thou  hast 
gevcn  them  me,  and  they  have  kept  thy 
sayinges. 

7  Nowe  have  they  knowen,  that  all 
thingcs  whatsoever  tliou  hast  gcven  me, 
are  ot  the. 

8  For  I  have  gcven  vnto  them  the 
wordes,  which  thou  gavcst  me  ;  and  they 
have  receaved  them,  and  have  knowen 
surely,  that  I  cam  out  from  the ;  and 
have  beleved,  that  thou  diddest  send  me. 

9  I  praye  for  them,  I  praye  not  for  the 
worlde,  but  for  them,  which  thou  hast 
gcven  me,  for  they  arc  thyne. 

I  o  And  all  myne  are  thyne,  and  thyne 
are  myne  ;  and  I  am  glorifyed  in  them. 

II  And  now  am  I  no  moarc  in  the 


544 


GOTHIC,  360. 


j|?  j^ai  in  }>amma  fairwhau  sind,  yah  ik 
du  j)us  gagga.  Atta  weiha,  fastai  iiis  in 
namin  jjeinamma,  |>anzei  atgaft  mis,  ei 
siyaiua  ain,  swaswe  wit. 

1 2  pan  was  mi]>  iin  in  ):amma  fair- 
whau, ik  fastaida  ins  in  namin  |peinam- 
ma ;  l^anzei  atgaft  mis,  gafastaida,  yah 
ainshun  us  ini  ni  fraqistnoda,  niba  sa 
sunus  frakistais,  ei  Jjata  gamelido  usfuUif) 
•\vaui-)?i. 

13  1|)  nu  du  ))us  gagga,  yah  jjata  rodya 
in  manasedai,  ei  habaina  fahed  meiua 
usfulUda  in  sis. 

14  Ik  atgaf  im  waurd  })einata,  yah  so 
manase];s  fiyaida  ins  ;  unte  ni  sind  us 
l^amma  fairwhau,  swaswe  ik  us  jiamma 
fairwhau  ni  im. 

15  Ni  bidya,  ei  usnimais  ins  us  Jiamma 
fairwliau,  ak  ei  baix'gais  im  faura  j^amma 
unselyin. 

16  Us  jjamma  fairwhau  ni  sind,  swaswe 
ik  us  })amma  fairwhau  ni  im. 

1 7  AVeiliai  ins  in  sunyai ;  waurd  }?einata 
sunya  ist. 

18  Swaswe  mik  insandides  in  manase}), 
swah  ik  insandida  ins  in  \>o  manased. 

19  Yah  fram  im  ik  weilia  mik  silban, 
ei  siyaina  yah  eis  weihai  in  sunyai. 

20  Ajjpan  ni  bi  |)ans  bidya  ainans,  ak 
bi  jjans  galaubyandaus  J^airh  waurda  ize 
du  mis  ; 

21  Ei  allai  ain  siyaina,  swaswe  ]>\i,  atta, 
in  mis,  yah  ik  in  J)us,  ei  yah  f^ai  in 
uggkis  ain  siyaina  ;  ei  so  manasej^s  ga- 
laubyai,  jjatei  \>u  mik  insandides. 

22  Yali  ik  wul):u  jjanei  gaft  mis,  gaf 
im,  ei  siyaina  ain,  swaswe  wit  ain  siyu ; 


23  Ik  in  im,  yah  J)U  in  mis,  ei  siyaina 
ustauhauai  du  ainamma  ;  yah  kunnei  so 
nianasej's,  Jjatei  ]>u  mik  insandides,  yah 
friyodes  ins,  swaswe  mik  friyodes. 

24  Atta,  l^atei  atgaft  mis,  wilyau  ei 
{■arei  im  ik,  3'ah  jai  siyaina  mij>  mis,  ei 
saiwliaina  wu][u  meinana,  |ninei  gaft 
mis ;    unte   friyodes    mik   faur   gaskaft 


ANGLO-SAXOX,  995.     [St.  Joiiv 

earde,  and  hi  synd  on  niidtlan-earde, 
and  ic  cume  to  de.'''  Halega^  fseder, 
heakl  on  dinum  uaman,  ctret  du  me 
sealdest,  d£et  hi  syn  an,  swa  wyt  synd.'*' 

12  Da  ic  wees  mid  him,  ic  heold  hi  on, 
dinum  naman ;  ic  heold  da  de  du  me 
seaklest,  and  ne  forwear|j  hyi-a  nan,  butou 
forspillednysse  beam,  dset  dset  halige 
gewrit  sy  gefylled.  • 

13  Nu  ic  cume  to  de,  and  d's  |)ing  ic 
sprece  on  middan-eai-de,  dset  hi  habbon 
minne  gefean  gefylledne  on  liim  sylfum. 

14  Ic  sealde  him  dine  spreece,  and 
middan-eard  hi  hsefde  on  batunge  ;  for- 
dam  hi  ne  synd  of  middau-earde,  swa  ic 
eac  ne  eom  of  middan-earde. 

15  Ne  bidde  ic,  daet  du  lii  nyme  of 
middan-eaide,  ac  dset  du  hi  geliealde 
of  yfele. 

16  Ne  synd  bi  of  middan-earde,  swa  ic 
ne  eom  of  middan-earde. 

17  Gehalga  bim  sojifsestnysse  ;  din 
sprsec  ys  sojjfsestnys. 

1 8  Swa  dii  me  sendest  on  middan-eard, 
ic  sende  bi  on  middan-eard. 

19  And  for  hig  ic  lialgige  me  sylfne, 
dset  hig  syn  eac  gebalgode  on  s6|)fEest- 
nysse. 

20  Witodlice  ne  gebidde  ic  for  hi  ane, 
ac  eac  for  da  de  gyt  sceolon  gelyfan 
jjurh  hyra  word  on  me  ; 

21  Dset  ealle  syn  an,  swa  du,  fsedei', 
eart  on  me,  and  ic  on  de,  dset  hig  syn 
eac  an  on  unc  ;  dset  middan-eard  gelyfe, 
dset  du  me  sendest. 


22  And  ic  seakle  bim  da  beorbtnysse, 
de  du  me  sealdest,  dset  bi  syn  an,  swa 
wyt  syn  an  ;  ■ 

23  Ic  eom  on  him,  and  du  eart  on 
me,  dset  hi  syn  ge-endode  on  an  ;  dset 
middan-eard  oncnawe,djet  du  me  sendest, 
and  lufodest  hig,  swa  dii  me  hifodest. 

24  Fseder,  ic  wylle  dset  da  de  dii  me 
seaklest,  syn  mid  me  dar  ic  eom,  dset 
big  geseon  mme  beorbtnysse,  de  du  me 
sealdest ;    fordam   dii   lufodest   me   eer 


XVII.  12-24.]  WYCLTFFE,  1389. 

Rud  tlies  ben  in  the  world,  and  I  come 
to  thee.  Ilooli  fadir,  kepc  hem  in  thy 
name,  whiche  thou  hast  50UUU  to  me, 
that  thei  be  oon,  as  and  we. 

12  Whanne  I  was  with  hem,  I  kepte 
hem  in  thi  name  ;  wliiche  thou  hast 
50uun  to  me,  I  kepte,  and  no  man  of 
hem  perischide,  no  but  the  sone  of  per- 
dicioun,^  that  the  scripture  be  fillid. 

13  Forsothe  now  I  come  to  thee,  and 
I  spcke  thes  thiugis  in  the  workl,  that 
tliei  haue  my  ioye  Hllid  in  hem  silf. 

14  I  5af  to  hem  thi  word,  and  the 
world  hadde  hem  in  hate  ;  for  thci  ben 
not  of  the  world,  as  and  I  am  not  of  the 
world. 

15  I  preie  not,  that  thou  take  a  wey 
liem  fro  the  world,  but  that  thou  kepe 
hem  fro  yuel. 

16  Thei  ben  not  of  the  world,  as  and 
I  am  not  of  the  world. 

1 7  Halwe  thou  hem  in  treuthe ;  thi 
word  is  treuthe. 

18  As  thou  sentist  me  in  to  the  world, 
and  I  sente  hem  in  to  the  world. 

19  And  I  halwe  my  silf  for  hem,  that 
and  thei  be  halwid  in  treuthe. 

20  Sotheli  I  preie  not  oonli  for  hem, 
but  and  for  hem  that  ben  to  bileuynge 
in  to  me  bi  the  word  of  hem  ; 

21  That  alle  thei  be  oon,  as  thou,  fadir, 
in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  and  thei  in 
vs  be  oon  ;  that  the  world  bileue,  for 
thou  hast  sent  me. 

22  And  I  haue  50uun  to  hem  the 
clercncssc,  that  thou  hast  50uun  to 
me,  that  thei  be  oon,  as  and  we  ben 
oon  ; 

23  I  in  hem,  and  thou  in  me,  that  thei 
be  endid  in  oon  ;  and  that  the  world 
knowe,  that  thou  sentist  me,  and  hast 
luuyd  hem,  as  thou  hast  louyd  and  me. 

24  Fadir,  I  wole  that  and  thei  whiche 
thou  hast  50uun  to  me,  be  with  mc 
w!iere  I  am,  that  thei  se  my  cleernesse, 
tliat  thou  hast  50uun  to  me  ;  for  thou 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


545 


worlde,  but  they  are  in  the  worldc,  and 
I  come  to  the.  Wholy  fatlier,  kepe  in 
thyne  awne  name,  them  which  thou  hast 
geven  me,  that  they  maye  be  one,  as  we 
are. 

12  "Whyll  I  was  with  them  in  the 
worlde,  I  kepte  them  in  thy  name ; 
those  that  thou  gavest  me,  have  I  kepte, 
and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  that  lost 
divide,  that  the  scripture  myght  be 
fulfilled. 

13  Nowe  come  I  to  the,  and  these 
wordes  speake  I  in  the  worlde,  that 
they  myght  have  my  ioye  full  in  them. 

14  I  have  geven  them  thy  doctryne, 
and  the  ■\vorlde  hath  hated  them ;  be- 
cause they  are  nott  off  the  worlde, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  worlde. 

15  I  desyre  not,  that  thou  shuldest 
take  them  out  of  the  worlde,  but  that 
thou  kepe  them  from  evyll. 

1 6  They  are  not  off  the  worlde,  as  I  am 
not  of  the  worlde. 

1 7  Sanctify  them  in  thy  truetli ;  thy 
sayinge  is  verite. 

18  As  thou  diddest  send  me  into  the 
worlde,  even  soo  have  I  sent  them  into 
the  worlde. 

19  And  for  their  sakes  sanctify  I  my 
silfe,  thatt  they  also  myght  be  sanctified 
thorowe  the  trueth. 

20  I  praye  not  for  them  alone,  butt 
for  them  also  which  shall  beleve  on  me 
thorowe  their  preachynge  ; 

2 1  That  they  all  maye  be  one,  as  thou, 
father,  arte  in  me,  and  I  in  the,  that 
they  maye  be  alsoo  one  in  vs  ;  that  the 
worlde  maye  beleve,  that  thou  hast  sent 
me. 

22  And  that  glory  that  thou  gavest 
me,  I  have  geven  them,  that  they  maye 
be  wone,  as  Me  are  wone ; 

23  I  am  in  them,  and  thou  arte  in  me, 
that  they  maye  be  made  perfecte  in 
won  ;  and  that  the  worlde  maye  knowe, 
that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved 
them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me. 

24  Father,  I  will  that  they  which  thou 
hast  geven  me,  be  with  mc  where  I  am, 
that  they  maye  se  my  glory,  which  thou 
hast  creven  me  ;  for  tliou  hast  loved  me 

N  n 


546  GOTHIC,  360. 

fairwhaus. 

25  Atta  garaihta,  yali  so  manasej^s  J)uk 
ni  ufkunjja,  i]>  ik  {juk  kunjja,  yah  ])ai 
ufkun])edun,  Jiatei  \>u  mik  insandides. 

26  Yah  gakannida  im  namo  jjeinata, 
yah  kannya ;  ei  fria})wa  ))oei  friyodes 
mik,  in  im  siyai,  yah  ik  in  im. 


Chap.  XVIII.  i  pata  qijjands  lesus, 
usiddya  mij)  siponyam  seinaim  ufar 
rinnon  jjo  Kaidron,  ]iai"ei  was  am-tigards, 
in  jsanei  galaij)  lesus,  yah  siponyos  is. 

2  Wissuh  pan  yah  ludas,  sa  gale^yauds 
ina,  jjana  stad,  })atei  ufta  gaiddya  lesus 
yainar  mi]?  siponyam  seinaim. 

3  1\>  ludas  nam  hansa,  yah  j^ize  gudyane 
yah  Fareisaie  andbahtans,  iddyuh  yaind- 
wair])s  mij)  skeimam,  yah  haizam,  yah 
wepnam. 

4  Ij)  lesus  witands  alia  jjoei  qemun 
ana  ina,  usgaggands  ut,  qaj)  im,  Whana 
sokeij)  1 

5  Andhafyandans  imma  qe))un,  lesu 
■jjana  Nazoraiu.  paruh  qa\>  im  lesus,  Ik 
im.  Stojjuh  j)an  yah  ludas,  sa  lewyands 
ina,  mi])  im. 

6  paruh  swe  qaJ)  im,  patei  ik  im,  ga- 
lij)un  ibukai,  yah  gadrusun  dala}). 

7  paJ)roh  })an  ins  aftra  frah,  Whana 
sokeij)  1  I])  eis  qe))un,  lesu  Jjana  J^azo- 
raiu. 

8  Andhof  lesus,  qa})  izwis,  })atei  ik  im  ; 
yabai  nu  mik  sokeij),  letij>  pans  gaggan. 

9  Ei  usfullnodedi  jiata  waurd  j)atei  qaj), 
Jli  jjanzei  atgaf  mis,  ni  fraqistida  ize 
iiinummehun. 

10  ij)  Seimon  Paitrus  habands  hairu, 
uslauk  ina,  yah  sloh  ])is  auhumistins 
gudyins  skalk,  yah  afmaimait  imma  auso 
taihswo.  Sah  J5an  haitans  was  namin 
Malkus. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 
middan-eard  geset  waere. 

25  La  rihtwisa  feder,  middan-eai'd  de 
ne  gecneow,  witodlice  ic  de  gecneow, 
and  hi  oncneowon,  dset  du  me  send  est. 

26  And  ic  him  cydde  dinne  naman, 
and  gyt  wylle  cydan ;  dset  seo  lufu  de 
dii  me  lufodest,  sy  on  him,  and  ic  eom 
on  him. 


Chap.  XVIII.  +1  Da  se  Hselend  das 
])ing  cwsej),  da  code  he  ...  .  ofer  da 
burnan  Cedron,  dsei'  wpes  tin  wyrt-tun, 
in  to  dam  he  code,  and  his  leorning- 
cnihtas. 

2  Witodlice  ludas,  de  hyne  belsewde, 
wiste  da  stowe,  fordam  de  se  Hselend 
oft-ra^dlice  com  dyder  mid  his  leorning- 
cnilitum. 

3  Da  underfeng  ludas  dset  folc,  and  da 
j'egnas  set  dam  bisceopum  and  set  dam 
Phariseon,  and  com  dyder  mid  leoht- 
fatum,  and  mid  blasum,  and  mid  wsepn- 
um. 

4  Witodlice  se  Hselend  wiste  ealle  da 
])ing  de  him  towearde  wseron,  he  code 
da  for]),  and  cwsej)  to  him,  Hwsene  sece 

5  Hig  andswarodon  him  and  cwsedon. 
Done  Nazareniscan  Heelend.  Se  Hsel- 
end  cwsej),  Ic  hit  eom.  S6j)lice  ludas 
de  hine  belsewde,  stod  mid  him. 

6  Da  he  openlice  sgede,  Ic  hit  eom,  da 
eodon  hig  underbsec,  and  feollon  on  da 
eoi-j)an, 

7  Eft  he  hi  acsode,  Hwsene  sece  ge  ? 
Hi  cwsedon.  Done  Nazareniscan  Hselend. 

8  Se  Hselend  him  andswarode,  Ic  ssede 
eow,  dset  ic  hit  eom ;  gif  ge  witodlice 
me  secaj),  Isetaj)  das  faran. 

9  Dset  seo  sjjrsec  w^re  gefylled  de  he 
cwsej),  Dset  ic  naune  dsera  ne  forspille, 
de  du  me  sealdest. 

10  Witodlice  Simon  Petrus  ateah  his 
sweord,  and  sloh  dses  bisceopes  ])eowan, 
and  acearf  him  of  da?t  s-v^ydre  eai'e. 
Dses  j)eowan  nama  wses  Malchus. 


XVII.  25.-XVIIL  lo.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389.  TYNDALE,  1526. 

before  the  makyiigc  of  the  worlde. 


547 


louedist   mo   bifor  the  mukiiige  of  tlie 
worlil. 

25  lli5tful  fiulir,  the  workl  knew  not 
thee,  forsothe  I  knew  thee,  and  thes 
knowen,  fur  thou  sentist  me. 

26  And  I  liaue  niaad  thi  name  knowe 
to  hem,  and  schal  make  knowe  ;  that 
the  loue  by  wliich  thou  hast  loued  me, 
be  in  hem,  and  I  in  hem. 


Chap.  XVIII.  i  Whanne  Jhesu 
hadde  seid  thes  thino;is,  he  wento  out 
with  his  dieciplis  ouer  the  strond  of 
Ccdron,  where  was  a  5erd,^  in  to  which 
he  outride,  and  his  disciplis. 

2  .Sothli  and  Judas,  that  bitraiede  him, 
wiste  the  place,  for  ofte  Jhesu  cam  to 
giderc  thidur  with  his  disciplis. 

3  Thcrfore  Avhanne  Judas  hadde  takun 
ii  eumpany  of  kni5tis,  and  of  the 
bischopis  and  Pharisees  mynystris,  he 
oana  with  lanternis,  and  brondis,  and 
armys. 

4  And  so  Jhesu  witinge  al!e  thingis 
that  weren  to  coniynge  on  him,  wente 
forth,   and  seith  to  hem.  Whom  seken 

5  Thei  answeriden  to  him,  Jhesu  of 
Xazarcth.  Jhesu  seith  to  hem,  I  am. 
Forsoth  and  Judas  that  bitrayede  hym, 
.stood  with  hem. 

6  Therfore  as  he  seide  to  hem,  I  am, 
thei  wenten  a  bak,  and  felden  doun  in 
to  erthe. 

7  Eft  he  axide  hem,  Whom  seken  ■^c  1 
Forsoth  thei  seiden,  Jhesu  Xazaren. 

8  He  answeridc  to  hem,  I  seide  to  50U, 
for  I  am  ;  thcrfore  if  je  seken  me,  snffre 
3e  thes  to  go  awey. 

9  That  the  word  which  he  seide  schulde 
be  fillid.  For  I  loste  not  ony  of  hem, 
whiche  thou  liast  50uun  to  me. 

10  Forsothe  Symount  Pctre  hauynge  a 
swcrd,  dron3  it  out,  and  smot  the  scr- 
uaunt  of  the  bischop,  and  kitte  of  his 
litil  ri5t  cere.  Forsothe  the  name  of 
the  seruaunt  was  Malkus. 


25  O  righteous  father,  the  very  worlde 
hath  nott  knowen  the,  l)utt  I  have 
knowen  the,  and  those  have  knowen, 
that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

26  And  I  have  declared  vnto  them  thy 
name,  and  Avill  declare  it ;  that  the  love 
wher  with  thou  lovedst  me,  be  in  them, 
and  that  I  be  in  them. 


CiiAP.  XVIII.  I  When  Jesus  had 
spoken  these  wordes,  he  went  forth  with 
his  disciples  over  the  broke  Cedron, 
whci'c  was  a  garden,  into  the  which  he 
entred,  with  his  disciples. 

2  Judas  also,  wich  betrayed  hym,  knewc 
the  place,  for  Jesus  often  tymes  resorted 
thither  with  his  disciples. 

3  Judas  then  after  he  had  receaved  a 
bonde  off  men,  and  ministers  of  the  by 
prestos  and  of  the  Phariscs,  cam  thither 
with  lantei'ns,  and  fyerbrondcs,  and  we- 
pens. 

4  Then  Jesus  knowyngc  all  thynges 
that  shulde  come  on  hym,  went  forth, 
and  sayde  vnto  them,  Whom  seke  ye  'i 

5  They  answered  hym,  Jesus  off  Naza- 
reth. Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  I  am  he. 
Judas  also  which  betrayed  him,  stode  by 
with  them. 

6  As  sone  as  he  had  sayd  vnto  them,  I 
am  he,  they  went  backe  wardes,  and  fell 
to  the  grounde. 

7  He  axed  them  agayne,  Whome  seke 
ye  l     They  sayde,  Jesus  off  Nazareth. 

8  Jesus  answered,  I  sayde  vnto  you,  I 
am  he  ;  iff  ye  soke  me,  lett  these  goo 
theyr  waye. 

9  That  the  sayinge  myght  be  fulfilled 
which  he  spake,  Of  thcni  which  thou 
gavcst,  have  I  not  lost  one. 

10  Simon  Peter  had  a  swearde,  and 
drue  hym  out,  and  smote  the  bye  prestes 
servaunt,  and  cut  off  his  right  care. 
The  servauntcs  name  was  Malchas. 

K  n  2 


548 


GOTHIC,  360. 


11  paruh  qaj)  lesus  du  Paitrau,  Lagel 
pana  liairu  in  fodr  ;  stikl  jjanei  gaf  mis 
atta,  niu  drigkau  ]jana  t 

12  paruh  hansa,  yah  sa  Jjusundifajjs, 
yah  andbahtos  ludaie,  undgripun  lesu, 
yah  gabundun  ina, 

13  Yah  gatauhun  'ina  du  Annin  frumist; 
sa  was  auk  swaihra  Kayafin,  saei  was 
auhumists  weilia  J)is  atajsnyis. 

14  Wasuh  ))an  Kayafa,  saei  garaginoda 
ludaium,  ))atei  batizo  ist  ainana  mannan 
fraqistyan  faur  managein. 

15  paruh  laistida  lesu  Seimon  Paitrus, 
yah  anj?ar  siponeis ;  sa!i  };an  siponeis 
Avas  kun})3  jjamma  gudyin.  Yah  mi];- 
inngalai[)  mi})  lesua,  ia  rohsn  ))is  gud- 
yins  ;  _ 

16  i\>  Paitrus  sto]j  at  dauroin  uta. 
paruh  usuldya  ut  sa  siponeis  anjiar,  saei 
was  kuuj's  jjamma  gudyin,  yah  qajj 
daurawardai,  yah  attauh  inn  Paitru. 

1 7  paruh  qa))  yaina  ))iwi,  so  daur- 
awardo,  du  Paitrau,  Ibai  yah  \iu  jjize 
siponye  is  jjis  mans  1  I  J?  is  qa\>,  Ni 
ini. 

18  paruh  stoJ)un  skalkos  yah  andbahtos 
haurya  waurkyandans,  unte  kakl  was, 
yah  warmidedun  sik  ;  yah  |;an  was  mij? 
im  Paitrus,  staudands  yah  warmyauds 
sik. 

1  9  Ij)  sa  auliumista  gudya  frah  lesu  bi 
siponyans  is,  yah  bi  laisein  is. 

20  Andliof  imma  lesus,  Ik  andaugyo 
rodida  manasedai  ;  ik  sinteino  laisida  in 
gaqumjjai,  yah  in  gudhusa,  jiarei  sint- 
eino ludaieis  gaqimand,  yah  J^iubyo  ni 
rodida  waiht. 

21  "VVhis  mik  fraihnis  1  fraihn  ))ans 
hausyandans,  wha  rodidedyau  du  im ; 
sai !  J}ai  witun,  jjatei  qajj  ik. 

22  I))  ])ata  qij^andin  i'mma,  sums  and- 
bahte  staudands,  gaf  slah  lofin  lesua, 
qaj^uli,  Swau  andhafyis  );amma  reikistin 
gudyin  1 

23  Andhof  lesus,  Yabai  ubilaba  rodida, 
weitwodei   bi   pata   ubil ;    ai])|)au  yabai 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995,     [St.  Johx 

T  I  Da  cwrejj  se  Hselend  to  Petre,  Do 
din  sweord  on  his  scsejje  ;  t!one  oalic  de 
min  fseder  me  sealde,  ne  drince  ic  hine '? 

I  2  Dset  folc,  and  se  ealdor,  and  dseru 
ludea  |iegnas,  namon  done  Hselend,  and 
bundon  hine, 

13  And  Iseddon  hine  sercst  to  Annan: 
se  wees  Caiphas  sweor,  and  se  Caiphas 
waes  daes  geares  bisceop. 

14  WitodHce  Caiphas  dihte  dam  lu- 
deon,  and  cwse]),  daet  hyt  betere  wsere 
dset  an  man  swulte  for  folce. 

15  Simon  Petrus  fyligde  dam  Hselende, 
and  oder  leorning-cniht ;  se  oder  leorn- 
ing-cniht  wses  dam  bisceope  cu}).  And 
he  code  in  mid  dam  Hcclende,  on  dees 
bisceopes  cafer-tun ; 

16  Petrus  stod  set  dsere  dura  dser  iite. 
Da  code  se  leorning-cniht  ut,  de  wses 
dses  bisceopes  ciida,  and  cwsejj  to  dsere 
dure-J)inene,  and  Isedde  Petrum  in. 

17  Da  cwse})  seo  duru-jnnen  to  Petre, 
Cwyst  du,  eart  du  of  dyses  leorning- 
cnihtum  1  Da  cwasj)  he,  Nic,  ne  eom 
ic. 

18  Da  Jjeowas  and  da  }iegnas  stodon 
set  dam  gledon,  and  wyrmdon  hig, 
fordam  hit  was  ceakl  ;  witodhce  Petrus 
stod  mid  him,  and  wyrmde  hyne. 

19  Se  bisceop  acsode  done  Hselend 
ymbe  his  leorning-cnihtas,  and  ymbe  his 
lare. 

20  Da   andswarode   se    Hselend    and 
cwse]i,    Ic   sprsec    openlice    to    middan- 
earde  ;   and  ic  Iserde  syinle  on  gesam- 
nunge,  and  on  temple,  dser  ealle  ludeas      .■ 
togsedere   comon,  and  ic  ne  sjirsec  nan       ■ 
Jjing  digelice. 

21  Hwi  acsast  du  me  ^  ilcsa  da  de 
gehyrdon,  hwset  ic  to  him  sprsece ;  hi 
witon,  da  J)ing  de  ic  him  ssede. 

22  Da  he  dis  cwse]?,  da  sloh  an  dsera 
|)egna  de  dar  stodon,  done  Hselend  mid 
his  handa,  and  cwse|>,  Andswarast  du 
swa  dam  bisceope  1 

23  Se  Hselend  andswarode  him  and 
cwse]),    Gif    ic    yfele    sprsece,    cyj)    ge- 


XVIII.  11-23.]   WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

1 1  Tlicrfore  Jliesu  selcle  to  Petre,  Senile 
thou  the  swonl  in  to  the  sehethe  ;  wolt 
thou  not,  that  I  divukc  thilke  cuppe, 
that  my  failir  5af  to  n<o  ] 

12  Therfore  the  cumpany  of  kny^tis, 
ami  the  tribune,  anil  the  mynystris  of 
•lewis,  token  Jhesu,  anil  bountlen  him, 

13  And  leililen  him  first  to  Annas  ; 
Bothli  he  was  failir  ot  Cayphas  wyf, 
that  was  bischop  of  that  jeer. 

1 4  Sothli  it  was  Cayphas,  that  jaf  coun- 
ccil  to  the  Jewis,  that  it  spedith  o  man 
for  to  deie  for  the  pcple. 

15  Therfore  Symount  Petre  suede  Jhesu, 
and  another  disciple  ;  forsoth  thilke  dis- 
ciple was  knowun  to  the  bischop.  And 
he  entride  yn  with  Jhesu,  in  to  the 
halle  of  the  bischop  ; 

16  Sothly  Petre  stood  at  the  dore 
withoute  forth.  Therfore  the  tothir  dis- 
ciple, that  was  knowun  to  the  bischoji, 
wente  out,  and  seide  to  the  womman 
kepinfje  the  dore,  and  ledde  yn  Petre. 

17  Therfore  the  handmayde,  kepere  of 
the  dore,  seide  to  Petre,  Wher  and  thou 
art  of  the  disciplis  of  this  man  ]  He 
seide,  I  am  not. 

18  Forsoth  tlie  seruauntis  and  mynys- 
tiis  stooden  at  the  colis,  for  it  was 
coold,  and  thei  warmyden  hem  ;  sothli 
an  I  Petre  was  with  hem,  stondinge  and 
warmynge  him. 

19  Therfore  the  bischop  axide  Jhesu 
of  his  disciplis,  and  of  his  teching. 

20  Jhesu  answeride  to  him,  I  haue 
.spokun  opynly  to  the  world  ;  I  tau5te 
cuere  in  the  synagoge,  and  in  the  temple, 
whidur  allc  the  Jewis  camen  to  gidere, 
and  in  priuy  I  sjiak  no  thing. 

2 1  What  axlst  thou  me  1  axe  hem  that 
herden,  what  I  haue  spokun  to  hem  ; 
lo  !  thei  witen,  what  thingis  I  haue 
seyd. 

22  Whanne  he  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
oon  of  the  mynystris  stondinge  ny3,  5af 
a  boffat  to  Jhesu,  seyinge,  Answerist 
thou  so  to  the  byschop  1 

23  Jhesu  answeride  to  him,  If  I  haue 
spokun  yuele,  here  thou  witnessing  of 


TYNDALE.  ir.26. 


549 


1 1  Then  sayde  Jesus  vnto  Peter,  Put 
vppc  thy  swearde  into  the  sheath  ;  shall 
I  not  drynke  of  the  cuppe,  which  my 
father  had  geven  me  1 

12  Then  the  company,  and  the  cap- 
tayne,  and  the  ministers  off  the  lewes, 
toke  Jesus,  and  bounde  hym, 

13  And  ledde  hym  awaye  to  Anna 
fyrst  ;  for  he  was  fathcrelawe  vnto  Cay- 
j)has,  which  was  the  hye  preste  thatt 
same  yeare. 

14  Cayphas  was  he,  that  gave  counsell 
to  the  lewes,  that  it  was  expedient  that 
won  man  shulde  deye  for  the  people. 

15  Simon  Peter  folowed  Jesus,  and 
another  disciple  ;  that  disciple  was 
knowen  of  the  hye  preste.  And  went 
in  Avith  Jesus,  into  the  pallys  off  the 
hye  preste  ; 

16  Peter  stode  att  the  dore  with  outt. 
Then  wentt  outt  thatt  other  disciple, 
which  Avas  knowen  vnto  the  hye  preste, 
and  spake  to  the  damsell  thatt  kept  the 
dore,  and  brought  in  Peter. 

17  Then  sayde  the  damsell,  that  kept 
the  dore,  vnto  Peter,  Arte  nott  thou 
wone  off  this  mannes  disciples  ]  He 
sayde,  I  am  nott. 

18  The  servauntes  and  the  ministers 
stode  there  and  had  made  a  fyre  off 
coles,  for  it  was  colde,  and  they  warmed 
them  selves  ;  Peter  also  stode  amonge 
them,  and  warmed  hym  silfe. 

19  The  hye  preste  axed  Jesus  of  his 
disciples,  and  of  his  doctrine. 

20  Jesus  answered  hym,  I  spak  openly 
in  the  worlde  :  I  ever  taught  in  the 
sinagoge,  and  in  the  temple,  whither  all 
the  lewes  resorted,  and  iu  secrete  have 
I  sayde  nothynge. 

2 1  "Why  axest  thou  me  1  axe  them 
whiche  herde  me,  what  I  sayde  vnto 
them  ;  beholde  !  they  can  tell,  what  I 
sayde. 

22  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  one  off 
the  ministers  which  stode  by,  smote 
Jesus  on  the  face,  sayinge,  Answrest 
thou  the  hye  preste  soo  1 

23  Jesus  answered  hym,  Yf  I  have 
evyl!  spoken,  beare  witnes  of  the  evyll ; 


550  GOTHIC,  360. 

waila,  duwlie  mik  slahis  1 

24  panuli  insandifla  'iiia  Annas  ga- 
Lundanana  du  Kayafin,  )-.amnia  inaistin 
gudyin. 

25  I\>  Seimon  Paitrus  was  standands 
yah  warmyands  sik  ;  jiaruli  qej^un  du 
imma,  Niii  yali  }'U  |jize  siponye  jis  is? 
Ijj  is  afalaik,  yah  qaj>,  Ne,  ni  ini. 

26  Qa})  sums  |)ize  skalke  ])is  maistins 
gudyins,  sah  nij'yis  was,  jjammel  af- 
mainiait  Paitrus  auso,  Niu  jnik  sawh 
ik  in  aurtigavda  mi})  imma  ] 

27  pavuh  aftra  afaiaik  Paitrus,  yah 
suns  hana  hrukida. 

28  1\)  eis  tauhun  lesu  fram  Kayafin, 
in  praitoriaun  ;  j^anuh  was  maurgins,  i|j 
eis  ni  iddyedun  in  praitoria,  ei  ni  bi- 
saulnodedeina,  ak  matidedeina  pascha. 


29  paruh  atiddya  ut  Peilatus  du  im, 
yah  qa|),  Who  wrohe  bairi|)  ana  Jjana 
mannan  1 

30  Andliofun,  yah  qe])un  du  imma,  Nili 
Avesi  sa  ubiltoyis,  ni  jjau  weis  atgebeima 
]jus  ina. 

31  paruh  qa])  im  Peilatus,  ISrimi)>  ina 
yus,  yah  bi  Avitoda  izwaramma,  stoyif) 
ina.  1]>  eis  qejmnuh  du  imma  ludaieis, 
Unsis  ni  skukl  ist  usqimau  manne  ain- 
ummehun  ; 

32  Ei  waiu-d  Frauyins  usfulhiodedi, 
J;atei  qa]',  bandwyands  wliileikamma 
<hui|;au  skukhx  gaswiltan. 

33  Gahuj'  in  praitaui-ia  aftra  Peilatus, 
yah  wopida  lesu,  qa))uh  imma,  pu  is 
jjiudans  ludaie  ? 

34  Andhof  lesus,  Abu  ))us  sill)in  ))U 
];ata  qij^is,  J)au  anj^arai  J)us  qej^uu  bi 
mik  1 

35  Andbof  Peilatus,  Waitei  ik  ludaius 
ira  1  So  jnuda  )ieina  jah  gudyans  anafulh- 
lui  ))uk  mis  ;  wlia  gatasvides  1 

36  Andhof  lesus,  p'iudangardi  meina 
nist  us  };amma  fairwhau  ;  'i\>  us  ]7amma 
fairwhau  wesi  meina  jdudangardi,  ai[)|-au 
audbahtos  meinai  usdaudidedeina,  ei  ni 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

witnesse  be  yfele  ;    gif  ic  wel   spreece, 
Invi  beatst  clu  me  1 

24  Da  sende  Annas  hine  to  ,  .  dam 
bisceope,  gebundenae. 

25  And  Symou  Petrus  stod  and  Avyi-m- 
de  hyne  ;  da  cwsedon  hi  to  him,  Cwyst 
du,  eart  dil  of  his  leorning-cnihtum  ? 
He  Avid-s5c,  and  cwiej),  Ic  ne  eom. 

26  Da  cwfe))  an  does  bisceopes  Jjeowena, 
hys  cuda,  dfes  eare  sloh  Petrus  of,  Hu 
ne  geseah  ic  de  on  dam  Avyrt-tune  mid 
hym  ? 

27  Petrus  da  eft  wid-soc,  and  sona  se 
cocc  creow. 

28  Da  gelccddon  hi  done  Hselend  to 
Caiphan,  on  dset  dom-ei'n  ;  hit  wses  da 
morgen,  and  hi  sylfe  ne  eodon  in  to 
dam  dom-erne,  dset  liyg  nseron  besmit- 
ene,  ac  (Xxt  hi  seton  hyra  easti'on. 

29  D;i  code  Pilatus  ut  to  him,  and 
cw£e|),  Hwylce  Avrohte  bringe  ge  ongean 
dysne  man  1 

30  Hig  andswaredon,  and  cwsedon  to 
him,  Gif  he  nsere  yfel-daedej  ne  sealde 
Ave  hine  de. 

31  Da  cwpej)  Pilatus  to  him,  Nima]> 
hine,  and  dema})  him,  be  eowre  se.  Da 
cwsedon  da  ludeas  to  him,  Us  nis  alyfed 
da^t  Ave  senigne  man  ofslean  ; 

32  Dfet  djes  Haelendes  sprsec  Avserc 
gefylled,  de  he  cwoej),  dfi  he  geswutelode 
hwylcon  deajie  he  swulte. 

33  Da  eode  Pilatus  eft  in  to  dam  dom- 
erne,  and  clypode  done  Heeleud,  and 
cwajj)  to  him,  Eart  du  ludca  cining  1 

34  Da  andswarodc  se  Hcclend  him, 
and  cwjejj,  Cwyst  du  dis  of  de  sylfum, 
hwteder  de  hyt  de  odre  ssedon  1 

35  Piiatus  him  andswarode  and  cwa}|>, 
Cwyst  du,  eom  ic  ludeisc  1  Din  j^eod 
and  dine  bisceopas  de  sealdon  me  ;  hwait 
dydest  du  ? 

36  Dii  cwfe})  se  Hselend,  j\Iin  rice  nys 
of  dysum  niiddan-carde  ;  gif  min  rice 
wsere  of  d3'sum  middan-earde,  witodlice 
mine  j^cgnas  fuhton,  da?t  ic  nsere  geseald 


XVIII.  24-36.]    WYCLIFFE,i389. 

yucl ;    sothli   if  wcl,  wlii  smytist   thou 
me  ? 

24  And  Annas  sentc  hhu  bouiulun  to 
Cayfas,  tlie  bischop. 

25  Forsotlie  Symount  Potrc  was  stond- 
yiii^o  aiul  Avannynuc  him  ;  tlicrfoic  thci 
soidcn  to  him,  Whor  and  tliou  art  his 
disciple  I  He  don}  euo,  and  sc}  de,  I  am 
not. 

26  Oon  of  the  biscliopis  seruauntis, 
eosyn  of  hym,  whos  litel  eere  Petre 
kittidc  of,  scydc,  AVher  I  syj  not  thee 
in  the  gardyn  \Yith  hym  ? 

27  Tlierfore  eft  Petre  denyedc,  and 
a  noon  the  koc  crew. 

28  Therfore  thei  leden  Jhesu  to  Cay- 
fas,  in  to  the  moot  halle ;  sothli  it  was 
morwetyde,  and  tliai  entriden  not  in  to 
the  moot  halle,  that  thei  schulden  not 
be  defoylid,  but  that  thei  schulden  ete 
j)aske. 

29  Therfore  Pilat  wente  out  with  oute 
forth  to  liem,  and  seide,  What  accusing 
bryiiije  5e  a5ens  this  man  1 

30  Thei  answeridcn,  and  seiden  to  hym, 
If  this  were  not  a  mysdocr,  we  hadden 
not  bitakun  hym  to  thee. 

31  Therfore  Pilat  seitli  to  hem,  Take 
50  iiim,  and  deme  5e  him,  vp  5oure  lawe. 
Therfore  thei  seyden  to  him.  It  is  not 
leeflul  to  vs  for  to  slee  ony  man  ; 

32  That  the  word  of  Jhesu  schulde  be 
fillid,  which  he  seide,  signyfiynge  bi  wliat 
deeth  he  was  to  deiynge. 

33  Therfore  eft  Pilate  entride  in  to 
the  moot  halle,  and  clepide  Jhesu,  and 
seide  to  him,  Ert  thou  king  of  Jewis  1 

34  Jhesu  answeride,  and  seide  to  him, 
Seist  thou  this  thing  of  thi  silf,  ether 
othere  seiden  to  thee  of  me  ? 

35  Pilat  answeride,  Wher  I  am  a  Jew  1 
Thi  folk  and  biscliopis  bytokun  thee  to 
me  ;  what  hast  thou  don  1 

^6  Jhesu  answeride,  My  kyngdom  is 
not  of  this  world  ;  if  my  kyngdom  were 
of  this  world,  sothly  my  mynystris 
schulden  stryue,  that  I  schulde  not  be 


TYNDALE,i526. 


551 


yf  I  liave  well  spoken,  why  smytest  thou 
me] 

24  Annas  sent  hym  bounde  vnto  Cay- 
phas,  the  hye  preste. 

25  Simon  Peter  stode  and  warmed  hym 
silfe  ;  and  they  saydo  vnto  hym,  Arte 
not  thou  also  won  of  his  discii)les  ]  He 
denied  itt,  and  sayde,  I  am  not. 

26  Won  of  the  servanntes  of  the  hye 
preste,  his  cosyn,  whose  eare  Peter 
smote  of,  sayde  vnto  hym.  Did  not  I 
se  the  in  the  garden  with  hym  1 

27  Peter  denyed  it  agayne,  and  im- 
mediatly  the  cocke  crewe. 

28  Then  ledd  they  Jesus  from  Cayphas, 
into  the  housse  of  iudgcnient ;  hit  was 
in  the  mornynge,  and  they  them  selves 
went  not  into  the  iiulgement  housse, 
lest  they  shulde  be  defyled,  butt  that 
they  myght  eate  pascha. 

29  Pilate  then  went  oute  vnto  them, 
and  sayde,  A\  hat  accusacion  brynge  ye 
agaynste  this  man  1 

30  Tliey  answered,  and  sayd  vnto 
hym.  Iff  he  Avei-e  ^nott  an  evyll  duar, 
we  wolde  not  have  delyvered  hym  vnto 
the. 

31  Then  sayd  Pilate  vnto  them.  Take 
hym  vnto  you,  and  iudge  hym,  after 
youre  awne  lawe.  The  lewcs  sayde 
vnto  hym,  It  is  nott  lawfuU  for  vs  to 
putt  eny  man  to  deeth  ; 

32  That  the  wordes  of  Jesus  myght 
be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  signifyinge 
what  deeth  he  shulde  deye. 

33  Then  Pilate  entred  into  the  iudge- 
ment  housse  agayne,  and  called  Jesus, 
and  sayd  vnto  him,  Arte  thou  kynge  of 
the  lewes  1 

34  Jesus  answered,  Sayst  thou  that  off 
thy  sylfe,  or  did  other  tell  ytt  the  of 
me  ? 

35  Pilate  answered.  Am  I  a  lewe  1 
Thyne  awne  nacion  and  hye  prestes  have 
delivered  the  vnto  me  ;  what  hast  thou 
done  1 

36  Jesus  answered.  My  kyngdome  is 
not  of  this  worlde ;  yff  my  kyngdome 
were  of  this  worlde,  then  wolde  my  min- 
isters suerly  fight,  that  I  shulde  not  be 


552 


GOTHIC,  360. 


galewij^s  wesyau  ludaium ;  'i\>  nu  jjiud- 
aiigardi  meina  uist  ])a|)ro. 

37  paruli  qa})  imina  Peilatus,  An  null 
])iudans  is  \>u1  Andhafyands  lesus  [qaj)],''' 
pu  qi))is,  ei  j^iudans  im  'ik.  Ik  du  [)am- 
magabaurans  ini,  yah  du  jjanima  qam  in 
|)amma  fairwhau,  ei  weitwodyau  sunyai. 
Whazuh  saei  ist  sunyos,  liausei})  stibnos 
meinaizos. 

38  panuli  qaj)  imma  Peilatus,  Wha  ist 
so  sunya  1  Yah  Jjata  qifjands,  galai]?  ut 
du  ludaium,  yah  qaj)  im,  Ik  ainohun 
fairino  ni  bigita  in  Jjamma, 

39  I[)  ist  biuhti  izwis,  ei  ainana  izwis 
fraletau  in  pascha  ;  wileidu  nu  ei  fraletau 
izwis  Jjana  |)iudan  ludaie  ? 

40  i\>  eis  hropidedun  aftra  allai,  qij^and- 
ans,  Ne  [-ana,  ak  Barabban.  Sah  ]jan 
was  sa  Barabba  waidedya. 


Chap.  XIX.     i  panuh  jsan  nam  Peila- 
tus lesu,  yah  usblaggw. 

2  Yah  })ai  gadrauhteis  uswundun  wipp- 
ya  us  )jaurnum,  yah  galagidedun  imma 
ana  haubid,  yah  wastyai  paurpurodai 
gawasidedun  ina, 

3  .  .  .  Yah  qejiun.  Hails,  ))iudans  lu- 
daie.    Yah  gebun  imma  slahins  lofin. 

4  Atiddya  aftra  ut  Peilatus,  yah  qa)) 
im,  Sai !  attiuha  izwis  ina  ut,  ei  witei)), 
J)atei  in  imma  ni  ainohun  fairino  bigat. 

5  paruh  usiddya  ut  lesus,  bairands 
})ana  ])aurneinan  waij),  yah  J;o  paurpur- 
odon  wastya.  Yah  qa})  im,  Sa  ist  sa 
manna  ! 

6  paruh  bi|)e  sewhun  ina  J)ai  maistans 
gudyans  yah  andbahtos,  hropidedun, 
qijjandans,  Ushramei,  ushramei  ina.  Qa|) 
im  Peilatus,  Nimi))  ina  yus,  yah  hramyi)), 
i|)  ik  fairina  in  imma  ni  bigita. 

7  Andhofun  imma  ludaieis,  Weis  wito]) 
aihum,  yah  hi  ])amma  witoda  unsaramma 
skal  gaswiltan,  unte  sik  silban  Gu])S 
sunu  gatawida. 

8  Bi|)e  gahausida  Peilatus  jjata  waurd, 
raais  ohta  sis. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.     [St.  John 

ludeum  ;  nis  min  rice  of  dysum  middan- 
earde. 

37  Da  cwsej)  Pilatus  to  him,  Eart  du 
witodlice  cyning  1  Se  Heelend  him  and- 
swarode  and  cwsej),  Dii  hit  segst,  doet  ic 
eom  cyng.  On  dam  ic  eoni  geboren, 
and  to  dam  ic  com  on  middan-eard,  dset 
ic  cyde  soJ)f8estnysse.  ^'Ic  dsera  de  ys 
on  s6j)fsestuysse,  gehyr])  mine  stefne. 

38  Da  cwsej)  Pilatus  to  him,  Hwset  ys 
s5))faestnys  1    And  da  he  dis  cwsej),  da 
code   he    eft   ut  to   dam  ludeum,  and' 
cwoe|)  to  him,  'Ne  fuude  ic  nanne  gylt 
on  dysum  men. 

39  Hit  ys  eower  gewuna,  dset  ic  for- 
gife  eow  anne  man  on  eastrou ;  wylle 
ge  daet  ic  forgife  eow  ludea  cyning  1 

40  Hig  clypedon  ealle,  and  cwsedon, 
Na  disne,  ac  Barraban.  Witodlice  Bar- 
rabas  wees  j'cof. 


Chap.  XIX.     i  Da  nam  Pilatus  done 
Hselend,  and  swang  hyne. 

2  And  da  Jjegnas  wundon  ))yrnenne 
cyne-helm,  and  asetton  hyne  on  his 
heafod,  and  scryddon  hyne  mid  pur- 
puran  reafe, 

3  And  hi  comon  to  hym,  and  cwsedon, 
Hal  beo  dii,  ludea  cyning.  And  hi 
plajtton  hyne  mid  hyra  handum. 

4  Da  code  Pilatus  eft  ut,  and  cwsej), 
Nii  !  ic  hyne  Isede  hider  ut  to  eow,  dset 
ge  ongyton,  dset  ic  ne  fiinde  nanne  gylt 
on  him. 

5  Da  code  se  Hselend  ut,  and  bser 
Jjyrnenne  cyne-helm,  and  purpuran  reaf. 
And  SBede  him,  Her  is  man  ! 

6  Witodlice  da  da  bisceopas  and  da 
J)egnas  hine  gesawon,  da  clypodon  hig, 
and  cwsedon,  H6h  hyne,  lioh  hyne.  Da 
cwfe})  Pilatus  to  him,  Nime  ge  hyne, 
and  h5|),  ic  ne  filnde  nanne  gylt  on  him. 

7  Da  ludeas  him  andswaredun  and 
cwiiedon,  We  habbaj)  se,  and  be  ure  se  he 
sceal  sweltan,  fordam  de  he  cwse])  dset 
he  wsere  Godes  sunu. 

8  Da  Pilatus  gehyrde  das  sprsece,  da 
ondred  he  him  dses  de  swidor. 


XVIII.  37--XIX.  8.]  WYCLIFFE,i389. 

takun  to  the  Jewis  ;  now  forsotlie  my 
kyngiloin  is  not  of  hennis.^ 

37  Anil  so  Pilat  soide  to  him,  Thcrforc 
art  thou  kyng?  Jlicsu  answeiido,  Tliou 
seidist,  for  I  am  a  kyng.  To  tliis  tiling 
I  am  born,  and  to  this  I  cam  in  to  the 
world,  that  I  here  witncssin'jf  to  treuthe. 
Ech  that  is  of  treuthe,  heerith  my  voys. 

38  Pilat  seith  to  him, What  is  treuthe? 
And  wlianne  he  liadde  sold  this  thing, 
eft  he  wente  out  to  the  Jewis,  and  seide 
to  hem,  I  fynde  no  cause  in  him. 

39  Forsoth  it  is  a  custom  to  50U,  that 
I  delyuer  oon  to  50U  in  ])a>k  ;  therforc 
wolen  5e  I  schal  dismytte  to  50U  the 
kyn^of  Jewis  ? 

40  Tlicrfore  thei  cryeden  eft  allc,  sey- 
inge,  Not  this,  but  Barabas.  Forsothe 
Barabas  was  a  theef. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


553 


Chap.  XIX.      i   Tlierfore  Filat  took 
thaune  Jhcsu,  and  scourgide. 

3  And  kny^tis  foldinge  a  crowne  of 
thorncs,  puttiden  on  his  heed,  and  diden 
aboute  him  a  cloth  of  purpur, 

3  And  camen  to  him,  and  seiden,  Heyl, 
kyng  of  Jewis.  And  thei  5auen  to  hym 
boffatis. 

4  Eft  Pilat  wente  out,  and  seide  to 
hem,  Lo !  I  lede  him  to  50U  with  oute 
forth,  that  3e  knowe,  for  I  fynde  no 
cau<e  in  him. 

5  Therfore  Jhesu  wente  out,  beringe  a 
crowne  of  thornes,  and  a  clooth  of  pur- 
pur. And  he  seith  to  hem.  Loo !  the 
man. 

6  Therfore  whanne  the  bischopis  and 
mynystris  hadde  seyn  him,  thei  crieden, 
seyinge,  Crucifie,  ciucifie  him.  Pilate 
seith  to  hem,  Take  5e  him,  and  crucifie 
5e,  sothli  I  fynde  no  cause  in  him. 

7  The  Jewis  answeriden  to  him,  We 
hun  a  lawe,  and  vpon  the  lawe  he  owith 
to  deie,  for  he  made  him  Goddis  sone. 

8  Therfore  whanne  Pilat  hadde  herd 
this  word,  he  dredde  more. 


delyvcred  to  the  lewes  ;  but  nowe  is  my 
kinndome  not  from  hence. 

37  Pilate  sayde  vnto  hym.  Arte  thou  a 
kynge  then  ]  Jesus  answered,  Thou 
sayst,  that  I  am  a  kynge.  For  this 
cause  was  I  borne,  and  for  this  cause 
cam  I  into  the  worlde,  that  I  shuldc 
beare  witnes  vnto  the  trueth.  All  that 
are  of  the  trueth,  heare  my  voice. 

38  Pilate  sayde  vnto  hym,  What  is 
trueth.  And  when  he  had  sayde  that, 
he  went  out  agayne  vnto  the  Icwcs,  and 
sayde  vnto  them,  I  fynde  in  him  no 
cause  at  all. 

39  Ye  have  a  costome  amonge  you, 
that  I  shulde  delyvre  you  won  loosse  at 
ester  ;  will  ye  that  I  loose  vnto  you  the 
kynge  of  the  lewes  1 

40  Then  cryed  they  all  againe,  sayinge, 
Not  him,  but  Barrabas.  Barrabas  was 
a  I'obber. 


Chap.   XIX.       i  Tlien   Pilf.te   toke 
Jesus,  and  scourged  hym. 

2  And  the  soudiers  wonde  a  croune  off 
thornes,  and  put  it  on  his  heed,  and 
they  did  on  hym  a  purple  garment, 

3  .  .  .  And  sayd,  Hayl,  kynge  off  the 
lewes.  And  they  smote  hym  on  the 
face. 

4  Pilate  went  forthe  agayne,  and  sayde 
vnto  them,  Beholde  !  I  brynge  him  forth 
to  you,  that  ye  maye  knowe,  that  I 
fynde  no  faute  in  hym. 

5  Then  cam  Jesus  forthe,  wearynge  a 
croune  of  thorncs,  and  a  robe  of  purple. 
And  Pilate  sayd  vnto  them,  Beholde  ! 
the  man. 

6  When  the  hye  prestcs  and  ministers 
sawe  him,  they  cryed,  sayinge.  Crucify 
him,  crucify  hym.  Pilate  sayde  vnto 
them.  Take  ye  hym,  and  crucify  hym, 
for  I  fynde  no  cause  in  hym. 

7  The  lewes  answered  hym,  We  have 
a  lawe,  and  by  oure  lawe  he  ought  to 
deye,  be  cause  he  made  hym  silfe  the 
Sonne  of  God. 

8  When  Pilate  herde  that  sayinge,  he 
was  the  moare  afrayde. 


554 


GOTHIC,  360. 


9  Yali  galaij)  'in  praitauria  aftra,  yah 
qa])  du  lesua,  Wliapro  is  }5U  1  !]>  lesus 
andawauvdi  ni  gaf  imtna. 

10  pai'uli  qa}>  imma  Peilatiis,  Du  mis 
ni  rodeis  1  Niu  waist,  ))atei  waldufni  aili 
usbramyan  ]>\ik,  yah  -waldufui  aih  fra- 
letan  |)uk  1 

1 1  Andhof  lesus,  Ni  aihtedeis  waldufn- 
ye  aiuhun  ana  mile,  nih  wesi  \>us  at- 
giban  iupa]iro ;  duhj'e  sa  galewyands 
mik  |;us,  maizein  frawaurht  habaid. 


))amma    sokida    Peilatus 
ijj   ludaieis    hropidedun, 


1 2  Framuli 
fraletan   ina ; 

qil^andans,  Yabai  ))ana  fraletis,  ni  is  fri- 
yonds  Kaisara ;  sawhazuh  izei  l)iudan 
sik  silban  tauyi)?,  andstandij?  Ivaisaiu 

13  panuh  Peilatus,  hausyands  J)ize 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John  ! 

9  And  eode  eft  in  to  dam  dom-erne, 
and  cwasj)  to  tfam  Hselende,  Hwanon 
eavt  dii  ]  AVitodlice  se  Hselend  him  no 
sealde  nane  andsware. 

10  Da  cwse])  Pilatus  to  him,  Hwi  ne 
sprycst  du  wid  me  1  Nast  du,  dset  ic 
hajbbe  mihte  de  to  honne,  and  ic  hsebbe 
mihte  de  to  forlaetenne  1 

11  Se  llselend  him  andswarode,  Nsef- 
dest  du  nane  mihte  ongean  me,  buton 
liyt  "\Vc5?re  de  ufan  geseald  ;  fordam  se 
htefj)  niaran  synne,  se  de  me  de  sealde. 

1 2  And  syddnn  solite  Pilatus  hu  he 
hyne  forlete  ;  da  ludeas  clypodon,  and 
cwsedon,  Gif  dii  hine  fovlcetst,  ne  eart 
dii  dtes  Caseres  freond ;  selc  diera  de 
hyne  to  cynge  de}->,  ys  dses  Caseres 
wider-saca. 

13  Da  Pilatus,  das  spreece  gehyrde,  da 
Iseddc  he  ut  done  Hselend,  and  soet  set- 
foran  dam  dom-setle  on  ua^re  stowe,  de 
is  genemned  Lithostratos,  and  on  Ebre- 
isc  Gabbatha. 

14  Hit  wses  dii  eastra  gegearcung-dseg, 
and  hyt  wies  seo  syxte  tid.  Da  cwa?]> 
he  to  dam  ludeum,  Her  ys  cower  cyn- 

ing  '• 

15  Hi  clypodon  ealle,  and  cwsedon, 
Nim  hyne,  nim  hyne  ;  and  hob.  Da 
cw3e]j  Pilatus,  Sceal  ic  hon  eowerne  cyn- 
ing  ?  Him  andswaredon  da  bisceopas 
and  cwsedon,  Nsebbe  we  nanne  cyning 
buton  Casere. 

16  Da  sealde  he  hyne  him,  to  ahCnue. 
Da  nnmon  hi  done  Htelend,  and  tugon 
hine  ut. 

17  And  he  sylf  bser  his  rode  mid  him 
on  da  stowe,  de  ys  genemned  Heafod- 
pannan  stow,  and  on  Ebreisc  Golgotha ; 

18  Dser  hi  hyne  ahengon,  and  twegen 
odre  mid  him,  on  twa  healfa,  and  done 
Hselend  on  middan. 

19  Witodllce  Pilatus  wrat  ofer-gewrit, 
and  sette  ofer  his  rode  ;  da^r  wses  on  ge- 
writen,  DIS  YS  SE  NAZARENISCA 
HJi'LEND,  lUDEA  CYNING. 

20  Manega  daera  ludea  rseddon  dis 
gewrit,  fordam  de  seo  stow  woes  gehende 


XIX.  9-20.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

9  Ami  he  wcntc  in  to  tlio  moot  liallc 
eft,  ami  scyile  to  liym,  Of  wIkmuius  art 
tliou  1  Fovsotlic  Jliesu  5uf  not  answcrc 
to  him. 

10  Pilat  seitli  to  him,  Spekcst  thou 
not  to  me?  Wost  thou  not,  for  I  hauc 
power  for  to  crucific  thee,  and  I  Iiaue 
power  for  to  delyuere  thco  I 

1 1  Jliesu  answeride.  Thou  schuldist 
not  liaue  ony  power  a5ens  me,  no  but 
it  were  •;ouuen  to  thee  fro  abouc  ;  ther- 
foro  he  that  bitook  me  to  thee,  hath  the 
more  synne. 

12  Thcrof^  Pilat  sou5te  for  to  delyuere 
Jhesu  :  forsothe  the  Jewis  erieden,  sey- 
inpje.  If  thou  leeuyst  this  man,  thou  ert 
not  frend  of  Cesar ;  for  ech  man  that 
makith  him  silf  kyng,  a5en  seith  Cesar. 

13  Thcrfore  Pilat,  whanne  lie  hadde 
herd  thes  wordis,  ledde  Jhesu  forth, 
and  saat  for  domesman  in  a  place,  that 
is  seide  Licostratos,  in  Ebrew  forsothe 
Golgatha.+ 

14  Forsoth  it  was  tlie  makinge  redy^ 
of  ])ask,  as  the  sixte  our.'''  And  he  seith 
to  the  Jewis,  Loo  !  50ure  kyng. 

!.■;  Forsoth  thei  cryeden,  seyinge.  Do 
u  wey,  do  a  wey ;  crucifie  hym.  Pihit 
seith  to  hem,  Schal  I  crucifie  3oure 
kyngl  The  bischopis  answeriden,  We 
hau  no  kyng  no  but  Cesar. 

16  Thcrfore  thanne  Pilat  bitook  him 
to  hem,  that  he  sehulde  Ijc  crucifyed. 
Forsothe  thei  token  Jhesu,  and  loddcn 
out. 

17  And  he  bcrymije  to  him  silf  a  cros 
wcntc  out  in  to  that  ])lace,  that  is  seid 
of  Caluarie,  in  Ebrew  Golgatha; 

18  AYhere  thei  crucifieden  him,  and 
othcrc  tweye  with  him,  on  this  syde 
and  on  that  syde,  forsothe  Jhesu  the 
myddil. 

19  Forsothe  and  Pilat  wroot  a  title, 
and  ])Utti<le  on  the  cross  ;  sothli  it  was 
writun,  Jhesu  Nazaren.  kyng  of  Jewis. 

20  Thcrfore  manye  of  the  Jewis  raddcn 
this  title,  for  the  place  where  Jhesu  was 


TYNDALE,  1526.  r>r)5 

9  And  went  aguyne  in  to  the  iudgincnt 
housse,  and  sayde  vnto  Jesus,  Whence 
arte  thou  1  Jesus  gave  hym  none  an- 
swcrc. 

10  Then  .sayde  Pilate  vnto  hym,  Speak- 
cst  thou  not  vnto  me  1  Knowest  thou 
nott,  that  I  have  power  to  crucify  the, 
and  have  power  to  loose  the  1 

1 1  Jesus  answered,  Thou  corniest  have 
no  power  att  all  agaynst  me,  except  it 
were  geven  vnto  the  from  above ;  thcr- 
fore he  that  delivered  me  vnto  the,  is 
moare  in  synne. 

1 2  And  from  thence  forthe  sought 
Pilate  meanes  to  loose  hym  ;  but  the 
lewes  cryed,  sayinge,  Yf  thou  Ictt  hym 
goo,  tliou  arte  not  Cesars  frende  ;  who- 
soever maketli  himsilfc  a  kynge,  is 
agaynst  Cesar. 

13  When  Pilate  herde  that  sayinge,  he 
brought  Jesus  forthe,  and  sate  doune  to 
geve  sentence  in  a  place,  called  the 
Pavement,  butt  in  the  Hebrue  tonge 
Gabbatha. 

14  Hitt  was  the  saboth  even  which 
falleth  in  the  ester  fcst,  and  aboute  the 
sixte  houre.  And  he  sayde  viito  the 
lewcs,  Beholde  !  youre  kynge. 

15  They  cryed,  Awaye  with  hym,  awaye 
with  hym  ;  crucify  hym.  Pilate  sayde 
vnto  them.  Shall  I  crucify  youre  kynge  ? 
The  h}'e  prestes  answered,  We  have  noo 
kynge  but  Cesar. 

16  Then  delivered  he  hym  vnto  them, 
to  be  crucified.  And  they  toke  Jesus, 
and  ledde  hym  awaye. 

17  And  he  bare  his  erosse  and  went 
forthe  into  a  place,  called  the  ])lace  off 
deed  menns  seniles,  which  is  named  in 
Hebrue  Golgatha  ; 

18  ^Vhere  they  crucified  hym,  and  with 
hym  two  other,  on  ether  syde  won,  and 
Jesus  in  the  myddes. 

19  Pilate  wrote  his  title,  and  put  it  on 
the  erosse  ;  the  wrytynge  was,  Jesus  off 
Nazareth,  Icynge  off  the  lewes. 

20  Tills  tytle  reed  many  off  the  Icwes, 
for  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified, 


r),>6 


GOTHIC,  060. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [Sx.Jod 

dsere  ceastre,  clser  se  Hfelend  woes  aliang 
en,  hit  wajs  awriten  Ehreiscuni  stafumj 
and  Greciscum,  and  Leden  stafuni. 

21  Dii  cwsedon  da  bisceopas  to  Pilate 
Ne  writ  du  ludea  cyning,  ae  dset  lit 
cwEede,  Ic  eoni  ludea  cyning. 

22  Da  cwse]'  Pilatus,  Ic  wrat,  daet  i( 
wrat. 

23  Da  da  cempan  liine  ahengon,  h 
nunion  l)is  reaf,  and  worliton  feowei 
d*las,  selcum  cempan  anne  dsel,  am 
tunecan.  Seo  tunece  waes  unasiwod 
and  wses  call  awefen. 

24  Da  cwsedon  lii  him  betweonan,  Nc 
slite  we  hy,  ac  uton  lileotan,  hwylcef 
ure  heo  sy  ;  dset  diet  halige  gewrit  sj 
gefylled,  de  dus  cwy}),  Hi  to  da'ldon 
liini  mine  reaf,  and  ofer  mine  reaf  hi 
wurpou  hlot.  Witodl'ce  dus  dydon  da 
cempan. 

25  Du  stodon  wid  da  rode  dses  Hsel- 
endes  moder,  and  his  modev  swuster. 
Maria  Cleophe,  and  Maria  Magdalenisce. 

26  Da  se  Hselend  geseali  his  moder. 
and  done  leorning-cniht  standende,  de 
he  hifode,  da  cwitjj  he  to  his  nieder, 
Wif,  her  !  ys  din  sunu. 

27  Eft  he  cwse\>  to  dam  leorning-cnihtey 
Her!  ys  din  moder.  And  of  drere  tidel 
.le  leoriiing-cniht  hi  nam  to  liim.  \ 

28  ^fter  dyson,  du  se  Ha?lend  wiste 
daet  ealle  ))ing  Avaeron  ge-endode,  dtet 
diet  halige  gewrit  waere  gefylled,  da 
cwc-ejj  he.  Me  Jjyrst. 

29  Da  stod  an  fset  full  ecedes.  Hi 
bewiindon  ane  spingan  mid  ysopo  seo 
wiEs  full  ecedes,  and  setton  to  his  mu]je. 

30  Da  se  Hselend  onfcng  does  ecedes, 
di  cwa?))  he,  Hyt  ys  ge-endod.  And  lie 
t'hylde  his  heafod,  and  iigeaf  his  gast. 

31  Da  ludeas  bccdon  Pilatum,  da^t  man 
forbraece  hjTa  sceancan,  and  lete  hi 
nyder,  fordam  de  hit  wa?s  gegearcung- 
dr-Eg,  dset  da  lichaman  ne  wunodon  on 
rode  on  reste-diege,  se  dseg  w£es  nifere 
rcste-dseg. 


,XIX.  21-31.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

'  crucificdc,  was  ny;  the  cltce,  and  it  was 
wiitcn  ill  Ebrew,  Greek,  and  Latyii. 

21  Tlierforc  the  bischops  of  Jewis 
Seidell  to  Pilat,  Nyle  thou  write  kyiig 
of  Jewis,  but  for  he  seyde,  I  am  kyng 
of  Jewis. 

2  Pihit  answcride.  That  that  I  haue 
writeii,  I  haue  writen. 

.^  Therfore  the  kuy^tis  whannc  thei 
haddeii  crucified  him.  token  his  clothis, 
and  madcn  foure  ])artis,  to  ech  kny5t  a 
j)art,  and  a  coote.  Forsothe  the  coote 
was  with  out  seem,  and  aboue  wouun 
bi  ah 

24  Therfore  thei  seiden  to  gidere, 
Kitte  we  not  it,  but  leye  Ave  lott,  wlios 
it  is  ;  that  the  scripture  be  fillid,  sey- 
inge,  Thei  partiden  my  clothis  to  liem, 
and  in  to  my  cloth  thei  senten  lott. 
And  sothli  kny5tis  diden  thes  thingis. 

25  Forsothe  bisydis  the  cross  of  Jhesu 
stoodcn  his  modir,  and  Marie  Cleaphe, 
the  sister  of  his  modir,  and  Marie  Mau- 
deleyn. 

26  Therfore  whanne  Jhesu  hadde  seyn 
the  modir,  and  the  disciple  stondinge, 
whom  he  louede,  he  selth  to  his  modir, 
Woniman,  lo  !  thi  sone. 

27  Aftirward  he  seith  to  the  disciple, 
Lo  !  thi  modir.  And  fro  that  our  the 
disciple  took  hire  in  to  his  thingis. 

28  Aftirward  Jhesu  witinge,  for  now 
alle  thingis  ben  endid,  that  the  scripture 
schulde  be  fillid,  he  seith,  I  thirste. 

•9  Sothli  a  vessel  was  putt  ful  of 
vynegre.  Thei  forsothe  puttinge  aboue 
with  ysope  the  spounge  ful  of  vynegre, 
ofTriden  to  his  mouth. 

30  Therfore  whanne  Jhesu  hadde  take 
vynegre,  he  seide,  It  is  endid.  And  the 
lieed  bowid  douu,  he  bitook  the  spirit. 

J I  Therfore  for  it  was  the  makynge 
redy  of  pask,  that  the  bodies  schulde 
not  dwelle  in  the  cross  in  the  saboth, 
for  that  day  of  .sabotli  was  greet,  the 
Jewis  preiedeii  Pilat,  that  the  hupis  of 
hem  schulden  be  brokun,  and  takuu 
awey. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


557 


was  ncye  to  the  cite,  and  it  was  written 
in  Ilcbrue,  Greke,  and  Latyn. 

2 1  Tlien  sayde  the  hye  prestes  off  the 
lewcs  to  Pilate,  AVryte  nott  kynge  off 
the  lewes,  butt  that  he  sayde,  I  am 
kynge  of  the  lewes. 

22  Pilate  answered.  What  I  have  writ- 
ten, that  have  I  written. 

23  The  soudicis  when  they  had  cruci- 
fied Jesus,  toke  his  garmcntes,  and  made 
foure  partes,  to  every  soudier  a  parte, 
and  also  his  coote.  The  coote  was  with 
out  seme,  woven  vppou  thorowe  and 
thorowe. 

24  And  they  sayde  won  to  another, 
Lett  vs  nott  devyde  it,  butt  cast  lootes, 
who  sha,ll  have  it ;  that  the  scripture 
myght  be  fulfilled,  which  sayth.  They 
parted  my  raynient  amonge  them,  and 
on  my  coote  did  cast  lottes.  And  the 
soudiers  did  soche  thyngcs  in  dede. 

25  There  stode  by  the  cross  of  Jesus 
his  mother,  and  his  mothers  sister,  ^lary 
the  wyfe  off  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Mag- 
dalene. 

26  When  Jesus  sawe  his  mother,  and 
the  disciple  stondynge,  whom  he  loved, 
he  sayde  vnto  his  mother,  Woman,  be- 
holde !  thy  sonne. 

27  Then  sayde  he  to  the  disciple,  Be- 
holde  !  thy  mother.  And  from  that 
houre  the  disciple  toke  her  for  his  awne. 

28  After  that,  when  Jesus  perceaved 
that  all  thynges  were  performed,  that 
the  scriptures  myght  be  fulfyled,  he 
sayde,  I  thyrst. 

29  There  stode  a  vessell  full  ofl*  veneger 
by.  They  filled  a  sponge  with  venegre, 
and  wonde  it  about  with  ysoppe,  and 
put  it  to  his  mougth. 

30  As  sone  as  Jesus  had  receaved  of 
the  venegre,  he  sayd.  It  is  fynnesshed. 
And  bowed  his  heed,  and  gave  vppe  the 
goost. 

3 1  The  lewes  then  be  cause  it  was  the 
saboth  even,  that  the  bodyes  shuid  not 
remayne  apon  the  crosse  on  the  saboth 
daye,  for  that  saboth  daye  was  an  hye 
daye,  besought  Pilate,  that  their  legges 
myght  be  broken,  and  that  they  myght 
be  taken  doune. 


558 


GOTHIC.  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

32  Da  comon  da  cempan,  and  brttcon 
ctrest  dses  sceancan  .  .  .  .,  de  mid  him 
aliangen  wses. 

33  Da  111  to  dam  Hselende  comon,  and 
gesawon  dset  lie  dead  wses,  ne  brsecoD 
hi  na  his  sceancan  ; 

34  Ac  an  daera  cempena  ge-openode 
his  sidan  mid  spere,  and  hrsedlice  dai 
fleow  blod  lit  and  wseter. 

35  And  se  de  hit  geseah,  cydde  ge- 
witnesse,  and  his  gewitnes  is  so)? ;  and 
he  wat  dset  he  s6]j  ssede,  daet  ge  ge- 
lyfon. 

36  Das  |jing  waeron  gewordene,  dsei 
dset  gewrit  wsei-e  gefylled,  Ne  forbrsece 
ge  niin  ban  on  him. 

37  [And  eft  oder  gewrit  seg])],'''  Hi  ge- 
seo]j  on  hwtene  hig  on-fsestnodon. 

38  Witodlice  [sefter  dam]^  losep  frair 
Arimathea  bsed  Pilatus,  dset  he  m6st( 
niman  daes  Hselendes  lichaman,  fordair 
de  he  w?es  dses  Hselendes  leorning- 
cniht,  dis  he  dyde  dearnunga,  for  dsen 
ludea  ege.  And  Pilatus  him  lyfde.  Dt 
com  he,  and  nam  dass  Hselendes  lic- 
haman. 

39  And  Nichodemus  com  dyder,  se  d( 
serest  com  to  dam  Hselende  on  niht 
and  brohte  wyrt-gemang  and  alewan 
swylce  hund-teontig  boxa. 

40  Hig  namon  dses  Hselendes  lichaman 
and  be-wundon  hine  mid  linenum  clad( 
mid  wyrt-gemaiigum,  swu  ludea  J)ea\> 
ys  to  bebyrgenne. 

41  Witodlice  dar  wses  Avyrt-tun,  or 
dsere  st5we  dar  se  Hselend  ahanger 
Avses,  and  on  dam  wyrt-tune  wses  niw< 
byrgen,  on  dsere  da  gyt  nan  man  naei 
aled. 

42  S6|)lice  dar  hig  ledon  done  Hselend 
for  dam  dsera  ludea  gearcung  wses  wiC 
da  byrgene. 


Chap.  XX.  '''i  Witodlice  on  anurr 
reste-dsege,  seo  Alagdalenisce  Maria  con 
on  mergeu,  ser  hit  leoht  wsere,  to  dsen 


XIX.  32.-XX.  I.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

32  Tliorforc  kny5tis  catnen,  and  sotlily 
thci  braken  the  tlii5e.s  of  the  firste,  and 
of  the  totliir,  that  vas  crucified  with 
him. 

33  Forsothe  wlianne  tlici  haddcn  come 
to  Jhesu,  as  tlici  sy5cn  him  deed  thanne, 
thci  braken  not  his  thi5es  ; 

34  But  oou  of  the  kny5tis  openyde  his 
syde  with  a  sper,  and  a  noon  bloot  and 
watir  wente  out. 

35  And  he  that  s}^,  bar  witnessing, 
and  his  witnessing  is  trewe ;  and  lie 
woot  for  he  seith  trewe  thingis,  that  50 
bileue. 

36  Forsothe  thes  thingis  ben  don,  that 
the  scripture  schulde  be  filled,  3e  schulen 
not  breke^  a  boon  of  him. 

37  And  eft  anothir  scripture  seith,  Thci 
schulen  se  in  to  whom  they  pi3ten  thorw. 

38  Sotheli  aftir  thes  thingis  Joseph  of 
Ai-mathi  preiede  Pilat,  that  he  schulde 
take  awcy  the  body  of  Jhesu,  for  that 
he  was  a  disciple  of  Jhesu,  forsothe 
priuey,  for  the  drede  of  Jewis.  And 
Pilat  suffride.  Therfore  he  cam,  and 
took  awcy  the  body  of  Jhesu. 

39  Sothli  and  Nycodeme  cam,  that 
hadde  come  first  to  Jhesu  in  the  ny5t, 
beringe  a  medlynge  of  myrre  and  aloes, 
as  an  hundrid  pound. 

40  Therfore  thei  token  the  body  of 
Jhesu,  and  bounden  it  in  l}mncn  clothis 
with  oynementis,  as  it  is  custom  to  Jewis 
for  to  birye. 

41  Sothli  in  the  place  wher  he  was 
crucified,  was  a  5erd,  and  in  the  5erd  a 
uewe  graue,  in  which  not  3it  ony  man 
was  put. 

42  Therfore  there  for  the  makynge  redy 
I  of  Jewis,  for  the  graue  was  ny3,  thei 

puttidea  Jhesu. 


Chap.  XX.  i  Forsothe  in  the  oot 
;  of  the  saboth,^  ^lary  Mawdeleyn  cam 
I  erly,  whaune   derknessis  weren   3it,  at 


TYNDALE,  1526.  MO 

32  Then  cam  the  soudicrs,  and  brake 
the  Icgges  of  the  fyrst,  and  of  the  other, 
which  was  crucified  with  Jesus. 

33  "When  they  cam  to  Jesus,  and  sawe 
that  he  was  deed  alredy,  they  brake  not 
his  legges  ; 

34  13utt  one  off  the  soudicrs  with  a 
speare  thrust  hym  into  the  syde,  and 
forth  with  cam  there  out  blude  and 
water. 

35  And  he  that  sawe  it,  bare  recordc, 
and  his  recordc  is  true  ;  and  he  knoweth 
that  he  sayth  true,  that  ye  myght  beleve 
also. 

36  These  thingcs  were  done,  that  the 
scripture  shulde  be  fulfilled,  Ye  shall  not 
breake  a  boone  of  him. 

37  And  agayne  another  scripture  say- 
etli,  They  shall  loke  on  hym  whom  they 
pearsed. 

38  After  that  Joseph  off  Aramathia, 
whych  was  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  se- 
cretly, for  feare  off  the  lewes,  besought 
Pilate,  that  he  myght  take  dounc  the 
boddy  ofi'  Jesus.  And  Pilate  gave  him 
licence 


39  And  there  cam  also  Nicodemus, 
which  att  the  begynnynge  cam  to  Jesus 
by  nyght,  and  brought  of  mirre  and 
aloes  mingled  to  gedder,  aboute  an 
hundred  pounde  wayght. 

40  Then  toke  they  the  body  of  Jcsu, 
and  wonde  it  in  lynnen  clothes  with 
those  confeccions,  as  the  manner  of  the 
lewes  is  to  bury. 

41  In  the  place  where  Jesus  was  cruci- 
fied, was  a  garden,  and  in  the  garden  a 
newe  sepulcre,  wherin  was  never  man 
layde. 

42  There  layde  they  Jesus,  be  cause  of 
the  lewes  sabotli  even,  for  the  sepulcre 
was  nye  at  honde. 


Chap.  XX.  i  The  morowe  after  the 
saboth  daye,  cam  Mary  Magdalene  erly, 
when  it  was  yet  darcke,  vnto  the  sepul- 


560 


GOTHIC.  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 

byrgene.     And  heo  geseali  dset  se  stan 
aweg  anumen  wees  fram  dsere  byi'gene. 

2  Da  am  lieo,  and  com  to  Simone 
Petre,  and  to  dam  odrum  leorning- 
cnihte,  de  se  Hselend  lufode,  and  heo 
cwse]>  to  him,  Hi  namon  Drihten  of 
byrgene,  and  we  nyton,  hwar  hi  hyne 
ledon. 

3  Petrus  eode  ut,  and  se  oder  leorning- 
cniht,  and  comon  to  doere  byrgene. 

4  Witodlice  hig  twegen  urnon  8etg£edere, 
and  se  cder  leorning-cniht  for-arn  Pet- 
rus forne,  and  com  rador  to  dsere  byrg- 
ene. 

5  And  da  he  nyder-abeah,  he  geseah 
da  h'n-wseda  licgan,  and  ne  eode  deah 
in. 

6  Witodlice  Simon  Petrus  com  sefter 
him,  and  eode  into  dsere  byrgene,  and 
he  geseah  bn-Avseda  licgan, 

7  And  daet  swat-lin  de  wses  uppan  his 
lieafde,  ne  Ijeg  hyt  na  mid  dam  hn- 
Wcedum,  ac  on-sundion  gefealden  on 
anre  stowe. 

8  Da  eode  eac  in  se  leorning-cniht,  de 
sercst  com  to  daere  byrgene,  and  geseah, 
and  gelyfde. 

9  Witodlice  da  git  hi  ne  cutton  halige 
gewrit,  dtet  hit  gebyrede  daet  he  sceolde 
fram  dea))e  arisan. 

10  Da  foron  eft  da  leorning-cnihtas  to 
dam  cdrum.'*' 

1 1  Witodlice  Maria  stod  dar  ute  net 
dsere  byrgene  and  weop.  And  da  heo 
weep,  lieo  abeah  nyder,  and  beseah 
innan  da  byrgene. 

12  And  geseah  twegen  englas  sittan 
mid  hwitum  reafe,  aniie  set  dam  heafdum 
and  oderne  set  dam  fotum,  dser  dres 
Haelendes  lie  aled  wtes. 

13  Hi  cwsedon  to  hyre,  AVif,  liwi  wepst 
dii  ]  Da  cwaejj  heo  to  hym,  Fordam  Jii 
namon  minne  Drihten,  and  ic  nat.  Invar 
hi  hine  ledon. 

14  Da  heo  das  ]>mg  saede,  da  bewende 
heo  hi  on-bsec,  and  geseah  hwar  se 
Hselend  stod,  and  heo  nyste  daet  hyt  se 
Hselend  wses. 

15  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend  to  h>Te,  Wif, 
hwi  wepst  du  1  hwfene  sccst  dti  ]  Hef> 
wende  dset  hit  se  wyrt-weard  waere,  and 


XX.  2-15-]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

the  graue.     And  she  sy3  the  stoon  turn- 
ed a^cn  fro  the  gmue. 

2  Therfore  she  ran,  and  cam  to  Sy- 
niount  Petre,  and  to  a  nothir  disciple, 
whom  Jhesii  louyde,  and  seith  to  hem, 
Tliei  han  take  the  Lord  fro  the  graue, 
and  we  witen  not,  where  thci  han  put 
him. 

3  Therfore  Petre  wente  out,  and  thilke 
othere  disciple,  and  thei  camen  to  the 
graue. 

4  Forsoth  thei  tweyne  runnen  to 
giderc,  and  thilke  other  disciple  ran 
bifore  sunner  than  Petre,  and  cam  first 
to  the  graue. 

5  And  whanne  he  hadde  ynbowyd  liim, 
Le  syj  the  scheetis  putt,  nethelees  he 
entride  not. 

6  Therfore  Symount  Petre  cam  suynge 
liyni,  and  he  entride  in  to  the  graue, 
and  he  sy5  the  scheetis  putt, 

7  And  the  sudarie  that  was  on  his 
liced,  not  putt  with  the  scheetis,  but  by 
it  silf  wlappid  in  to  0  place. 

S  Therfore  thanne  and  thilke  disciple 
that  cam  first  to  the  graue,  entride,  and 
sy5,  and  bileuede. 

9  Foi'sothe  thei  wisten  not  the  scrip- 
ture, for  it  bihofte  him  for  to  ryse  a5en 
fro  deede  men. 

I  o  Therfore  the  disciplis  wenten  eft  to 
hem  selue. 

I I  Forsoth  Marie  stood  at  the  graue 
withoute  forth  wepynge.  Therfore  while 
she  wepte,  sche  bowide  hir,  and  biheld 
forth  in  to  the  graue. 

12  And  she  sy5  twey  angclis  sittynge 
in  whyt,  oon  at  the  heed  and  oon  at  the 
feet,  wher  the  body  of  Jhesu  was  putt. 

1 3  Thei  seyn  to  hir,  Womman,  what 
wcpist  thou]  She  seid  to  hem,  For 
thei  han  takun  a  wey  my  lord,  and  I 
woot  not,  where  thei  ban  putt  him. 

14  Whanne  she  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
she  was  turnyd  a  bak,  and  sy3  Jhesu 
stondinge,  and  wiste  not  for  it  was 
Jhesu. 

15  Jhesu  seith  to  hir,  Womman,  what 
wepist  thou  ]  whom  sekist  thou  ]  She 
gessinge  for  he  was  a  gardener,  seith 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


r)6i 


ere.     And  sawe  the  stone  rowled  awaye 
from  the  toumbe. 

2  Then  she  rannc,  and  cam  to  Simon 
Peter,  and  to  the  other  disciple,  whom 
Jesus  loved,  and  sayde  vnto  them,  They 
have  taken  awaye  the  Lorde  out  off  the 
toumbe,  and  we  cannot  tell,  where  they 
have  layde  hym. 

3  Peter  went  forth,  and  that  other 
disciple,  and  cam  vnto  the  sepulcre. 

4  They  ranne  bothe  to  gether,  and  that 
other  discij)le  did  out  runne  Peter,  and 
cam  fyrst  to  the  sepulcre. 

5  And  he  stouped  doune,  and  sawe  the 
lynnen  clothes,  yet  went  he  not  in. 

6  Then  cam  Simon  Peter  foloAvynge 
hym,  and  went  into  the  sepulcre,  and 
sawe  the  lynnen  clothes  lye, 

7  And  the  napkyn  that  was  aboute  hys 
heed,  nott  lyinge  wytu  lue  iyiinen  clothes, 
but  Avrapped  togedder  in  a  place  by  yt 
sylfe. 

8  Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple 
whych  cam  fyrst  to  the  sepulcre,  and  he 
sawe,  and  beleved. 

9  For  as  yett  they  knew  nott  the 
scriptures,  that  he  shulde  ryse  agayne 
from  deeth. 

10  And  the  disciples  went  awaye  agayne 
vnto  their  awne  home. 

1 1  Mary  stode  with  out  att  the  sepul- 
cre wepynge.  As  she  wept,  she  bowed 
her  sylfe  into  the  sepulcre, 

12  And  sawe  two  angels  clothed  in 
whyte  sittyng,  the  one  att  the  heed  and 
the  other  at  the  fete,  where  they  had 
layde  the  body  of  Jesus. 

13  They  sayde  vnto  her.  Woman,  why 
wepest  thou  1  She  sayde  vnto  them. 
They  have  taken  awaye  my  lorde,  and 
I  wote  not,  where  they  have  la}de  him. 

14  When  she  had  thus  sayde,  she 
turned  lier  sylfe  backc,  and  sawe  Jesus 
stondynge,  and  knewe  not  that  it  was 
Jesus. 

15  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Woman,  why 
wepest  thou  ]  whom  sekest  thou  1  She 
supoosyngc  that  he  had  bene  the  gar- 

o  o 


562 


GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON",  995.    [St.  John 

cw8e|>  to  him,  Leof,  gif  du  hine  name, 
sege  me,  hwar  du  hine  ledest,  and  ic 
hine  nime. 

1 6  Da  cwse})  se  Haelend  to  hyre,  Maria. 
Heo  bewende  hi  and  cvfse]>  to  him,  Rab- 
boni,  dset  ys  gecweden,  lareow. 

17  Da  cwsejj  se  Heelend  to  hyre,  Ne 
cet-hrin  dii  min,  blu  gyt  ic  ne  astah 
to  milium  feeder ;  gang  to  minum  brodr 
um,  and  sege  him,  Ic  astige  to  minum 
feeder  and  to  eowrum  feeder,  and  to 
minum  Gode  and  to  eowrum  Gode. 

18  Da  com  seo  Magdalenisce  Maria, 
and  cydde  dam  leorning-cnihtum  and 
cwsej),  Ic  geseah  Drihten,  and  das  J)ing 
he  me  ssede.^ 

19  Da  hit  wses  £efen,  on  anon  dsera 
reste-daga,  and  da  dura  wseron  belocene, 
dser  da  leorning-cnihtas  wseron  gegad- 
erode,  for  dsera  ludea  ege,  se  Hselend 
com,  and  stod  to-middes  hyra,  and  cw3e]> 
to  him,  Sig  sibb  mid  eow. 

20  And  da  he  dset  cwse]>,  he  set-ywde 
him  his  handa  and  his  sidan  ;  da  leorn- 
ing-cnihtas wseron  h]\]>e,  da  hi  htefdou 
Drihten  gesewen. 

21  He  c\v3e}j  eft  to  him,  Sig  sibb  midi 
eow ;  swa  swa  feeder  me  sende,  ic  sende 
eow. 

22  Da  he  doet  cwse)/,  da  bleow  he  on 
hi,  and  cwsejj  to  him,  L'nderfojj  Haligne 
Gast ; 

23  Dsera  synna  de  ge  forgyfaj),  hi  beo]) 
him  forgyfeue  ;  and  dara  de  ge  healdajj, 
hig  beoj)  gehealdene. 

24  Witodlice  Thomas,  an  of  dam 
twelfum,  de  ys  gecweden  Didlmus,  doet 
ys,  Gelycost,  on  ure  gejjeode,  he  nees 
mid  him,  da  se  Hselend  com. 

25  Da  cwffidon  da  odre  leorning-cnihtas 
to  him,  We  gesawon  Drihten.  Da  cwae)? 
he  to  him,  Ne  gelyfe  ic,  buton  ic  geseo 
dsera  neegla  feestnunge  on  his  handa,  and 
ic  do  minne  finger  on  dsera  nsegla  stede, 
and  d5  mine  hand  to  his  sidan. 

26  And  eft  sefter  eahta  dagum  his 
leorning-cnihtas  wseron  inne,  and  Thom- 
as mid  him.   Se  Hselend  com,  belocenum 


XX.  1 6-26.]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

to  him,  Sire,  if  tliou  liast  takun  him  vp, 
seye  to  me,  wl»erc  tht)U  hast  put  him, 
and  I  schal  take  hiiu  a  wey. 

16  JIicsu  scith  to  hir,  Marie.  She 
coniiertid  soith  to  him,  Eabboiiy,  that  is 
seid,  maistir. 

17  Jhcsu  seith  to  hir,  Nylc  thou  touche 
me,  for  I  haue  not  5it  styled  to  my 
fadir  ;  forsothe  go  to  my  britheren,  and 
seye  to  liem,  I  stye  to  my  fadir  and 
30ure  fadir,  to  my  God  and  50ure  God. 

18  !Mary  Mawdclcyn  cam,  tclllnge  to 
disciplis.  For  I  sy5  the  Lord,  and  thes 
thiugis  he  seide  to  me. 

19  Thcrfore  whanne  eucutid  was  in  that 
day,  oon  of  the  saljotis,  and  tlie  5atis 
weren  sehitt,  where  disciplis  weren 
gederid,  for  the  drede  of  Jcwis,  Jhesu 
cam,  and  stood  in  the  myddel  of  hem, 
and  seide  to  hem,  Pees  to  30U. 

20  And  whanne  he  hadde  seid  this 
thing,  he  schewide  to  hem  hondis  and 
the  syde  ;  therfore  the  disciplis  ioycdcn, 
the  Lord  seyn. 

21  Therfore  he  seith  to  hem  eft,  Pees 
to  50U  ;  as  the  fadir  sentc  me,  and  I 
sende  50U. 

22  "Whanne  he  hadde  seid  thes  thingis, 
he  blew  ynuc,  and  seide,  Take  ■^e  the 
Hooly  Gost ; 

23  Whos  synnes  50  schulen  foi'5yue, 
thei  ben  for50uun  ;  and  whos  synnes  50 
schulen  withholde,  thei  ben  withholdun. 

24  Forsothe  Thomas,  oon  of  the  tweluc, 

that  is  seid  Didymus, was 

not  with  hem,  whanne  Jhesu  cam. 

25  Therfore  othere  disciplis  seiden.  We 
ban  seyn  the  Lord.  Forsothe  he  seide 
to  hem,  No  but  I  schal  se  in  his  hondis 
the  ficching  of  naylis,  and  schal  sende 
my  fyngris  in  to  places  of  naylis,  and 
I  schal  sende  myn  honde  in  to  his  syde, 
I  schal  not  bileue. 

26  And  aftir  ei5te  dayes  eft  his  dis- 
ciplis weren  with  ynne,  and  Thomas 
with  hem.     Jhesu  cam,  the  jatis  sehitt, 


TYlSbALE,  1526.  563 

dener,  sayde  vnto  hym,  Syr,  if  thou  have 
borne  him  hence,  tell  me,  where  thou 
hast  layile  him,  and  I  will  take  hym 
awayc. 

16  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Mary.  She 
turned  her  sylfo  and  sayde  vnto  hym, 
Raboni,  which  is  to  saye,  master. 

17  Jesus  sayde  vnto  her,  Touche  me 
not,  for  I  have  nott  yet  ascended  to  my 
father ;  butt  goo  to  my  brothren,  and 
saye  vnto  them,  I  ascende  vnto  my 
father  and  youre  father,  my  God  and 
yourc  God. 

18  ]\Iary  ^fagdalcne  cam,  and  toldc  the 
disciples,  That  she  had  senc  the  Lorde, 
and  that  he  had  spoken  soche  thingcs 
vnto  her. 

19  The  same  dayc  at  nyght,  whych 
was  the  morowe  after  the  saboth  daye, 
when  the  dores  were  shutt,  where  the 
disciples  were  assembled  to  geddcr,  for 
feare  of  the  lewes,  cam  Jesus,  and  stode 
in  the  myddes,  and  sayd  to  them,  Peace 
be  with  you. 

20  And  when  he  had  so  sayde,  he 
shewed  vnto  them  his  hondes  and  his 
fete  and  his  syde  ;  then  were  the  dis- 
ciples glad,  when  they  sawe  the  Lorde. 

2 1  He  sayde  vnto  them  agayne,  Peace 
be  with  you  ;  as  my  father  sent  me, 
even  so  sende  I  you. 

22  When  he  had  sayde  that,  he  bluwe 
on  them,  and  sayde  vnto  them,  Eeceave 
the  Holy  Goost ; 

23  Whosoevers  synnes  ye  rcmyt,  they 
arc  remitted  vnto  them  ;  and  whoso- 
evers synnes  ye  retayne,  they  are  re- 
tayned. 

24  Thomas,  one  off  the  twelve,  called 

Didimus, was 

not  with  them,  when  Jesus  cam. 

25  The  other  disciples  sayd  vnto  hym. 
We  have  sene  the  Lorde.  And  he  sayde 
vnto  them,  Except  I  se  in  his  hondes 
the  prcnt  of  the  nayles,  and  put  my 
fynger  in  the  holes  off  the  nayles,  and 
thruste  my  honde  into  hys  syde,  I  will 
not  beleve. 

26  And  after  viij  dayes  agayne  the 
disciples  were  Avith  in,  and  Thomas  was 
with  them.     Jesus  cam,  when  the  dores 

002 


564 


GOTHIC,  36a 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.Johit 

durum,   and   stcd   to-middes   him,  and 
cwsej),  STg  eow  sibb. 

27  Syddan  he  saede  Thome,  Do"  dinne 
finger  hider,  and  geseoh  mine  handa, 
and  nim  dine  hand,  and  do  on  mine 
sidan,  and  ne  beo  du  ungeleafiul,  ac  ge- 
leaffuh 

28  Thomas  andswarode,  and  cwse))  to 
him,  Du  eart  miu  God  and  min  Drihten. 

29  Se  Hffilend  cwse]?  to  him,  Du  ge- 
lyfdest,  fordam  du  me  gesawe ;  da 
synd  eadige,  de  ne  gesawon,  and  ge- 
lyfdon. 

30  Witodl'ce  manege  odre  tacen  se 
Haelend  worhte  on  his  leorning-cnihta 
gesyhjje,  de  ne  synd  on  dysse  bee  awrit- 
ene. 

31  Witodlice  das  J)ing  synd  awritene, 
dset  ge  gelyfon,  dset  se  Haelend  ys  Crist, 
Godes  sunu,  and  dset  ge  habbon  ece  lif 
donne  ge  gelyf'a]?  on  his  naman. 


Chap.  XXI.  +1  Eft  sefter 
Hselend  hine  geswutelode  dus 
dsere  Tiberiadiscan  sae 


dam   se 
.  .  .   %t 


2  Simon  Petrus,  and  Thomas,  de  ys 
gecweden  Gelicost,  wseron  setgsedere, 
and  Nathanahel,  se  waes  of  Chanaa  Ga- 
hlese,  and  Zebedeus  suna,  and  odre  twe- 
gen  dsera  leorning-cnihta. 

3  Da  cwsej)  Simon  Petrus  to  him,  Ic 
wylle  gan  on  fixo]?.  Da  cwsedon  hi  to 
him,  And  we  wylla{)  gan  mid  de.  And 
hi  eodon  ut,  and  eodon  on  scip.  And 
ne  fengon  nan  Jjing  on  daere  nihte. 

4  Witodlice  on  seme  mergen,  se  Hsel- 
end  st5d  on  dam  strande  ;  ne  gecneowon 
deah  da  leorning-cnihtas,  dset  hit  se 
Hselend  wses. 

5  Da  cwsejj  se  Hselend  to  him,  Cnapan, 
cwefle  ge,  hsebbe  ge  sufoll  Hig  and- 
swarodou  him  and  cwaedon,  Nese. 

6  He  cwsej)  to  him,  Lseta))  dset  nett  on 
da  swidran  healfe  dses  rewettes,  and  ge 
gemetajj.  Hig  leton  witodlice,  and  ne 
mihton  hit  ateon,  for  dsera  fixa  msenigeo. 

7  Witodlice  se  leorning-cniht,  de  se 


XX.  27.-XXI.  7]  WYCLIFFE,  1389. 

juul   stood    in    the    niycldcl,    ami  selde, 
Pees  to  5011. 

27  Aftirward  lie  seitli  to  Thomas, 
Brync^  yu  liidur  tlii  fyngur,  and  se  niyu 
Iiondis,  and  bryng  to  thin  hond,  and 
send  in  to  my  syde,  and  nyle  thou  be 
vnbileueful,  but  feithful. 

28  Thomas  answeride,  and  seide  to 
him,  My  Loi*d  and  my  God. 

29  Jhesu  seith  to  hiin,  Thomas,  for 
thou  hast  seyn  me,  thou  bileuedist ; 
blessid  beu  thei,  that  sy3en  not,  and  ban 
IwleurtL 

30  Forsothe  and  Jhesus  dide  manye 
othere  signes  in  the  sy5t  of  his  disciplis, 
whiche  ben  not  ^n•ituu  in  this  book. 

31  Forsothe  thes  ben  writun,  that  ^e 
bileue,  for  Jhesu  is  Crist,  the  sone  of 
God,  and  tliat  56  bileuynge  haue  lyf  in 
Lis  name. 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


565 


Chap.  XXI.  i  Aftirward  Jhesu  eft 
schewide  him  to  his  disciplis,  at  the  see 
of  Tyberias.     Sothli  he  schewide  thus. 

2  Ther  weren  to  gidere  Symount  Petre, 
and  Thomas,  that  is  seid  Didymus,  and 
Nathanael,  that  was  of  the  Cane  of  Gali- 
lee, and  the  sones  of  Zebedee,  and  tweye 
othere  of  his  disciplis. 

3  Symount  Petre  seith  to  hem,  I  go 
for  to  fysclie.  Thei  seyn  to  him,  And 
we  comen  with  thee.  And  thei  3eden 
out,  and  stijeden  in  to  a  boot.  And  in 
that  nijt  thei  token  nothing. 

4  Forsotb  the  morwe  maad,  Jhesu 
stood  in  the  brynke  ;  nethelees  the  dis- 
ciplis knewen  not,  for  it  was  Jhesu. 

5  Thei-foi-e  Jhesu  seith  to  hem.  Chil- 
dren, wher  5e  ban  ony  soupynge  thing? 
Thei  answeriden,  Nay. 

6  He  seide  to  hem,  Send  je  the  nett 
in  to  the  ri-;thalf  of  the  rowyng,  and  5e 
schulen  fynde.  Therfore  thei  senten  the 
nett,  and  now  thei  myjten  not  drawe  it, 
for  multitude  of  fyschis. 

7  Thei-fore  thilke  disciple,  whom  Jhesu 


were  shet,  and  stode  in  the  myddes,  and 
sayde.  Peace  be  with  you. 

27  Then  sayde  he  to  Thomas,  Put  in 
thy  fynger  here,  and  se  my  hondes, 
and  putt  forth  thy  honde,  and  thrust 
hym  into  my  syde,  and  be  uott  wyth 
out  fayth,  but  beleve. 

28  Thomas  answered,  and  sayde  vnto 
hym,  My  Lorde  and  my  God. 

29  Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Thomas, 
because  thou  hast  sene  me,  therfore  hast 
thou  beleved  ;  happy  are  they,  that 
have  not  sene,  and  yet  have  beleved. 

30  And  many  other  signes  did  Jesus 
in  the  presence  of  his  disciples,  which 
are  not  written  in  this  boke.  \ 

31  These  are  written,  that  ye  myglit 
beleve,  that  Jesus  is  Christ,  the  sonne 
of  God,  and  that  ye  in  belevynge  myght 
have  life  thorewe  his  name. 


Chap.  XXI.  i  After  thatt  Jesus 
shewed  hym  silfe  agayne  ...  at  the 
see  of  Tyberias.  And  on  this  wyse 
shewed  he  him  silfe. 

2  There  Avere  to  gedder  Simon  Peter, 
and  Thomas,  which  is  called  Didimus, 
and  Nathanael,  of  Cana  a  cite  of  Galile, 
and  the  sonnes  off  Zebedei,  and  two 
other  off  the  disciples. 

3  Simon  Peter  sayde  vnto  them,  I  goo 
afysshynge.  They  sayde  vnto  hym,  We 
also  wyll  goo  wyth  the.  They  went 
their  waye,  and  entred  into  a  shippe 
strayght  waye.  And  that  nyght  caught 
they  uoo  thynge. 

4  When  the  mornjTige  was  nowe  come, 
Jesus  stode  on  the  shore  ;  neverthelesso 
the  disciples  knewe  not,  that  it  was 
Jesus. 

5  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Sjts,  have 
ye  eny  meate  ?  They  answered  hym, 
Noo. 

6  And  he  sayde  vnto  them.  Cast  out 
youre  nett  on  the  right  syde  of  the 
shippe,  and  ye  shall  fynde.  They  cast 
out,  and  anon  they  were  not  able  to 
drawe  it,  for  the  multitude  of  fysshes. 

7  Then  sayde  the  disciple,  whom  Jesus 


566  GOTHIC,  360. 


ANGLO-SAXON,  995.     [St.  John 

Hselend  lufode,  cwjejj  to  Petre,  Hit  ys 
Drihten.  Da  Petrus  gehyrde  dset  hit 
Drihten  wses,  da  dyde  he  on  his  tunecan, 
and  begyrde  hine,  witodlice  he  wses  ser 
nacod,  and  scet  innan  sse. 

8  Da  odre  leorning-cnihtas  reowon 
dser-to,  hi  waeron  unfeor  frani  lande, 
SAvylce  hit  wsere  twa  liund  ehia,  and 
tugon  hyra  fisc-nett. 

9  Da  hig  on  land  eodon,  hi  gesawon 
hcgan  gleda,  and  fisc  dar  on  fyr,  and 
hlaf. 

10  Da  cwpej)  se  Heelend  to  him,  Bring- 
a)>  da  fixas,  de  ge  nu  gefengon. 

11  Simon  Petrus  eode  up,  and  teh  his 
nett  on  land,  micelra  fixa  full,  dsera  wses 
hund-teontig  and  Jjreo  and  fiftig ;  and 
da  hyra  swa  fsela  woes,  uses  dset  nett 
tobrocen. 

12  Da  cwse))  se  Hselend  to  him,  Ga]> 
hyder,  and  etajj.  And  nan  dsera  de  dar 
sset,  ne  dorste  hine  acsian,  Hwset  he 
wsere,  hi  wiston  dset  hit  wses  Drihten. 

13  And  se  Hselend  com,  and  nam  hlaf, 
and  eac  fisc,  and  sealde  him, 

14  On  dysum  wses  se  Hselend  jjriwa 
geswutelod  his  leorning-cnibtum,  da  hei 
aras  of  deaj'e.  '| 

15  Da  hi  seton,  ''^da  cwse|)  se  Hselend 
to  Simon  Petre,  Simon  lohannis,  lufast 
du  me  swidor  donne  das  1  He  cwsej)  to 
him,  Gea,  Drihten,  dii  wast  dset  ic  de 
lufige.  He  cwse})  to  him,  Heald  mine 
lamb. 

16  He  cwsejj  eft  to  him,  Simon  lohan- 
nis, lufast  dii  me  1  He  cwse])  to  him, 
Gea,  Drihten,  dii  wast  dset  ic  de  lufige. 
Da  cwse];  he  to  him,  Heald  mine  lamb. 

17  He  cwse];  Jjriddan  side  to  him,  Simon 
lohannis,  lufast  dii  me  1  Da  wses  Petrus 
sarig,  fordam  de  he  cwse])  ])riddan  side 
to  him,  Lufast  du  me,  and  he  cwsej)  to 
him,  Drihten,  du  wast  ealle  ]>ing ;  dii 
Avast  dset  ic  de  lufige.  Dii  cwse]?  he  to 
him,  Heald  mine  sceap. 

18  So]',  ic  secge  de,  da  du  gingra  wsere, 
dii  gyrdest  de,  and  eodest  dser  du  wold- 
est  ;  Avitodlice  donne  dii  ealdest,  du 
strecst  dine  handa,  and  oder  de  gyrt, 


XXI.8-I8.]  WYCLIFFE.isSp. 

loucde,  seide  to  Petrc,  It  is  the  Lord. 
Symount  Pctrc,  wlianne  he  haddc  herd 
for  it  was  the  Lord,  girte  him  with  a 
coote,  sothli  he  was  nakid,  and  sentc 
him  in  to  the  see. 

8  Sothli  othcre  disciplis  caraen  by 
hoot,  for  thci  wcrcn  not  for  fro  the  lond, 
hut  as  two  hundrid  cuhitis,  drawynge 
the  nctt  of  lischis. 

9  Tlierfore  as  thei  camen  doun  in  to 
the  lond,  thci  sy5eu  coHs  put,  and  a 
fysch  put  ahoue,  and  breed. 

TO  Jhesu  seith  to  hym,  Brynge  50  of 
the  fischis,  whiche  50  han  taken  now. 

1 1  Symount  Potre  sti5ede  vp,  and 
drow5  the  nett  in  to  the  lond,  ful  of 
grete  fischis,  an  liundrid  fyfti  and  thre ; 
and  wlianne  tliei  weren  so  greete,  the 
nctt  is  not  brokun. 

12  Jhcsu  scith  to  hem,  Come  56,  ete 
;e.  And  no  man  of  the  sittinge  at  mete 
durste  axe  him,  Who  art  thou,  witinge 
fur  it  is  the  Lord. 

13  And  Jhcsu  cam,  and  took  breed, 
and  5af  to  hem,  and  the  fysch  also. 

14  Now  this  thridde  day  Jhesu  is 
schewid  to  his  disciplis,  whanne  he 
liadde  rise  a5en  fro  deed  vien. 

15  Thcrfore  whanne  thci  liaddcn  etyn, 
Jhesu  seith  to  Symount  Pctre,  Symount 
of  John,  louest  thou  me  more  than 
tlics  do7i  ?  He  seith  to  hym,  '^he, 
Lord,  thou  west  for  I  loue  thee. 
Jhcsu  seith  to  him,  Fecde  thou  my 
lambrcn. 

16  Eft  he  seith  to  hym,  Symount  of 
John,  louest  thou  me  ?  And  he  seith 
to  him,  5he,  Lord,  thou  wost  for  I  loue 
thee.  He  seith  to  him,  Feede  thou  my 
lambrcn. 

17  He  seith  to  him  the  thridde  tyme, 
Symount  of  John,  louest  thou  me  1 
Petre  is  sori,  for  he  seith  to  him  the 
thridde  tyme,  Louest  thou  me,  and  he 
seith  to  him,  Lord,  tliou  wost  alle 
thingis ;  thou  wost  for  I  loue  thee. 
Jhesu  seith  to  him,  Feede  thou  my 
schecp. 

18  Trculi,  treuli,  I  seie  to  thee,  whanne 
thou  were  5ongere,  thou  girdedist  thee, 
and  wandridest  where  thou  woldist ; 
sothli  whanne  thou  schalt  wexe  eldere, 


TYNDALE,  1526. 


567 


loved,  vnto  Peter,  It  is  the  Lorde. 
When  Simon  Peter  herdc  that  it  was 
the  Lorde,  he  gyrde  his  mantell  to  hym, 
for  he  was  naked,  and  sprange  into  the 
see. 

8  The  other  disciples  cam  by  sliipi)e, 
for  they  were  nott  farrc  from  londe, 
butt  as  itt  were  two  hondred  cuhites, 
and  they  drcwe  the  net  with  fisshcs. 

9  As  sone  as  they  were  come  to  londe, 
they  sawe  hoot  coles  layde,  and  fisshe 
layde  tlier  on,  and  breed. 

10  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Brynge  of 
the  fisshes,  which  ye  have  nowe  caught. 

1 1  Simon  Peter  stepped  forthe,  and 
drewe  the  nett  to  londe,  full  of  greats 
fisshes,  an  hondred  and  .liij.  and  for  all 
there  wei-e  so  many,  yet  was  nut  the 
net  broken. 

12  Jesus  sayde  vnto  them,  Come,  and 
dyne.  And  none  of  the  disciples  durste 
axe  hym.  What  arte  thou,  for  they 
knewe  that  it  was  the  Lorde. 

13  Jesus  then  cam,  and  toke  breed, 
and  gave  them,  and  fisshe  lykwyse. 

14  And  this  is  nowe  the  thyrde  tyme 
that  Jesus  apered  to  his  disciples,  after 
that  he  was  rysen  agayne  from  deeth. 

15  When  they  had  dyned,  Jesus  sayde 
to  Simon  Peter,  Simon  Joanna,  lovest 
thou  me  more  then  these'?  He  sayde 
vnto  hym.  Ye,  Lorde,  thou  knowest  that 
I  love  the.  He  sayde  vnto  hym,  Fede 
my  lambes. 

1 6  He  sayde  to  hym  agayne  the  seconde 
tyme,  Simon  Joanna,  lovest  thou  me  ] 
He  sayde  vnto  hym,  Ye,  Lorde,  thou 
knowest  that  I  love  the.  He  sayde  vnto 
hym,  Fede  my  shcpe. 

17  He  sayde  vnto  hym  the  thyrde 
tyme,  Simon  Joanna,  lovest  thou  me  1 
Peter  sorowed,  because  he  sayde  the 
thyrde  tyme,  Lovest  thou  me,  and  sayde 
vnto  hym,  Lorde,  thou  knowest  all 
thynge  ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  the. 
Jesus  sayde  vnto  hym,  Fede  my  shcpe. 

18  Verely,  verely,  I  saye  vnto  the,  when 
thou  wast  yonge,  thou  gerdedst  thy  silfe, 
and  walkedst  whither  thow  woldest ; 
but  when   thou   arte   olde,   thou  shalt 


568 


GOTHIC,  360. 


AXGLO-SAXON,  995.    [St.  John 
and  Iset  dyder  de  du  nelt. 


19  Eset  lie  witodlice  S3tde,  and  tacnode 
hwylcon  deajje  he  wolde  God  f^eswut- 
elian.  '•'And  da  he  dset  ssede,  da  cwse)) 
he  to  him,  Fylig  me. 

20  Da  Petrus  hine  beweude,  da  geseah 
he  dset  se  leorning-cniht  him  fyligde,  de 
se  Hselend  lufode,  se  de  hlinode  on  ge- 
beorscype  ofer  his  breost,  and  cwtej', 
Drihten,  hwjet  ys,  se  de  de  belsew))'? 

21  Witodlice  da  Petrus  dysne  geseah, 
da  cwsejj  he  to  dam  Hselende,  Di-ihten, 
hwset  sceal  des  ? 

22  Da  cwsej)  se  Hselend  to  him,  Ic 
wylle  doet  he  wunige  dus  od  ic  cume, 
hwset  to  de  ?  fylig  du  me. 

23  Witodlice  deos  sprsec  com  ut  ge- 
mang  brodrum,  dset  se  leorning-cniht 
ne  swylt.  And  ne  cwsej)  se  Hselend  to 
him,  ne  swylt  he,  ac,  Dus  ic  wylle  dset 
he  wunige  od  ic  cume,  hwset  to  de  1 

24  Dis  ys  se  leorning-cniht,  de  cyj) 
gewitnesse  be  dyson,  and  wi-at  d's  I'ing; 
and  we  witon,  dset  hys  gewitnes  ys  sc|>. 

25  Witodlice  odre  manega  )jing  synd 
de  se  Hselend  worhte,  git"  da  ealle  a- 
writene  wseron,  ic  wene  ne  mihte  des 
middan-eard  ealle  da  bee  befou.    Amen. 


XXI.  19-25.]  WYCLIFFE,  13S9. 

thou  schalt  liolde  forth  thin  hondis,  ami 
anothir  schal  girile  thee,  and  leede  thee 
wliidir  thou  wolt  not. 

19  Sotlili  he  scidc  this  thing,  signyfy- 
ingc  by  what  deeth  lie  was  to  glorifiynge 
God.  And  whanne  he  hadde  seid  thes 
thingis,  he  scith  to  him,  Sue  thou  nic. 

20  Potre  conucrtid  syj  thilke  disciple, 
whom  Jhcsu  louede,  and  which  restide 
in  the  soupcr  on  liis  brcst,  and  he  scide 
to  hym.  Lord,  who  is  it,  that  schal  bi- 
traye  thee  ] 

21  Therfore  whanne  Petre  hadde  scyn 
this  disciple,  he  seith  to  Jhcsu,  Lord, 
what  forsothe  this  1 

22  Jhesu  seith  to  him,  So  I  wole  liim 
dwelle  til  I  come,  what  to  thee  1  sue 
thou  me. 

23  Therfore  this  word  wente  out  a 
mong  britheren,  for  thilke  disciple  dey- 
cth  not.  And  Jhesu  seide  not  to  him, 
for  he  deieth  not,  but,  So  I  wole  him 
dwelle  til  I  come,  what  to  thee] 

24  This  is  thilke  disciple,  that  berith 
witnessing  of  thes  thingis,  and  wroot 
thes  thingis  ;  and  we  witen,  for  his  wit- 
nessing is  trewe. 

25  Forsothe  there  ben  and  manye 
othcre  syngncs^  that  Jhesu  dide,  wliiche 
if  thci  ben  writun  by  eche  by  hem  silue, 
I  deme  neither  the  world  him  silf  to 
mowe  take  tho  bookis,  that  ben  to  be 
writun. 

Here  endith  the  gospel  of  John. 


TYNDALE.  1126. 


569 


strctche  forthc  thy  hondcs,  and  a  nother 
shall  gyrde  the,  and  leade  the  whither 
thou  woldest  not. 

1 9  That  spake  he,  signifyinge  by  what 
deeth  he  shulde  glorify  God.  And  when 
lie  had  sayde  thus,  he  sayd  to  hym, 
Folowe  me. 

20  Peter  turned  about  and  sawe  that 
disciple,  whom  Jesus  loved,  folowynge, 
which  also  Icncd  on  his  brest  at  super, 
and  sayde,  Lorde,  which  is  he,  that  shall 
betraye  the  ? 

2 1  When  Peter  sawe  hym,  he  sayde  to 
Jesus,  Lorde,  what  shall  he  here  do  ] 

22  Jesus  sayd  vnto  hym,  Yf  I  will 
have  hym  to  tary  tyll  I  come,  what  is 
that  to  the  1  folowe  thou  me. 

23  Then  went  this  sayinge  a  broode 
amonge  the  brethren,  that  that  disciple 
shulde  nott  deye.  And  Jesus  sayde  nott 
to  hym,  he  shall  not  deye,  butt,  Yff  I  will 
that  he  tary  tyll  I  come,  what  is  that 
to  the? 

24  The  same  disciple  is  he,  which  testi- 
fieth  off  these  tliynges,  and  wrote  these 
tliynges;  and  we  knowe,  thatt  hys  testy- 
mony  is  true. 

25  There  are  also  many  other  thynges 
which  Jesus  did,  the  which  yff  they 
shulde  be  written  every  won,  I  suppose 
the  worlde  coulde  nott  contayne  the 
bokes,  that  shulde  be  written. 


Here 
Jhon. 


endeth  the  Gospell  off  Sainct 


NOTES    ON 


THE  GOTHIC  VEESION. 


Title,  p.  2,  column  i. — The  Title  of 
St.  Matthew  does  not  exist  in  the  Codex 
Argenteus,  but  it  is  complete  in  St.  Mavk, 
where  the  MS.  has  Aiwaggelyo  ))airh 
Marku  anastodeij'  Evangelium  secun- 
dum Marcum  incipit.  From  this,  the 
Title  of  St.  Matthew  is  taken.  Aiwaggel- 
yo is  a  mere  transliteration  of  the 
Greek  'EvayjiKiov ;  for,  as  y,  before  an- 
other y  in  Greek,  has  the  sound  of  n, 
so  it  has  in  the  Gothic,  and  AiAvaggelyo 
is,  therefore,  pronounced  Aiwangelyo, 
with  the  same  meaning  as  'Evayyekiov, 
and  the  Latin  Evangelium,  that  is  glad 
tidings,  good  news.  Our  Anglo-Saxon 
forefathers  translated  EvayyeXiov  by  god 
good,  and  spell  a  narration,  news,  that 
is  Godspell,  our  2-)resent  Gospel.  The 
writers  of  the  Gospels  were  then  styled 
Godspelleras,  our  old  Gospellers,  and 
now  Evangelists,  from  EvayyeXia-T-qs,  and 
the  Latin  Evangelista  a7i  Exangelist, 
or  hringer  of  glad  tidings. 

Matt.  i.  21.  The  Gothic  text  is  based 
upon  the  Codex  Argenteus,  as  given  in 
— "  Codex  Argenteus,  sive  sacrorum 
Evangeliorum  Versionis  Gothicfe  frag- 
menta,  quae  iterum  recognita  adnota- 
tionibusque  instructa  per  lineas  singidas 
adjidem  codicis,  additis  fragmentis  evan- 
gelicis  codicum  Ambrosianorum,  et  tab- 
ula lapide  expressa.  Edidit  Andreas 
Uppstrom,  Ph.  D.  AA.  LL.  M,  in  Regia 
Academia  Upsaliensi  LingujB  Gothicse 
docens,  et  in  schola  Cathedrali  adjunctus. 
Upsalia3 :  C.  A.  Leffler  Reg.  Acad.  Ty- 
pographus,  1854  et  1857." 

Dr.  Uppstrom  has  published,  on  the 
same  plan,  the  Gothic  Fragments  of 
St.  Matthew's  Gospel  from  the  MS.  in 


the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  con- 
taining eh. XXV.  38-46;  xxvi.1-3,  65—75*. 
and  xxvii.  i  ; — Part  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  from  the  Codex  Caro- 
linus,  in  the  Library  of  Wolfenbiittel 
in  the  Duchy  of  Brunswick  ; — and  the 
Skeireins,  i.  e.  'Epnijveia,  Interpretatio, 
or  Commentary  of  part  of  St.  John's 
Gospel,  from  the  MSS.  in  the  Vatican 
and  Ambrosian  Libraries.  They  are 
printed  in  an  inexpensive  form, — an 
8vo.  pamphlet  of  48  pages, — with  this 
Title,  —  "  Fragmenta  Gothica  Selecta, 
ad  fidem  codicum  Ambrosianorum  Carol- 
ini  Vaticani.  Edidit  Andreas  Uppsti'om, 
Upsalite,  C.  A.  Leffler,  Reg.  Acad.  Typo- 
graphus  mdccclxi."  In  his  preface, 
he  defends  himself  from  some  severe 
strictures,  which  his  laborious  and 
valuable  work  does  not  appear  to  have 
deserved. 

Where  our  text  differs  from  Dr.  Upp- 
strom's,  a  small  t  is  placed  after  the 
word  or  clause  in  the  text,  referring  to 
these  notes  for  the  reason  of  the  altera- 
tion, or  for  the  source  of  the  addition. 
The  indefatigable  and  learned  jNIassmann 
has  made  up  some  of  the  verses  of  the 
lost  chapters  of  St.  Matthew  by  quota- 
tions from  other  sources.  These  vei'ses 
are  given  from  the  other  Gospels,  in  the 
text  of  Upps.  on  the  plan  of  Professor 
Massmann's  most  useful  and  compre- 
hensive "Ulfilas.  Die  Heiligen  Schrift- 
en  alten  und  neuen  Bundes  in  Goth- 
ischer  Sprache :  Mit  gegeniiberstehendeni 
Griechischem  und  Lateinischem  Texte, 
Anmerkungen,  Worterbuch,  Sprachlehre 
und  geschichtlicher  Einleitung  von  H. 
F.  Massmann.  8vo.  Stuttgart,  1B57." 


St.  Matt.  i.  21.-vii.  28.] 


GOTHIC  NOTES. 


571 


Matt. i. 21.  Taken  partly,  from  Lk.i. 
31.     For  Icsu,  see  Note  011  Mt.  vii.  28. 

iii.  3.  rartly,  from  Lk.  iii.  4  ;  ^Ik.  i. 
3. — 7,  8.  TiUtly,  from  Lk.  iii.  7,  8. — 
9.  Partly,  from  Lk.  iii.  8  ^lass. — 10. 
Exactly,  from  Lk.  iii.  9,  the  text  of 
Upps.  which  a,2;rees  with  M.xss.  — 11. 
Partly,  from  Lk.  iii.  16  :  Mk  i.  8  : 
Skeireins  4to.  Mass.  p.  14,  aud  42  : 
Upps.  4to.  p.  I  :  Svo.  p.  25.  The 
words  within  square  brackets  [  ]  are 
added  here  and  in  other  places  to  com- 
plete the  sense.    See'Mass.  Ultilas,  p.  38. 

iv.  4.  Partly,  from  Lk.  iv.  4  JNIass. — 
5.  Partly,  from  Lk.  iv.  9. — 6.  Exactly, 
from  Lk.  iv.  9-1 1. — 7.  Exactly,  from 
the  last  clause  of  Lk.  iv.  X2. — 10.  Part- 
ly, from  Lk.  iv.  8. — 17.  Partly,  from 
Mlv.  i.  15  Mass. — 18.  From  Mk.  i.  16. — 
19.  From  Mk.  i.  17.— 20,  21.  Partly, 
fi'om  Mk.  i.  18,  19,  20  Mass. — 22.  Part- 
ly, from  !Mk.  i.  20. 

V.  3.  From  Lk.  vi.  20  Mass.  —  8. 
Exactly,  from  Skeireins  Mass.  4to.  p. 
26,  col.  2,  aud  p.  48,  col.  2  ;  also  Upps. 
4to.  p.  I  :  Svo.  p.  37,  20-23  :  ''^'so  Cast. 
Mai.  p. 24. — Palimpsests.  As  Cast.Mai. 
the  contraction  for  Count  Castiglione 
and  Angelo  !Mai,  will  be  quoted  here- 
after, it  may  be  noticed,  that  they  have 
published  Ulj)hiliT?,  in  Ambrosianis  2m- 
limpsestis,  specimen  {see  Note  on  ch.  vii. 
28).  ]\Iai  had  discovered  in  the  Am- 
brosian  Liln-aiy  at  Milan,  in  1817,  parts 
of  the  Gothic  translation  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, under  more  recent  writing.  These 
are  called  Palimpsests  or  rescripts,  be- 
cause they  were  Trdkiii^ria-Toi,  cleaned 
again  (from  ttoKIv  a<jaiii,  and  ■(//•do)  to 
scour,  clean)  ;  that  is,  the  original  writ- 
ing was  washed  ott'  the  parchment,  that 
it  might  be  used  for  a  new  manuscript. 
The  first  writing  could  seldom  be  en- 
tii'ely  obliterated,  and  it  could,  there- 
fore, be  often  read  under,  and  on  the 
side  of  the  later  writing.  Facsimiles 
are  given  by  Cast.  Mai.  They  recovered 
under  other  writing,  not  only  this  8th 
verse  of  Matt,  v.,  but  other  parts  of 
Scripture,  see  note  on  Matt.  i.  2  1,  j).  570. 
— 13.  See  Lk.  xiv.  34  ;  Mk.  ix.  50  Mass. 
— 15.   Here   the   Codex  Arfrenteus  be- 


gins, and  continues  to  ch.  vi.  32,  where 
another  chasm  occurs  in  the  M.S.  in- 
dicated by  a  blank  space  in  the  Gothic 
column.  Ui)ps.  p.  2  and  4. — 15e.  The 
small  italic  letter  after  the  number  of 
the  verse,  indicates  the  word  referred  to 
in  the  verse.  The  first  word  of  the  verse 
is  denoted  by  a,  the  second  by  h,  and 
the  fifth  by  e.  Thus,  15e  denote  verse 
15,  and  e  the  fifth  word  of  that  verse, 
or  liuteij).  Arg.  has  liutci|),  evidently 
a  mistake  for  liuhtei]) ;  see  liuhtyai  iu 
the  next  verse. — 29?'.  Arg.  has  usstagg, 
but  it  ought  to  be  usstigg. — 43?;".  Arg. 
has  fiais  Hand  for  fiyais  fiyand. 

vi.  24y.  ^Mammonin — In  the  margin 
of  the  Codex  Argenteus,  against  this 
word,  Upps.  was  the  first  to  notice 
faihu|'ra[ina]  which  Junius  Glos.  says, 
"videtur  mihi  composita  ex  faihu  opes, 
divitice  ;  et  j^reihan  premere,  cojnprimere, 
elidere,  affligere  ;  propter  multiplices  il- 
las  curas,  quoe  acquirendas  acquisitasque 
opes  comitantur,"  p.  244,  Faihu J^raina 
is  from  Lk.  xvi.  9.  The  A.S.  translates 
SouXeueii/  fiancova  servire  mamonce,  by 
woruld-welan  worldly  weal. 

vii.  2 Be.  iS  in  Arg.  is  a  contrac- 
tion for  iSSnS.  Dr.  Marshall,  in 
the  Gothic  and  Anglo-Saxon  Gospels  of 
1665,  was  the  first  to  suggest  this  true 
reading,  in  a  note  on  Mt.  xi.  16,  p.  405. 
Dr.  Marshall's  suggestion  was  verified 
by  Cast.  Mai  in  18 19.  Esdras  ii.  36, 
where  the  word  was  first  found  written  in 

full:  thus  ns  rAK-^A  iGsnis 

us  garda  lesuis,  tw  oikw  ^Iriaoi  de  donio 
lesu.  They  then  add,  in  a  note,  "  Ita 
codex  explicatis  omnibus    litteris    IG- 

SniS,  quum  alibi  sit  iniS.  Ergo 
nunc  omnino  definitur  controversia  num 

legendum  sit  IGSHS  an  I^VlSHS, 
de  qua  jamjjridem  egerant  Ihreus  in. 
Ulphila  illustr.  ad  ]\Iarc.  i.  45.  Gordo- 
nus  in  specimine  animadv,  critic,  et 
Knittelius  in  Commentario  ad  Ulphil. 
jt.  321."  Ulphilo}  partium  ineditarum 
in  Ambrosianis  Palimpsestis  ah  Angelo 
Maio  repertarum  sjjecimen,  conjunctis 
curis   ejusdem  Maii   et  Caroli  Octavii 


572 


GOTHIC  NOTES.    [St.  Matt.  ix.l5.-JoHN  iii.  26. 


CastillioncBi  editum,  4to.  Mediolani 
1 8 19,  p.  2.  For  an  account  of  Palimp- 
sests, see  note  to  Mt.  v.  8. 

Matt.  ix.  \5t.  Ai-g.  atgagggand  for 
atgaggand. 

xi.  10 .  Arg.  has  meinna,  it  should  be 
meinana  meum,  to  agree  with  aggilu. — 
15c.  Fi'om  15c.  to  23^.  Arg.  is  almost 
illegible.  The  deficient  letters  and  words 
are  most  carefully  supplied  by  Upps. 
chiefly  from  the  other  Gospels,  so  as 
exactly  to  fill  the  same  spaces  in  the 
Oodex  Arg.  as  the  original  letters  and 
words  occupied  before  they  were  worn 
away  or  become  illegible.  With  the 
aid  of  a  good  magnifying  glass,  and  a 
clear  light,  which  the  constant  access  to 
the  Codex  enabled  Dr.  Uppstrom  to 
•choose,  the  distinct  outlines  and  ev^en 
faint  traces  of  letters  and  words  were 
discovered.  Guided  by  these,  and  the 
exact  spaces  to  be  filled  up  in  the  de- 
fective Codex,  there  can  be  little  doubt 
of  the  correct  restoration  of  the  deficient 
letters  and  words.  These,  in  our  Text, 
are  all  placed  within  brackets. 

XXV.  38-46.  From  Cast.  Mai,  p.  8, 
9  :  Arg.  p.  13  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p. 
I,  2. 

xxvi.  1-3,  65-69.  Cast.  Mai,  p.  10, 
II  :  Arg.  p.  14  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth. 
]).  2,  3. — 70-75.  Arg.  :  Upps.  p.  14  : 
Fi-ag.  p.  3,  4  :  Cast.  Mai,  p.  10-12. 

xxvii.  1.  Cast.  Mai,  p.  10-13  •  -^''g- 
p.  14  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  3,  4. — 51e. 
Arg.  diskritnoda  for  disskritnoda,  as  in 
the  last  word  of  this  verse. 


Mark  x.  39?/.  [daupyanda]  w.  in 
Arg.  an  evident  omission.  See  the  latter 
part  of  the  note  on  Jn.  x.  18. — 42/. 
[jjaiei]  w.  in  Arg.  See  last  note  and 
reference. 


liUke  vii.  32^.  Arg.  yan-ni  evidently 
for  yah-ni. 

ix.  50o.  Ni  ainshun  auk  "ist  manne, 
saei  ni  gawaurkyai  maht  in  namin  mein- 
amma,  Literally/  and  in  the  order  of  the 


tvords, — Nullus  etiam  est  hominum,  qui 
non  faciat  potentiam  [virtutem,  mira- 
cula]  in  nomine  meo.  This  passage  is 
not  found  in  the  Greek  MSS.  but  in 
some  Latin  versions.  It  is  in  the 
parallel  passage  of  St.  Mark  ix.  39, 
where  the  Vulgate  has  — "  Nemo  est 
enim,  qui  faciat  virtutem  in  nomine 
meo." 

xiv.  31?}*. — Gabelentz  and  Lobe,  p. 
133,  note  to  3iy,  assert  that — du  Avig- 
anna  of  Arg.  "  Sine  dubio  falsum,  pro 
du  wigana  ad  bellum,  qui  est  dativus 
vocis  wigans  helium."  Upps.  thinks 
the  reading  of  Arg.  may  be  retained  ; 
it  is,  therefore,  adopted  in  our  text. 
Though  his  remai-ks  are  too  long  for 
insertion,  we  give  the  following  quota- 
tion, and  refer  to  his  note  for  particu- 
lars. "  Quid  si  Codicis  lectio  ipsa  per 
se  proba  est,  dummodo  probe  explicetur? 
Nos  verbum  pro  verbo  reddiraus  :  aut 
quis  rex  iens  mere  contra  alium  regem 
ad  movendum  1.  quatiendum  1.  pellendum 
so.  eum,  nee.  1.  pro/ecto,  nonne  sedens 
antea  cogitat  .  .  .  .  %  Upps.  j).  74, 
note  on  line  6,  7. 

XV.  22i.  Arg.  bringi}),  for  briggi[>. — 
236.  Arg.  bringandans,  for  briggandans. 


John  i.  29a-j.  Taken  from  Skeir- 
eins,  4to.  p.  4,  line  3-6  ;  and  p.  37, 
line  14,  15  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  8vo.  p. 
15,10-13. 

iii  3a-m,  From  Skeireins,  p.  7,  20- 
25;  and  p.  39,  10-13:  Upps.  Frag. 
Goth.  p.  21,  4-10. — 4a-j9.  Skeir.  p.  8, 
11-17  ;  and  p.  39,  18-21  :  also  p.  8, 
25-p-  9>  7  ;  and  p.  40,  4-6  :  tJpps. 
Frag.  Goth.  p.  20,  2-8  :  also  p.  20, 
16-23. — Sa-g-.  Skeir.  p.  9,  16-22  ;  and 
p.  40,  II- 1 3  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  21, 
4-10. — 23a-^.  Skeir.  p.  11,  1-4  ;  and 
p.  41,  1-2  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  22, 
14-17. — 24a-A.  Skeir.  p.  1 1,  4-7  ;  and 
p.  41,  3-4  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  22, 
17-20. — 25ar-k.  Skeir.  p.  11,  24-25. 
and  p.  12,  1-3;  and  p.  41,  12-13: 
Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  23, 1 2-1 6. — 2Qa-r. 
Skeir.  p.  15,  10-17  ;  and  p.  43,  5-7  : 


St.  John  iii  29.-xviii.  37.]     GOTHIC  NOTES. 


573 


Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  26,  19-25.  &«. 
29a-e,  30a- f.  Skeir.  p.  15,  1-4  J  a"^^ 
43,  I,  2  :  Upps.  Frrtg.  Goth.  p.  26, 
10-13.— 31rt-/  Skeir.  p.  16,  20,  21; 
and  p.  43,  21  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  27, 
29-30.— 31^7-;.  Skeir.  p.  17.  16-17  ; 
and  44,  9  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  28, 
20,  21. — 3lk-m.  Skeir.  p.  17,  6;  and 
p.  44,  II  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  28,  23. 
— 32a-m.  Skeir.  p.  17,  20-24;  and 
p.  44,  1 1-14  :  Upps.  Frag.  Goth.  p.  28, 
24-28. 

V.  2la-o.    Skeir.  p.  20 ;    and  p.  45  : 
Upps.  Arg.  p.  19  ;  and  Frag.  Goth.  p. 
31,  2-7.— 22rt-A-.  Skeir.  p.  20;    and  p. 
45  :  Upps.  Arg.  p.  1 9  ;  and  Frag.  Goth. 
p.  31,  16-19. — 23a-g.  Skeir.  p.  21,  18 
-20;   and  p.  46  :    Upps.  Arg.  p.  19  J 
and  Frag.  Goth.  p.  32,  12-14.— 35ft-o. 
Skeir.  p.  23,  17-22  ;  and  p.  47  •  Upps. 
Arg.  p.  19  ;  and  Frag.  Goth.  P-  34.  ^9" 
20,  and  p.  35,  1-4. — 36a-dd.  Skeir.  p. 
23,  &c.  and  p.  47  '■   Upps.  Arg.  p.  19  5 
Frag.  Goth.  p.  35,  5-15-— 37a-'i.  Skeir. 
p.  25,  9-12  ;  and  p.  48  :  Upps.  Arg.  p. 
19;    and  Frag.  Goth.   p.  36,  16-19.— 
Slj-r.  Skeir.  p.  26  ;  and  p.  48  :  Upps. 
Arg.  p.  19  ;  and  Frag.  Goth.  p.  37,  12- 
14.— 38a-p.   Skeir.  p.   26,  7-12;    and 
p.  48:    Upps.  Arg.  p.  19;    and   Frag. 
Goth.  p.  37,   15-20.  — 45a-o.  With  a 
the  Codex  Arg.  begins  again,  and  is  per- 
fect to  ch.  viii,  except  the  omission  of 
V.  39  ch.  vi :  part  of  v.  29,  and  v.  53 
f\.  -vii. 


vii.  41t.    Arg.  has  distinctly  )>u,  for 
))au.  Upps.  p.  24,  line  11  in  the  note. 

X.  18/-L    Omitted  in  Arg.     There 
can  scarcely  be  any  doubt  as  to  the  re- 
stored passage,  within  brackets,   when 
it  is  seen  under  the  Greek,  and  between 
the  two  lines  now  in  Arg.  thus,— 
OvSeif  aipfi  avrfjv    an 
ffjov,  aX\'  e-yca  Tidrj^i  avrrju    drr 
(fiavTOv, 

Ni  whashun  nim|j  |)0  af 
[mis,  akei  ik  lagya  \)0  af] 
mis  silbin. 
Here  the  first  two  lines  of  the  Gothic- 
ending  with  ])0  af,  and  the  next  two  be- 
ginning with  mis,  the  eye  seems  to  have 
caught  the  lower  )jo  af,  and  then  to 
have  naturally  gone  on  to  mis  silbin,  in- 
stead of  mis,  akei  &c.  omitting  the  whole 
line  within  brackets.  Those,  Avho  have 
had  much  experience  in  copying  MSS. 
know  the  tendency  they  have  had  to- 
such  errors.  The  restored  line  was  first 
suggested  by  Dr.  Marshall  in  1665,  p> 
469,  approved  by  subsequent  editors, 
especially  by  Gab.  Lob.  and  adopted  by 
Upps.  Mass.  and  others. 

xi.  25no.  The  reading  of  Arg.  is 
that  given  in  the  text.  Upps.  defends 
it  in  a  long  note,  p.  31,  32.  — Mass. 
alters  the  text  to  ^auhyabai  gadau|>ni]>, 
in  Greek  kuv  uTroedinj,  and  the  Vulgate 
etiani  si  mortuus  fuit. 
I       xii.  la.  From  Arg.  fol.  75,  i. 

xviii.  311.  [qa])]  is  omitted  in  Arg. 


NOTES    ON 


THE  ANGLO-SAXON  VERSION. 


Title,  p.  2,  column  2. — Godspell  is 
derived  from  god  good,  and  spell  narra- 
tion, message,  tidings.  It  has  exactly 
the  same  meaning  as  the  Greek  €vay- 
ye'Kiov,  from  (V  well,  good,  and  dyytXkco 
to  bear  a  message,  to  bring  tidings  or 
news. 

The  Anglo-Saxon  Text  is  from  the 
MS.  in  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cam- 
bridge, No.  CXL.  of  Nasmith's  Catal. 
In  Wanley's  Catal.  p.  116,  col.  i,  the 
age  of  this  MS.  is  stated  to  be — "  Paulo 
ante  Conquisitionem  Anglise  descriptus." 
A  reference  is  made  to  it,  in  the  follow- 
ing notes,  by  B.,  Avhich  is  the  first 
letter  of  Bene't,  for  some  time  the 
•colloquial  name  of  Corpus  Christi  Col- 
lege. Some  readings  and  correct  in- 
flections of  words,  Avith  their  more  usual 
orthography,  have  been  taken  from  the 
invaluable  MS.  li.  2.  11,  in  the  Cam- 
bridge University  Library,  and  referred 
to  in  the  notes,  by  the  letter  C.  This 
Cambridge  MS.  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
Gospels  is  remarkable  for  its  adherence 
to  the  West-Saxon  grammatical  forms 
and  orthography.  Wanley,  in  p.  152, 
col.  I,  says  "  Circa  tempus  Conquisi- 
tionis  Anglife  scriptus."  It  is  supposed, 
however,  that  both  B  and  C  are  earlier 
than  the  dates  assigned  to  them  by 
Wanley  ;  probably  B  Avas  written  about 
A.D.  995.  The  Anglo-Saxon  rubrics,  in 
the  following  notes,  are  all  copied  from  C, 
and  compared  with  O,  the  Anglo-Saxon 
MS.  of  the  Gospels  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  Oxford,  No.  441.  The  Anglo- 
Saxon  Eubrics  do  not  exist  in  B  and  H. 
They  could  not  be  retained  in  the  body 
of  our  Anglo-Saxon  Text,  as  they  stand 


in  C,  without  deranging  the  parallel 
order  of  the  verses,  and  the  loss  of 
much  space.  An  obelisk  f  is,  therefore, 
placed  in  the  Text,  where  the  Rubrics 
begin,  referring  to  the  chapter  and  verse, 
where  they  will  be  found  in  the  following 
notes. 

Matt.  i.  18a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra}) 
on  myde-Avyntres  maesse-sefen.  C.  That 
is,  the  Rubric  of  the  Cambridge  MS.  li 
2.  II,  in  the  University  Library. — 25^. 
[od  daet]  from  Rushw. 

ii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  twelftan  dseg.  C. — 
lOA.  hig  C. — 13a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on 
cilda  [Ms.  cylda]  mtesse-dseg.  C. — 19a. 
Dys  sceal  on  twelftan  aefen.  C. 

iii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  W5dnes  dseg, 
on  dsere  J>ryddan  wucan  ser  Myddan 
wyntra.  C. — 13a.  Dys  sceal  on  Wodnes 
dseg  ofer  twelftan  dseg.  C. 

iv.  la.  Dis  Godspel  sceal  on  halgan 
dseg.  C. — 3e.  costnind  B.  for  costniend, 
or  for  costnigend  of  C. — 12a.  Dis  sceal 
on  Frige  dseg  ofer  twelftan  dseg.  C. — 
15a-?.  This  verse  is  from  the  Rushw. 
It  is  not  in  B.  C.  H.  O.  nor  in  the 
Royal  MS.  Brit.  Museum  L  A  XIV; 
but  it  is  found  in  the  Lindisfarne  MS. 
as  well  as  in  the  Rushworth. — 18a.  Dis 
Godspel  sceal  on  Andreas  msesse-dseg. 
C. — 23a.  Dis  sceal  on  Frige  dseg,  on 
daere  jjryddan  wucan  ofer  twelftan  dseg. 
C. 

V.  la.  Dis  Godspel  gebyi'a|)  to  ealra 
halgena  mressan.  C. — 4.  Tyndale  trans- 
lated from  the  Greek,  and  has  the  same 
order  of  the  verses,  as  our  English  ver- 
sion. The  Anglo-Saxon  and  Wycliife, 
foUoAving  the  Vulgate,  have  transposed 
the  verses  4  and  5.     The  verses  retain 


St.  Matt.  v.  4.-xvL  13.]     ANGLO-SAXON  NOTES. 


575 


the  orijjinal  order  of  each  version ;  but, 
for  facility  of  reference,  the  verses  are 
numbered  to  agree  with  Tyndale,  and 
our  authorised  version. — 46.  B.  has  synt 
from  V.  3  to  14,  and  in  most  other 
places,  but  synd  is  the  reguUir  form, 
and  it  is  adopted  from  C. — 17^.^  Dis 
Godspel  sceal  on  ttone  oderne  Wodnes 
d.-eg  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C.  —  20a.  Dis 
Godspel  sceal  on  done  feorl'an  Sunnan 
da>g  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C.  —  25a.  Dis 
Godspel  sceal  on  Wodnes  dtcg,  on  dajre 
})ryddan  wucan  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. — 
31rt.  Dis  sceal  on  "Wodnes  da:"?,  on  dsere 
XVI.  wucan  ofer  Pcntecosten,  C. — 38rt6. 
Ge  gehyrdon  C,  p.  15,  10  :  gehyrdon 
ge  B. — 42/.  wylle  C  :  omitted  by  B. 
and  Q. — 43(1.  Dis  sceal  on  Wodnes 
dtef,  on  doere  syxteo|)an  >vucan  ofer 
Pcntecosten  ;  and  on  Frige  dseg  innan 
daere  cys-wucan.  C. 

vi.  7/  nellon  C  :  nellen  0,  Rl  : 
uelle  B,  H.— Ila6.  Urne  ge  B,  0.— 
16«.  Dys  gebyra})  to  caput  jejunii  [capud 
ieiunii  MS.  p.  17.]  on  Wodnes  dseg.  C. 
— 24o.  Dys  sceal  on  done  syxteojian 
Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. 

vii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  done  feorjjan 
Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. — 7a. 
Dys  Godspel  sceal  to  Gang-dagon.  C. — 
15a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyrajj  on  dsere 
nygo))an  wucan  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. — 
28a.  Dys  sceal  on  done  jjryddan  Sun- 
nan dseg  ofer  Epiphanian.  C. 

viii.  Id.  H^lend  C  :  H^lnd  B.  — 
14a.  Dis  gebyrajj  on  Frige  dxg,  on 
dfere  twa  and  twentugo))an  wucan  ofer 
Pcntecosten.  C. — 19a.  Dis  sceal  on 
Wodnes  dasg,  on  dsere  feorjjan  wucan 
ofer  twelftan  dseg.  C. — 23a.  Dis  sceal 
on  done  feorjjan  Sunnan  dseg,  ofer  twelft- 
an dseg.  C. 

ix.  la.  Dis  G5dspel  sceal  on  Sun- 
nan dseg,  on  da?re  twentugojian  wucan 
ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. — 3abc.  Da  cwaidon 
sume.  C  :  Da  cwaedon  big.  B. — 9a.  Dis 
Godspel  sceal  on  See.  Matheus  msesse- 
tefen.  C— 14a.  Dis  sceal  on  Frige  dseg, 
on  dsere  odre  Easter-wucan.  C.  — 14/t. 
C  :  duss  B.  — 15ii-kk  on  dam  dagum 
from  Vetus  Italica. — lljj.  Dis  sceal  on 
Sunnan  dseg,  on  daere  fif  and  tweutugo- 


)>an  wucan  ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. — 18b. 
he  C  :  he  w.  B.— 25/t.  code  C.  p.  28, 
1 8,  O,  R 1 :  gcode  B,  H. — 27a.  Dis  sceal 
on  Wodnes  dajg,  on  dsere  xiii.  wucan 
ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. 

X.  16a.  Dis  Gcdspel  sceal  to  man- 
egra  Martyra  mivsse-dsege.  C. — 19cd. 
h?g  and  C  :  w.  B.— 26/  Dys  Godspel 
gebyraj)  to  anes  Confcssores  ma?sse-divge. 
C — 31i.  spcarwan  C:  spearuan  B. — 
37a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyraj)  to  anes  Mar- 
tyres  msesse-dsege.  C. 

xi,  2a.  Dys  gebyra])  on  dsere  seiran 
[arran  C]  wucan  36 r  Myda-wyntra.  C. — 
7v.  westen  C,  p.  35,  2  i  :  wesden  B.— 
20a.  Dys  G5dspel  gebyra))  on  Frige 
dfeo-,  on  dsere  ^ryttcojjan  A\nican  ofer 
Pcntecosten.  C.  —  25a.  Dys  sceal  on 
Wodnes  dajg,  on  dsere  syxtan  wucan 
ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. 

xii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  Frige  [Frvge 
C]  dseg,  on  dsere  eahto];an  Avucan  ofer 
Pcntecosten.  C.  —  14a.  Dys  sceal  on 
Wodnes  dseg,  on  dsere  xiiii.  wucan  ofer 
Pcntecosten.  C  — 22a.  Dys  sceal  on 
done  })ryddan  Sunnan  dseg  innan  Lenct. 
C._30a.  Dys  sceal  on  Wodnes  dseg, 
on  dtere  twelftan  wucan  ofer  Pcnte- 
costen. C.— 38a.  Dys  sceal  on  Wodnes 
dteo-,  on  dsere  forman  Lencten  wucan.  C. 
—tdk-q  taken  from  Mk.  iii.  34J-Q- 

xiii.  3m.  stedere  B,  0,  III  :  sawere 
C  :  sajwere  H.— 43Z--?-.  C,  0  :  w.  B,  H, 
p^l. — 44a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  to  Sea. 
Agnan  msessan.  C. 

xiv.  90,  &c.  w.  B,  C,  0,  H,  PL— 22a. 
Dys  Godspel  sceal  in  octabas  Petri  et 
Pauli.  C.—2ld.  and  the  clause  w.  B,  C, 
0,  H,  Rl. 

XV.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra])  on 
done  |)ryddan  Wodnes  da?g  innan  Lenct- 
ene.  C— 3/  cwiej)  C  :  w.  B,  O,  H,  Rl. 
—Sff.  w.  B,  C,  O,  H,  R  1.-150^  and 
cwiej)  C,  H  :  w.  B.  0,  RL— 19j.  stala  C  : 
stale  O,  B,  H  :  w.  Rl.— 21a.  Dys  God- 
spel gebyra))  on  done  forman  punrcs 
dteg  innan  Lenctene.  C.  —  32a.  Dys 
Godspel  gebyra))  on  dare  eahtoj)an  wucan 
ofer  Pcntecosten.  C. 

xvi.  la  Dys  sceal  on  W5dnes  dseg, 
on  d;vre  eahto))an  wucan  ofer  Pcntecost- 
en. C.— 13a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra))  on 


576 


ANGLO-SAXON"  NOTES.     [St.  Matt.  xvi.  14.-xxi.  8. 


Petres  msesse-dseg.  C.  —  14o.  wltegena 
Kl :  wytegena  C  :  witegyna  B,  O  :  wit- 
egan  H. — 24a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on 
See.  Laurentius  msesse-dseg.  C.  —  28a. 
Dys  sceal  on  Sseternes  dseg,  on  dsere 
forman  Lencten-wucan.  C. 

xvii.  10a.  Dys  sceal  on  Frige  dfeg, 
on  dsere  fiftan  wucan  ofer  Pentecosteii, 
C. — 14a.  Dys  sceal  on  Wodnes  dteg,  to 
dam  ffestene  ser  hserfestes  emnyhte.  C. 

xviii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  See.  Michaeles 
msesse-dseg.  C. — 107i.  and  the  clause  w. 
B,  C,  H,  0  and  RI. — 15a.  Dis  sceal  on 
Tiwes  dseg,  on  dsere  pryddan  Lencten 
wucan.  C. — 23a.  Dys  sceal  on  dsere 
xxiii.  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xix.  12n— w.  From  the  margin  of  C : 
w.  B,  H,  O  and  Rl. — 27a.  Dys  sceal  to 
See.  Paulus  mtesse-dsege ;  and  to  See. 
Benedictus.  C. 

XX.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  done  Sunnan 
dseg,  de  man  belycjj  Alleluia.  C.  p.  67, 
23.  See  Rubric  Mk.  iv.  36. — 9c.  de  C: 
dse  B  :  da  H. — 17a.  Dys  Godspel  ge- 
l)yra])  on  Wodnes  dseg,  on  dsere  odre 
Lencten-wucan.  C. — 21/1  du  C,  H  :  tu 
B. — 22m. — Tyndale  has  the  following 
clause  [x-ii] — and  to  be  baptised  with 
the  baptim  that  Y  shalbe  baptised  with, 
— because  it  is  in  Greek,  from  which 
Tyndale  translated.  It  is  omitted  by 
the  Vulgate,  and  therefore  by  WyclifFe, 
as  he  translated  from  the  Vulgate.  It 
is  also  w.  in  Anglo-Saxon. — 28.  Be- 
tween this  and  the  next  verse,  the  fol- 
lowing interpolation  occurs  in  B,  C,  H, 
O. — Ge  wylniaj)  to  gedeonne  on  ge- 
hwaedum  )>inge,  and  beon  gewanod  on 
dam  msestan  j)inge.  Witodlice,  donne 
ge  to  gereorde  geladode  beo}),  ne  sitte 
ge  on  dam  fyrmestan  setlum,  de-lses  de 
arwurdre  wer  sefter  de  cume,  and  se 
husbonda  hate  de  arisan  and  ryman 
dam  odrum,  and  du  beo  gescynd.  Gif 
du  sitst  on  gereorde,  on  dam  ytemestan 
setle  ;  and  sefter  de  cymjj  oder  gebeor, 
and  se  ladigenda  cwede  to  de, — Site 
innor,  leof :  donne  byj)  de  arwurdlicor 
donne  de  man  uttor  scufe.  That  is 
literally,  in  English, —  Ye  seek  to  become 
great  in  a  small  matter,  and  to  he 
minished  in  the  greatest  matter.     Verily, 


when  ye  shall  he  hidden  to  a  feast,  sit  ye 
not  in  the  first  seats,  lest  a  more  worthy 
onan  come  after  thee,  and  the  householder 
hid  thee  rise  and  make  room  for  the  other  y 
and  thou  he  put  to  shame.  If  thou  sittest 
at  a  feast,  in  the  outermost  seat;  and 
after  thee  cometh  another  guest,  and  the 
bidder  say  to  thee, — Friend,  sit  nearer  : 
then  shalt  thou  be  more  honourable  tlian 
the  man  put  into  the  outer  [seat].  The 
Avhole  of  this  parable,  except  the  first 
sentence,  will  be  found  in  ch.  xiv.  7-10 
of  St.  Luke.  Junius  and  MarshalVs 
Evan.  Goth,  et  A.  S.  p.  496.  This  in- 
terpolation is  not  contained  in  the  Vul- 
gate, but  it  is  found  entire  in  the  MS. 
of  the  Gospels,  which  Gregory  the  Great 
sent  into  England  by  St.  Augustine  in 
the  sixth  century.  From  that  time  to 
the  Reformation  it  Avas  carefully  pre- 
served in  the  Bibliotheca  Gregoriana  in 
St.  Augustine's  Abbey,  at  Canterbury. 
At  the  dissolution  of  religious  houses, 
it  came  first  into  the  hands  of  Lord 
Hatton,  then  of  Sir  Robert  Cotton,  of 
Cunington,  Huntingdonshire,  where  it 
was  in  1602;  as  the  latter  name,  place, 
and  date  are  written  on  the  MS.  It 
afterwards  found  its  way  into  the 
Bodleian  Library,  where  this  great 
treasure  is  still  kept  with  the  utmost 
care.  I  am  indebted  to  Geo.  Waring, 
Esq.,  M.A.,  for  the  following  verbatim 
copy  of  this  interpolation,  taken  from 
the  Bodleian  MS.  Codex  August.  857 
D.  2.  14.  "  Vos  autem  quseritis  de 
modico  crescere,  et  de  maximo  minui. 
Cum  autem  introeritis  ad  cenam  vocati, 
nolite  recumbere  in  superioribus  locis, 
ne  forte  dignior  te  superveniat,  et  ac- 
cedens  is  qui  te  invitavit,  dicat  tibi, — 
Adhuc  iufex'ius  accede,  et  confundaris. 
Si  autem  recubueris  in  inferiori  loco  ; 
et  advenerit  humilior  te,  dicet  tibi  qui 
te  invitavit, — Accede  adhuc  superius  ; 
et  erit  tibi  hoc  utilius."  Fol.  23,  col.  i. — 
29a.  Dys  sceal  on  Sseternes  dseg,  on 
dsere  Pentecostenes  wucan  to  dam  Ymb- 
rene.  C. 

xxi.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  dsere  feorjjan 
wucan,  serMydda-wyntra.C. — 8/:>.streow- 
edon  C.  p.  72,  i  :  streoweden  H  :  strew- 


St.  Matt.  xxi.  16.-St.  M auk  x.  17.]     ANGLO-SAXON  NOT  KS. 


odun  B  :  strcwodon  0 :  strcwcdon  HI. 
— 16 u'.  sacerclii  B,  C,  H,  O,  and  other 
^IS.  evidently  an  error  of  the  seribcs 
for  sucendru,  v.  Ps.  8,  3,  where  Spclman 
has  siicengra. — 23a.  Dys  seeal  on  Wod- 
iies  divg,  on  (here  fiftiin  wucan  ofer 
Pentecosten.  C— 31^.  ivftera  K  C  :  }ldra 
as  in  V.  28. — 33f/.  Dys  seeal  on  tlan-e 
I'clre  wucan  innan  Lenctene,  on  Frige 
dreg.  C. 

xxii.  8^-.  gearwe  C  p.  76,  13  and 
O  :  gearewe  H  :  earwe  B. — 15a.  Dis 
Godspel  seeal  on  xxiii.  wuean  ofer  Pen- 
tecosten. This  rnbric  is  written  in  a 
recent  hand,  on  the  margin  of  C.  p.  77, 
and  followed,  in  the  same  hand,  by 
Abeuntes  pharisei  consilium  inicrunt,  ut 
caperent  Jesum  in  sernione. — 34a.  Dys 
seeal  on  dasre  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 
xxiii.  5m.  heals-bec  O  :  heals-boec 
B  :  hals-bfec  C  :  hals-bec  H. — 13a.  Dys 
seeal  on  Frige  da\g,  on  cttere  nygej'an 
wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. — 14.  This 
verse  is  w.  in  A,  S.  and  in  Codex  Au- 
gustinius,  Bod.  857.  D.  2.  14.  fol.  27, 
col.  2,  but  it  is  in  the  Vulgate  ;  another 
proof  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  Vei'sion  was 
not  made  from  the  Vulgate,  and  that 
the  Codex  Angustin.  which  Gregory  the 
Great  sent  to  England  was  not  the 
correct  Vulgate  version  of  St.  Jerome, 
but  one  of  the  old  Italic  versions. — 
See  Note  to  ch.  xx.  28.  —  34a.  Dys 
Godspel  seeal  on  See  Stefanes  ma?sse- 
dseg.  C.  —  376  and  d.  Jerusalem  H  : 
Gerusalem  B. 

xxiv.  305.  cumendne  B,  E,  1  :  cum- 
ende  C,  H :  cumyndue  O. —  30 y.  genypon 
C.  p.  85,  II  :  genipod  B,  O. — 39c.  nyst- 
on  C.  p.  86,  5  :  nystan  Rl:  nj'sten  H  : 
nys})on  B,  O. — 42a.  Dys  G5dspel  seeal 
to  mseniges  [msenies  !MS.]  Confessores 
msesse-dsege.  C. — 43w.  gejuifigan  0  :  ge- 
jjafiau  C,  H  :  gejjafigen  B. — 46a.  eadig 
C,  II  :  cadi  B. 

XXV.  la.  Dys  seeal  to  haligra  fsemnena 
mfesse-dsege.  C. — 14a.  Dys  Godspel  ge- 
b}Ta|i  on  See.  Syluestresmtesse-(!sege,and 
to  odra  Confessores.  C. — 31a.  Dys  seeal 
on  !M6nan  dseg,  on  forman  f?esten-dajg. 
C. — 34a.  Donne  cwi])  se  cyning  to  dam 
de  on  hys  swidran  healfe  beoj).  C.  p.  91, 


^/7 

I,  in  a  small  and  later  hand,  at  the  top 
of  the  page.  H  has  Da  saxle  se  kyng  to 
dan  de  on  his  swidren  waren.  In  B  and 
O  \Y.—39a-/.  C  p.  90,  12  :  w.  B.  0. 

xxvi.  2a.  Des  Passio  seeal  on  Palm- 
Sunuan  dajg.  C. 

xxviii.  la.  Dys  seeal  on  Easter- 
sefen.  C. — 8a.  Dis  seeal  on  Frige  dseg, 
on  dicre  odre  Easter-wucan.  C.  —  lea. 
Dis  seeal  on  Fri^c  disv:,  innan  diere 
Easter-wucan.  C. 

C  has  the  following  note  after  20W. — 
Finit  Amen.  Sit  sic  hoc  hie  interim. 
Ego,  /Elfricus,  scripsi  hunc  librum  in 
Monasterio  Badjionio,  et  dedi  Briht- 
woldo  Preposito.  Qui  scrlpsit  uiuat  in 
pace,  in  hoc  mundo  et  in  futuro  seeulo, 
et  qui  legit  legator  in  eternum.  C.  p.  88. 


Mark  i.  40a.  Dys  seeal  on  "Wodnes 
dseg,  on  dsere  fiftcojjan  Avucan  ofer  Pente- 
costen. C. 

iv.  36.  Dis  sccal  on  dtere  wucau 
aefter  dam  de  man  belyel?  Alleluia.  C. 
p.  116,  4  ;  See  Rubric  Mt.  xx.  la. 

V.  la.  Dis  sccal  on  Frige  dteg,  on 
doere  seofej'an  Avucan  ofer  Pentecosten. 
C. 

vi.  17a.  Dys  G'dspel  seeal  innan 
hrerefcste  to  See.  lohanncs  ma^ssan.  C. — 
45a.  Dis  seeal  on  Sa^terues  dseg  ser 
halgan  daege.  C. 

vii.  la.  Dys  seeal  on  Wodnes  dajg, 
on  dtere  Jjryddan  Lcncten-wucan.  C. — 
31a.  Dis  Godspel  seeal  on  daere  Jji'yt- 
teojjan  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

viii.  la.  Dis  Godspel  gebyraj)  on 
dasre  ehtojian  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten. 
C. — 27a.  Dys  Godspel  seeal  on  See. 
Petres  majsse-da;ge.  C. 

ix.  2a.  Dis  seeal  on  Sajtern-da^g, 
on  dicre  forman  fa'sten-wucan.  C. — 17a. 
Dis  seeal  to  dam  Ymb-rene  innan  luere- 
feste,  on  AVodncs  daeg.  C. — 38a.  Dis 
seeal  on  Wodnes  da3g,  on  dtere  nygo])an 
wuean  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

X.  13a.  Dys  seeal  on  Frige  da;g,  on 

da;re  syxtan  wuean  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

— 17a.    Dis  seeal  on  Wodnes  dseg,  on 

dajre  seofejjan  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten. 

pp 


578 


ANGLO-SAXON  NOTES.     [St.  Mark  x.  4e.-ST.  Luke  xv.  11. 


C. — 4:6a.  Dys  gebyra[)  ou  Sunnan  dssg 
jEV  halgan  dsege.  C. 

xi.  la.  Dys  gebyra})  feower  wucon 
Ki-Myddan  wintran.  C. — Sj.  Tlie  MSS. 
have  boceras,  an  error  of  the  scribes  for 
bogas. — 11a.  Dis  sceal  on  clone  feorjjan 
Frige  dfeg  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xii.  13a.  Dys  sceal  on  disre  xxiiii. 
wncan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. — 28a.  Dys 
Godspel  sceal  on  Frige  dseg,  on  dsere 
twelftan  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xiv.  la.  Des  Passio  gebyraf)  on  Tiwes 
da?g,  on  dsere  Palm-wucan.  C. 

XV.  40r-v.  From  C.  p.  1 6 1,  i  i/-t  2a. 
■ — 47a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra)>  on  Easter- 
dseg.  C. 

xvi.  9a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyrajj  on 
Wodnes  dseg,  on  dsere  odre  [odere  MS.] 
Easter-wucan.  C. — 14a.  Dis  sceal  on 
punres  da3g,  innan  dsere  Gang- wucan. 


Luke  i.  la.  Dis  Godspel  gebyraj)  on 
Midde-sumeres  msesse-sefen.  C. —  26a. 
Dis  sceal  on  Wodnes  dseg,  to  dam  Ymb- 
rene  eer  Mydda-wyntran.  C. — 39a.  Dis 
gebyra)>  on  Frige  dseg  to  dam  ylcan  fses- 
tene.  C. — 56a.  Dis  gebyra})  on  Myd- 
sumeres  msesse-dseg.  C. 

ii.  la.  Dis  sceal  on  Mydde-wyntres 
mjesse-nyht,  to  dsere  forman  rasessan.  C. 
• — 21a.  Dis  sceal  on  done  ebtojjan  msesse- 
dseg  to  Myddan  wyntra.  C  — 33a.  Dis 
sceal  on  done  Sunnan  dseg,  betweox 
Mydde-wintres  msesse-dsege,  and  twelftan 
dsege.  C. 

iii.  la.  Dis  gebyra])  on  Ssetern-dseg, 
to  sew-fsestene,  ser  Myddan  wyntra.  C. — 
23t~x.  Helies  .  .  .  se  wses  Nazareth.  The 
scribe,  in  abriqDtly  breaking  off  the  gene- 
alogy, may  have  confounded  Helies  with 
Hselend,  and  have  added,  se  wses  Naza- 
reth, from  a  natural  association  of  the  Sa- 
viour's name  with  his  residence  at  Naza- 
reth, Mt.  xxi,  II. — As  to  the  number  of 
generations,  Beza  observes,  in  a  note  on 
this  passage,  In  vetustissimo  Latino  co- 
dice  lego, — "  Generationes  septuaginta 
quinque."  Marshall,  p.  503. 

iv.  38a.  Dis  sceal  on  done  ])ryddan 


punres  dseg  innan  Lenctene,  and  to 
Pentecosten  on  Sa?ternes  dseg.  C. 

V.  la.  Dis  sceal  on  done  syxtan 
Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. — 17a. 
Dis  sceal  on  Frige  dseg,  on  dsere  Pente- 
costenes  wucan.  C. 

vi.  36a.  Dis  gebyra])  on  done  fiftan 
Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

vii.  11a.  Dys  sceal  on  done  seofen- 
teo))an  Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pentcosten.  C. 
— 24p.  hwig  C,  p.  190,  II. — 25v-z.  See 
Marshall. — 36a.  Dis  Godspel  sceal  to 
dam  Ymb-rene  innan  hserfeste  on  Frige 
dseg.  C. 

viii.  40a.  Dis  sceal  on  Frige  dseg, 
on  dsere  Pentecostenes  wucan,  to  dam 
Ymb-i-ene.  C. — 4i9q-t.  See  Marshall. 

ix.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  punres  dseg,  on 
dsere  Pentecostenes  wucan.  C. — 12a. 
Dis  sceal  on  Wodnes  dseg,  on  dsere 
Pentecostenes  wucan,  to  dam  Ymb- 
rene.  C. 

X.  la.  Dis  Godspel  sceal  to  anes 
Apostoles  msessan.  C. — 23a.  Dis  sceal 
on  dsere  feowerteojian  wucan  ofer  Pente- 
costen. C. — 38a.  Dis  sceal  to  Assump- 
tione  See.  Marie,  and  Ssetern-dagum  be 
Maria.  C. 

xi.  5/.  Dis  sceal  to  Gang-dagon 
dsege  twegen  dagas.  C,  p.  208,  6. — 14a. 
Dis  Godspel  gebyra))  ou  done  |)ryddan 
Sunnan  dseg  innan  Lenctene.  C. — 37a. 
Dis  Godspel  gebyra))  on  Frige  dseg,  on 
dsere  teo])an  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xii.  11a.  Dis  sceal  on  Frige  dseg 
ofer  Pentecosten.  C. — 35a.  Dis  Godspel 
gebyra))  to  mseniges  Confessores  msesse- 
dsege.  C. 

xiii.  6a.  Dis  Godspel  sceal  to  dam 
Ymb-rene  innan  hserefeste  on  Ssetern- 
dseg.  C. 

xiv.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra))  on 
dsere  nygonteo))an  Avucan  ofer  Pente- 
costen. C — 16a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra)) 
on  done  ))ryddan  Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pen- 
tecosten. C. — 25a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal 
to  Scs.  Hermetis  and  to  Scs.  Agustinus 
msessan.  C, 

XV.  la.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  done 
feor))an  Sunnan  dseg  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 
— 11a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra))  on  Sseternes 
dseg,  on  dsere  odre  Lencten-wucan.  C. 


St.  Luke  xvi.  1.-St.  John  x.  11.]    ANGLO-SAXON  NOTES. 


571> 


xvi.  la.  Dys  Godspel  p;ebyra)>  on 
dsere  teoJ)aii  wucan  ofcr  Pentecosten.  C. 
— lOrt.  Dys  gebyrnj)  on  Wodncs  dseg 
on  tta?re  teol'au  wucan  [ucan  MS.]  ofer 
Pentecosten.  C. — 19rt.  Dis  Godspel  gc- 
byi'aj)  on  Ctone  oderne  Suunan  da^g  ofer 
Pentecosten.  C. 

xvii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra)>  on 
done  oderne  Frige  da^g  ofcr  Pentecosten. 
C — 11a.  Dys  gebyra|>  on  da>re  syxteoj^an 
Nvucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xviii.  10a.  Dys  gebjTal'  on  da?re 
endlyftan  wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xix.  12a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  See. 
Grcgorius  ma^sse-dteg.  C.  —  29a.  Dys 
gebyraji  feower  wucan  ser^Iiddan  wyntra, 
and  on  Pahn-Sunnan-da-g.  C. — 41a.  Dys 
Gcdspel  gebyrajj  on  dtere  endlyftan 
wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

XX.  27a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on 
Wodncs  d£eg  ofer  Pentecosten.  C. 

xxi.  12^-.  The  ^MSS.  liave  syddan, 
an  evident  error  for  syllan  ;  sylla}>  is, 
therefore,  adopted  from  Mk.  xiii.  p. — 
20a.  Dys  Godspell  gebyraj'  on  Wodncs 
da'g  on  drere  xi.  wucan  [ucan  MS.]  ofer 
Pentecosten.  C.  Godspell,  in  this  Ru- 
bric, is  written  over  the  line  in  a  much 
smaller  hand. — 34a.  Dys  Godspel  ge- 
byrajj on  Frige  dreg,  on  dsere  endleftan 
wucan  ofer  Pentecosten.  C.  The  words 
g—j  in  this  Rubric  are  ^vl•itten  above  the 
line  in  a  much  smaller  hand. 

xxii.  la.  Dcs  Passio  gebyraj?  on 
Wodnes  daeg,  on  dsere  Palm-wucan.  C. 

xxiv.  13a.  Dys  gebyrajj  on  oderne 
Easter-daeg.  C. — 36a.  Dys  gebyrajj  on 
jjryddan  Easter-da-g.  C. 


John  i.  lab.  On  fruman,  C,  0  :  On 
frymj'c,  B :  On  anginne  aerest.  H.  2cd.  on 
fruman.  Cot. — 15a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyrajj 
jnym  wucon  aer  Myddan-wyntran,  on 
done  Frige  dseg.  C. — 19/  Dys  gebyrajj 
on  done  Sunnan  da3g  ser  ^lyddan-wyn- 
tra.  C. — 29a.  Dys  gebyraj)  on  done  viii 
dteg  Godes  a-t-ywednysse.  C. — 35a.  Dys 
sceal  on  See.  Andreas  maesse-iefen.  C. 

ii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  Sunnan 
daeg,  dsere  odre  wucar  ofer  Epipbania 


Domini.  C. — 12a.  Dys  Godspel  gcbyra|» 
on  dierc  feorjjan  wucan  innan  [ynnan 
MS.  p.  268,  17],  Lengtene,  on  Monau 
da;g.  0. 

iii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  man  sceal  ra-d- 
an  ofcr  Eastron,  be  dajre  rode,  and  eft 
ofer  Pentecosten,  on  done  forman  Sun- 
nan dreg.  C. — 16a.  Dys  sceal  on  oderne 
Pentccostenes  mresse-dreg.  C. — 25a.  Dys 
sceal  on  Wodnes  dreg,  on  drerc  jiryddan 
Avucan  ofcr  Eastron.  C. 

iv.  6e.  Dys  sceal  on  Frige  dreg,  on 
drere  iii.  Lcngtcn-wucan.  C. — 46o.  Dys 
Godspel  gebyrajj  ofer  Pentecosten,  on 
drere  an  and  twentygojjan  wucan  on 
Sunnan  dreg.  C. 

V.  la.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  Frige 
dreg,  on  drere  forman  Lengten-wucan.  C. 
— 17a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  punres  dreg, 
on  drere  feorjjan  Lencten-wucan.  C. — 
30a.  Dys  sceal  on  purs  dreg,  on  drere 
odre  Lencten-wucan.  C. 

vi.  la.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  Myd- 
lenctenes  Sunnan  dreg.  C.  —  27a.  Dys 
sceal  on  Frige  dreg,  on  drere  forman 
wucan  refter  Epipbania  Domini.  C. — 
44a.  Dys  sceal  on  Wodnes  dreg,  on  drere 
Pentccostenes  Avucan.  C. — 53^.  Dys  sceal 
anum  drege  ser  Palm-sunnan-dregc.  C. 

vii.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  Tywes  dreg,  on 
drere  fiftan  wucan  innan  Lengtene.  C. — 
14a.  Dys  sceal  on  Myd-lengtenes  wucan, 
on  Tywes  dreg.  C. — 32^.  Dys  sceal  on 
Monan  dreg,  on  drere  fyftan  wucan  in- 
nan Lenctene.  C. — 40a.  Dys  Godspel 
sceal  on  punres  [pures  MS.]  dreg,  on 
drere  fiftan  wucan  innan  Lenctene.  C. 

viii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyrajj  anum 
drege  ser  Myd-frestene.  C.  —  12a.  Dys 
Godspel  sceal  on  drere  Myd-frestenes 
wucan,  on  Sreterncs  dreg  C. — 21/i.  Dys 
G6ds])el  sceal  on  Monan  dreg,  on  drere 
odre  Lencten-wucan.  C. — 31a.  Dys  sceal 
on  punres  dreg,  on  drere  forman  Lengten- 
wucan.  C. — 4t3ff-n.  Taken  from  O  :  w. 
in  ]}  and  C. — 46a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyrajj 
on  Sunnan  dreg,  on  drerc  fiftan  wucan 
innan  Lenctene.  C. 

ix.    la.     Dys    Godspel    gebyrajj    on 

Wodnes  dreg,  on  Myd-frestenes  wucan.  C. 

X.  la. — i3ys  sceal  on  Tywes  dreg,  on 

daere  Pentccostenes  wucan.  C. — 11a.  Dys 

p  p  2 


580 


ANGLO-SAXON  NOTES.       St.  John  x.  15.-xxi.  19. 


sceal  on  Siinnan  dseg,  feowertyne  nylit 
uppan  Eastron.  C. — 15j-r.  Copied  from 
the  left  margin  of  C,  p.  302,  opposite 
the  II  and  12th  line. — 22a.  Dys  sceal 
on  Wodnes  dseg,  innon  dfere  fiftan  Lenc- 
ten-wucan  ;  and  to  Cyric-halgungum.  C. 

xi.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  Fryge  dseg,  on 
Myd-f;estenes  wucan.  C. — 47a.  Dys  sceal 
twam  dagum  ser  Palm-sunnan  dtege.  C. 

xii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  Monan 
dseg,  innan  cltere  Palm-wucan.  C. — 24a. 
Dys  sceal  on  Tywes  dteg,  on  dsere  Palm- 
wuca".  C. 

xiii.  la.  Dys  gebyraj)  on  punres  dseg 
Eer  Eastron.  C. — 14/-'y.  Omitted  by  B, 
inserted  here  from  C,  p.  315,  6-8. — 
33a.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra]?  on  Fryge 
dfeg,  on  dtere  feorj^an  wucan  ofer  East- 
ron. C. 

xiv.  la.  Dys  G5dspel  gebyraj?  to 
dsere  msessan  Philyppi  and  lacobi.  C. — 
15  a.  Dys  sceal  on  Pentecostenes  ma'sse- 
sefen.  C. — 23A.  Dys  Gudspel  sceal  on 
Pentecostenes  mpesse-dteg.  C. 

XV.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyra]?  to  See. 
Uitalis  msessan.  C. — 7a.  Dys  Godspel 
sceal  on  Wodnes  dpeg  ofer  Ascensio 
Domini.  C. — 12a.  Dys  gebyraj)  to  clsera 
Apostola  msesse-dagon.  C. — 17a.  And 
dys  gebyrajj  to  drera  Apostola  m»sse- 
dagon.  C. — 26a.  Dys  gebyra]'  on  Sun- 
nan  diBg,  ofer  Ascensio  Domini.  C. 

xvi.  5a.  Dys  Godspel  sceal  on  Sun- 
nan  d.'eg,  on  daere  feor})an  wucan  [ucan 
MS.]  ofer  Eastron.  C. — 16a.  Dys  God- 
spel gebyraj)  ofer  Eastron,  twa  wucan, 
on  Sunnan  dseg.  C. — 23^.  Dys  Godspel 
sceal  on  done  feorjan  Sunnan  dseg  ofer 
Eastron.  C. 

xvii.  la.  Dys  Godspel  gebyraj)  on 
Wodnes  iJieg,  on  d;ere  Gang-wucan  to 
dam  uigilian.  C. — lOc-e.  From  C,  p.  327, 


1^-20  :  B,  O  have  \>'me  synt  mine. — lie. 
C  has  com,  p.  327,  3  :  B,  O  com. — II9. 
Dys  Godspel  gebyraj)  on  Wodnes  dseg, 
on  di-iere  feorjian  Avucan  ofer  Eastron.  C. 
— llr.  On  dsere  tide  se  Hstlend  beheold 
hys  leorning-cnihtas,  and  cwsej)  : — This 
is  not  in  the  Greek  Text,  nor  in  the 
Vulgate  of  Jerome  :  it  is  an  addition  of 
the  Anglo-Saxon  translator,  and  pre- 
cedes Halega,  in  C,  p.  327,  8a-gb  ;  also 
in  B,  H  and  O. — Uhh.  Literally,  tJiat 
they  may  be  one,  as  [wyt]  we  two  are 
one.  The  Greek  has  KaBoi^  i]y.eh  :  the 
Vulgate  sicut  et  nos.  Tlie  Gothic  is 
swaswe  wit  as  we  two.  Though  Greek 
has  the  dual  vco'i  ive  two,  it  is  not  here 
used.  The  Gothic  and  Anglo-Saxon 
give  tlie  sense  most  minutely  and 
clearly. 

xviii.  la.  Des  Passio  gebyraj)  on 
Langa-frige-dsgg.  C 

xis.  37a-e.  Written  between  the 
lines  II  and  12  of  C,  p.  336.  In  the 
same  verse  over  on-fsestnodon,  is  written, 
in  the  same  hand  as  a-e,  sticodou  stuck, 
pierced. — 386c.  Written  also  in  the  same 
hand  between  the  lines  1 2  and  13  of  C, 

P-  336. 

XX.  la.  Dys  sceal  on  Sa?terncs  dfeg, 
on  dsere  Easter-wucan.  C. — 11a.  Dis 
Godspel  gebyraj)  on  punres  dseg,  innan 
dsere  Easter-wucan  [ucan  M8.].  C. — 
19a.  Dis  Godspel  gebyraj)  seofon  nyht 
ofer  Eastron.  C. 

xxi.  la.  Dis  Godspel  gebyraj)  on 
Wodnes  dseg,  innan  dsere  Easter-wucan 
[ucan  MS.].  C.—15d.  Dis  Godspell  ge- 
byraj) on  Petres  msesse-^fen.  C. — 19???. 
Dys  Godspel  gebyraj?  on  See.  lohanuis 
Euangelista  [euuangelista  MS.  j).  342] 
msesse-dseff.  C. 


NOTES    ON 


WYCLIFFE'S    TRANSLATIOX. 


The  text  of  WycHffe  lias  been  taken 
from  the  first  version,  <i;iven  in  the  4to. 
Edition,  published  at  Oxford  in  1850, 
printed  at  the  University  Press,  under 

'^  the  editorial  care  of  Sir  Frederic  Gladden 
and  the  Eev.  Josiah  Forshall,  collated 
with  the  oi-iginal  MS.  N".  369  of  the 
Douce  Collection  in  the  Bodleian 
Library. 

1  The  following  words  in  Italic  are  in 
the  body  of  the  page  of  "Wyclifte's  trans- 
lation. They  are,  like  our  marginal 
readings,  explanatory  of  words,  which 
seemed  to  require  elucidation.     In  the 

'  Douce  MS.  they  are  written  in  letters 
of  the  same  form  as  the  other  part  of 
the  text ;  but,  for  distinction,  a  red  line 
is  drawn  under  them.  For  the  same 
purpose,  Sir  Frederic  ]Madden  and  Mr. 
Forshall  have  printed  them  in  the  Italic 
character.  In  their  text  of  Matt.  i.  26. 
after  gendride,  we  find  in  Italic  or  higate. 
— and  in  v.  22aa.  Eacha,  that  is,  a  word 
of  scorn. — vi.  13m.  Amen,  that  is,  so  be 
it. — X.  396.  his  soule,  that  is,  temporal 
lyf.  Though  these  explanatory  words 
could  not  be  entirely  excluded,  as  they 
belong  to  the  translation  ;  yet,  if  left  in 
the  text,  they  would  have  expanded  it 
too  much  to  harmonise  with  the  other 
versions.  A  small  obelisk  or  dagger  is, 
therefore,  placed  in  the  text,  where  such 
Italic  words  occur.  All  these  explana- 
tory words  are  given  in  the  following 
notes,  in  the  Italic  character. 

Matt.  i.  26.  or  hifjate. — \Qi.  or  ri^t- 
ful. — 19m.  or  lede  hirferther. — 20«.  or 
sweuen. — 23iv.  or  expound. 

ii.  Iq.  or  wijs  men.  — 16^.  or  dis- 
ceyued. 


ill.  2h.  or  cume  ni'^e. — 11/7!  or  crist- 
en. — 12t'.  or  fan. — 12ec.  or  that  neuer 
shal  he  quenchid. — 15  v.  or  left  hym. 

iv.  21aa.  or  heetijnge. — 23w.  or  ache. 
— 24c.  or  fame. 

V.  4.  Wycliffe,  following  the  Vul- 
gate, places  verse  5  before  4. — 17c.  or 
deme. — 17/i.  or  distruye. — 18m.  that  is, 
leste  lettre. — \Qd.  or  breketh. — 22ao.  that 
is,  a  ivord  of  scorn. — 22^(.  that  is,  a 
word  of  dispisynge. — 24«.  or  acordid. 
— Sl^:*.  that  is,  a  litil  boke  offoi'sakyng. 
— 47f/.  or  saluten. 

vi.  13m.  that  is,  so  be  it.  The  Dox- 
ology  is  omitted  by  AVyclifie,  and  the 
Anglo-Saxon,  because  it  Avas  not  in  the 
Vulgate. — 20t.  or  undirmyne  nat. 

vii.  3/  or  a  litil  mote. — 6^.  or  pre- 
ciouse  stoonys. — 13  m.  or  dampnacioun. 
— 26y.  or  soond. 

viii.  19c.  or  a  man  of  laice. — 20/i. 
or  borowis. — 28cc.  or  wickid. — 30c.  or 
drone. 

ix.  15^-.  or  hvsbonde.  —  15m.  or 
mourne. — 16i.  or  neive. — Hi.  or  wijn 
vesselis. — 20A.  or  rennynge. — 28yy.  or 
^ea. — 35^y.  or  ache. 

X.  12i.  or  salute  ^ee. — 14^.  or  citee. 
— 16^.  or  wijse  bifore. — 18c.  or  meyris. 
— 19e.  or  bitraie. — 25;s.  or  thefadir  oj 
meynee. — 26j.  or  hid. — 39e.  that  is, 
temporal  lyf. — 39?i.  that  is,  11  f 

xi.  5z.  or  ben  maad  keepers  of  the 
gospel. — 12o.  or  violence. — 19o.  or  glot- 
oun. — 22^,  24o.  or  lesse  peyne. — 25hb. 
or  sice-!,  men. — 28n.  or  fulfille. — 30e.  or 
snfte. — 30i.  or  eisy. 

xii.  An.  or  pultynne  forth. — \Ql.  or 
knoioen. —  25q.  or  discounfortid. — 27^. 
or  wJios  mi^t. — 2Qu.  or  amonge  ^ou. 


582 


NOTES  ON  WYCLIFFE.     St.  Matt.  xiii.  6.-St.  Mark  x.  14. 


xiii.  6g.  or  hrenden  for  hete. — llq. 
or  2Jriuyte. — 2,\l.  that  is,  it  lastith  hot  a 
litil  tyme. — 2,5k,  2Ql,  2766.  or  cokil. — 
29i.  or  coclis.  —  30^.  or  cockilis.  — 
^Ogg.  or  smale  hundelis.  —  32n.  or 
hraunchis. — 35v/.  or  telle  oute. — 36a;.  or 
cokelis.  — 38^.  or  cocklis. — 55i.  or  car- 
penter. 

xiv.  le.  that  is,  prince  of  thefourthe 
part. —  Qcl.  or  warnyd. — 22f?.  or  cora- 
aundide. 

XV.  2c?.  or  hreken. — 2f.  oi  statutis. 
— 6r.  or  idyl. 

xvi.  Sj.  or  sorwful. — Ylk.  that  is, 
the  sone  of  culuer. — 18aa.  or  strengthe. 
■ — 23s.  or  vndirstondist  not. — 25A;  and 
25r.  that  is,  his  lyf 

xvii.  2c.  or  turnyd  into  an  other 
lickenesse. — 17 g.  or  out  of  the  feith. — 
25ee.  or  rent. — 2hll.  or  other  mennys 
sones. — 2nff.  that  is,  a  certeyn  ofmoneye. 

xviii.  15m.  or  snyhhe. — 27;.  or  suf 
Jride  hym. 

xix.  3t.  or  forsaJce. — Bq.  or  drawe. 
— Qt.  or  knytte  to  gidre. — 24i.  or  eysier. 
— 28'z;.  or  gendrynge  a-^ein. — 28nn.  or 


XX.  lo.  or  hy  the  morwe. — 9 p.  that 
is,  euery  man  oo  peny. — 22^'.  or  shulen 
axe. — 28s.  or  lif 

xxi.  5n.  or  meke.  —  Ql.  that  is,  I 
jyreie,  saue.- — 16s.  tJtat  kunnen  nat  speke. 
—  29l.  or  forthenkynge.  —  33dd.  or 
sette  it  to  ferine. — 31n.  or  drede. 

xxii.  5c.  or  recken  nat.  —  lo.  or 
distruyde. — 16i.  that  hen  men  of  Er- 
oudis.  —  16ee.  or  charge. — 17^?.  or  em- 
perour. — 175'.  or  tribut. 

xxiii.  4J1.  or  that  mown  nat  he  horn. 
— bq.  that  hen  smale  scrowis. — 15s.  that 
is,  a  conuertid  to  "^oure  ordre. — 16ee.  or 
is  detour. — 23u.  or  of  more  charge. — 
23hh.  ornedide. — 33c.  orhuriownyngus, 
■ — 33e.  that  sleen  her  modris. — 34:1.  or 
writeris. — 38i.  or  forsaken. 

xxiv.  10/.  or  ech  other. — 22j.  that 
is,  mankynde. — 26^.  or  placis. —  30o. 
or  lynagis. — 31ee.  or  endes. —  32^\  or 
hraunche. — 40^.  or  forsaken. — 45i.  or 
war. — 48?2.  or  taryinge. 

XXV.  \u.  or  hushonde. — \x.  or  vnjf — 
5  c.  or  houshonde. — 15^.  or  hesauntis. — 


20s.  or  hesauntis. — 21?.  or  trewe. — 27/1 
or  hetaken. — 34^.  or  take  "^ee  in  posses- 
sioun. — 34ee.    or   makynge. — 356&.    or\^ 
herherden. 

xxvi.  lOj.  or  sory. —  30c.  or  heri- 
ynge. — 37o.  or  heuy. — 38o.  or  ahyde 
5ee. — 41^.  or  vnstahle. — 64o.  or  fro  this 
tyme  forth. — 65^!  or  to-rente. 

xxvii.  2m.  or  chf  iustice. — 3n.  or 
forthenkynge. — bv.  or  a  gnare. — YSf  or 
domysman. — Ylm.  or  delyuere. — 19e.  or 
domysman. — 19gg.  or  sioeuen. — 20^.  or 
counseiliden. — 21p.  or  delyuerid. — 242;. 
or  giltlesse. — 29t».  or  folden. — 40c.  or 
fie  to  thee. — 46w.  or  loM. — 48?.  or  vyne- 
gre. —  b\i.  or  rent.  —  52^.  or  weren 
dead. — 597i;.  or  lynnen  cloth. — Q3i.  or 
d'lsseyuour. — QQe.  or  wardiden. — 66/t. 
or  seelinge. 

xxviii  Ig.  or  holiday. — 147i.  or  ins- 
tise. 


a 


Mark  i.  7m.  or  vnhynde. — 15p.  or  do 
5ee  ^j^naunce. —  28c.  or  tything. —  30A:. 
or  lay. — 45  i.  or  2JU23lishe. 

ii.  21<7.  or  newe. — 21s.  or  2ycccche. — 
22j.  or  wyne  vesselis. 

iii.  lO-y.  or  woundis.  —  12?.  or 
knowen. 

iv.  4^.  or  of  the  eire. — 10c.  or  hy 
hym  sUf — llo.  or  2yi'yuite. — 17?.  that 
is,  lasten  a  lityl  tyme. — 28?.  or  grene 
corn. — 29o.  or  hook. — 32e.  or  quykened. 
— 32.9.  or  erhis. — 34^.  or  hy  hem  self 

V.  3h.  or  hiriels. — 4*.  or  make  tame. 
— 13s.  or  haste. — 20k.  that  is,  a  cuntree 
of  ten  citees. — 29m.  or  sikenesse. — 41p. 
or  expownid. 

vi.  3f  or  carpenter. — 9  c?.  that  hen 
optyn  ahoue. — 21a;.  or  gretteste. 

vii.  2n.  that  is,  not  waischun.- — 3q. 
or  statutis. — \8j.  or  vnwyse. — 22&.  or 
ouer  hard  kepynge  of  goodis. — 24cc.  or 
he  priuy. — 31/i.  or  coostis. 

viii.  22J.  or  ahyden. — Sn.  or  smale 
gohatis. — llA.  or  axe. — 35^.  and  35s. 
that  is,  his  lyf. 

ix.  3r.  or  walkere  of  cloth.  — 18m. 
or  vometh. — 49/!  or  maad  sauori. 

X.  2p.   or  forsake. — 14/i.  or  vnwor- 


'  St.  :Mark  X.  25.-ST.  John  xii.  37.]     NOTES  ON  WYCLIFFE. 


583 


thili. — 25c.  or  esyer. — 427n.  orhen  scyn. 
— 42."?.  or  hen  lordls.— A.bv.  or  hjf. — 
,45tc.  or  a-^en  bli/ng. 

xi.  8in.  or  braunchis. 

xii.  If.  or  in  ^;ar(//)//s. — 4.t.  or  re- 
proui/ngis. — 6y.  or  dreJr  ivilh  rcuerencc. 
— Ig.  or  to  gidere. — SOtat.  or  my^tc.—^ 
33^.  or  mynde. 

xiii.  2,01c.  or  mankynde. — 20aa.  or 
maad  schort. 

xiv.   \h.   wlthoifyten   sonrdoiv^,. — 4/. 

or  heuyli. — 13fo.  or  come  cryCns  •^oii. — 

•.14r.  or  etyng  place. — 26c.  or  heriynge. 

— 34o.  or  abide  y. — 44^/.  or  queynlcly. 

— 65dd.  or  bolf'atis. 

XV.  7r.  (hat  is,  dehaat  in  cytee. — 
13/'.  or  2)itt  hym  on  the  cros. — 15t.  or 
betun. — 22^.  or  expowned. — 25/.  that 
men  clepen  vndrun. — 28^.  or  ordeyned. 
— 32m.  or fals  repref. — 33rf.  or  mydday. 
— 33r.  that  is,  noon. — 34w.  or  wherto. 
^37 h.  or  sente  out  the  hreth. — 38q.  or 
hynethe. — 43/.  that  hadde  ten  men  vndir 
him. — 44/.  or  broir^t  to. 

xvi.  5y.  or  greetli  aferd. — So.  or  gon 
in  to  hem. — 12o.  or  figure. — 16//.  or 
cristenyd.  — 18/.  or  deedli  thing,  that 
bryngith  deeth. 


Luke  i.  19bb.  or  telle.  —  20/  or 
doicmbe. 

ii.  In.  or  noble. — 3i.  or  hiowleching. 

iii.  6c.  or  man. 

V.  1/  or  camenfaste. 

vi.  32/  etliir  thank.  —  41/  othir  a 
mot. 

vii.  2g.  that  hadde  an  hundrid  men 
vndir  him.  —  22icu.  ether  ben  maad 
keperis  of  the  gospel. — 34m.  ether  glotoun. 
— 41?.  ethir  vsi(,rer. 

X.  12/.  other  lasse  peyne. — 19/  othir 
tredinge. — 27s.  or  lyf. 

xi.  20i.  ether  spirit.  —  41/.  ether 
supjoflu. — 42'/?i.  ether  erbe. 

XV.  8/  ether  besauntis.  —  12o.  ethir 
catel. 

xvi.  Ip.  ethir  a  baily.  — 19^;.  etluir 
whit  silk. — 26i.  etlier  depthe. 

xviii.  5/.  or  disesrful. 

xix.  202).  ^''''fir  sweting  cloth. 


xxi.  2l.  ethir  a  fcrthing. — 12m.  ether 
prisouns. 

xxii.  In.  that  is,  sacrifice  of  pask. — 
25^\  or  lordschipen.  —  44c.  ether  an- 
givische. — 64c.  or  hidden. 

xxiii.  46?/.  ether  diede. — 50/i;.  ether 
hauynge  ten  vndir  him. 

xxiv.  Hi.  ether  errour. 


John  i.  1/  that  is,  Gnddis  sone. — 
14c.  that  is,  Goddis  sone.  — 14/  or 
man. 

ii.  1/  or  toion. — Qm.  that  is,  prince 
in  the  hous  of  thre  stagis.  — 18/  or 
tokene. 

iii.  ISi.  or  davipnyd. — 20m.  or  vn- 
dirnomun. — 224'.  or  cristenede. — 25c. 
or  axi/ng. — 25?i.  or  clensing. — 26/.  or 
maistir. — 29e.  or  wyf. — 29/i.  or  hose- 
bonde. — 30^•.  or  maad  lesse. 

iv.  5p.  or  feeld. — 6k.  or  feynt. — 6~. 
or  vndurn. — 21a;.  or  worschii)e. — 31/  or 
maistir. — 35a^f.  or  cuntrees. — 36/.'  or 
mede.  —  44w.  or  worschip. — 45/^6.  or 
haliday. 

V.  135.  or  sett. — 35/i.  or  ^yiiynge  li-^t. 
— 37m.  or foorine. 

vi.  14t.  or  Tnyracle. — 2Qu.  or  my- 
raclis. — 27^;.  or  markede. 

vii.  2l.  that  is,  afeeste  of  tahernaclis. 
— 4i.  or  pritiy. — 14/  or  gi>ynge  bitioixe. 
— 23s.  or  wraththe. — 35;:.  or  dislroy- 
inge. 

viii.  7c/.  or  confynuede.  —  19n.  or 
knoioen. — 25n.  or  thefirste  of  al  thing. 
— 42?%  or  cam  forth. — 51q.  or  taaste. 

ix.  2/  that  is,  Maistir.  —  6s.  or 
bawmede. — 11.  or  cisterne. — \\x.  or  cis- 
terne.  —  16bb.  or  myraclis.  —  28c.  or 
cursiden. 

X.  Ilk.  that  is,  his  lyf. — 12c.  or  hyred 
hyne. — 12v.  or  forsaketh. — 12^  or  scat- 
erith. — 20k.  or  wcxith  wood. — 41/.  or 
myracle. 

xi.  8e.  or  maistir. — 27c.  or  ^hc. — 
28p.  or  stilnesse. — 44z<;.  or  sweting  cloth. 
— 47it.  or  myraclis. 

xii.  3/t.  or  trewe  narde. — 16o.  or 
hadden  mynde. — 25e.  and  2Ln.  that  is, 
lyf.—26q.  or  seruant. — 37A.  or  myra- 


584 


WYCLIFFE  AND  TYNDALE.     St.  John  xii.  40.-xxi. 


clis. — 40i.  or  maad  hard. — 40cc.  or  al 
turned. 

xiii.  37p.  and  38g.  that  is,  lyf. 

xiv.  26'y.  or  remembre. 

XV.  26.  or  hraunche. — 13 wi.  that  is, 
lyf. — 25w.  or  freely. — 26v.  or  cometh 
forth. 

xvi.  6/.  or  heuynesse.  —  21aa.  o?- 
charge. — 25t.  or  fZe?*^-e  saumplis. — 32^. 
or  scaterid. — 33t.  or  ouerleying. 


xvii.  2j.    or  man. — 12ee.   or  dart 
nacioun. 

xviii.  1m.    or  a  gardyn.  —  3611.    "^ 
of  this  place.  -  < 

xix.  12a.    or  fro  thennus. — 13z. 
Englisch,  place  of  Caluarie. — 14^!  o; 
euyn. — 14^.  or  mydday. — 36o.  or  mih 
lesse. 

XX.  Ig.  that  is,  of  the  ivoke. 

xxi.  26<7.  or  myraclis. 


TYNDALE'S    TRANSLATION. 


Our  text  of  Tyndale's  vei-sion  is  taken 
verbatim  from  the  very  exact  and  beauti- 
ful facsimile  published  with  the  follow- 
ing Title, — "The  first  New  Testament 
printed  in  the  English  language  [1525 
or  1526],  translated  from  the  Greek  by 
William  Tyndale  :  reproduced  in  Fac- 
simile, with  an  introduction  by  Francis 
Fry,  F.  S.A.,  Bristol,  printed  for  the 
editor,  1862." 

This  facsimile  is  a  perfect  representa- 
tion of  the  earliest  and  most  complete 
coj^y  of  Tyndale's  version  known  to 
exist.  It  was  printed  by  Peter  Sclibffer 
at  the  free  city  (frei  statt,  p.  24)  of 
Worms,  and  sold  in  Oxford  "  before  the 
7th  February,  1526."  Had  it  been 
dated,  it  might  have  been  1525  or  1526. 
Further  notice  of  Tyndale  and  of  this 
edition  is  given  in  the  Preface.  At 
13resent,  it  is  only  necessary  to  observe, 
that  it  is  believed  our  text  is  in  the 
exact  words  written  by  Tyndale,  for  it 
was  printed  from  his  OAvn  MS.  under 
his  own  eye.  Only  the  evident  and 
glaring  errors  in  orthography  are  cor- 
rected, and  made  to  agree  with  the 
same  words  used  in  other  parts  ©f  the 
translation.  Every  possible  care  has 
been  employed  to  give  the  words  pre- 
cisely as  the  Martyr  wrote  them.     ''  The 


errours  comitted  in  the  prentynge"  (Fol. 
ccclv.)  are  such  as  would  most  likely 
occur  to  a  German  compositor :  as  iu 
John  vii.  14  gebe  for  geve  gave.  The 
misprints  are  very  numerous  ;  but  they 
are  at  once  detected  by  an  English  eye. 
The  following  are  a  few  examples : — 
John  iii.  36  beloveth/b?'  beleveth 


iv. 

2  thought 

though 

V 

4  wath 

what 

7  stoppeth 

steppeth  as 
stepped  in 
verse  4 

- 

27  soune 

Sonne  son 

- 

35  brurnynge 

burnynge 

vi. 

12  ynought 

ynough  enoug, 
verse  15 

- 

45  hat 

hath 

— 

69  soone 

Sonne  son 

vii. 

14  thaught 

taught 

viii. 

20  honhes 

hondes 

- 

47  Gog 

God 

55  is 

his 

It  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to  cite 
more  examples.  The  manifest  misprints 
have  been  silently  corrected,  that  our 
text  might  be  made,  as  far  as  loossible, 
a  perfect  i-epresentation  of  the  words 
written  by  William  Tyndale,  one  of  the 
best  scholars  aiid  one  of  the  greatest 
Divines  of  his  age. 


Qy^ 


THE    END. 


U 


