ἘΠῚ Ύ ae) 8 BL ee ᾿ 
. i Δ 





ἢ ἐν ἂψ 


ὦ «ἵν 


7] 


eC 155 017 
























































el 


eit a) tie 
᾽ 





THE ORIGINAL HEBREW 


OF A PORTION OF 


BCC LESIAS ELCUS 










Rondon 


HENRY FROWDE 


Oxrorp University Press WAREHOUSE 
_ AMEN Corner, E.C. t 





THE MACMILLAN CO., 66 FIFTH AVENUE 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2008 with funding from 
Microsoft Corporation 


https://archive.org/details/originalhebrewof0Ocowlrich 


oii πτὸν 


Ὁ face title 


I recto (see p. 6) 





THE ORIGINAL HEBREW ᾿ 


OF A PORTION OF 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


(XXXIX. 15 tro XLIX. 11) 


i 











TOGETHER WITH 


THE EARLY VERSIONS AND AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
FOLLOWED BY 


THE QUOTATIONS FROM BEN SIRA IN 
RABBINICAL LITERATURE 


EDITED BY 


A. E. COWLEY, M.A., anp Av. NEUBAUER, M.A. 


WITH TWO FACSIMILES 


OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


M DCCC XCVII 














PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
|‘ BY HORACE HART 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY : 


ς 
2 ἢ 
ῃ 
᾿ \ 
. 
᾿ ᾿ 
* 
75) ΓΟ. 
hae ἂΪ i; 
; ᾿ς Δ᾽ 
ΜῈ Ἂ ἢ a. 
να ἡ“ » ἣ 








DEDICATED © 


TO 


PROFESSOR A. H. SAYCE 


436662 




















CONTENTS. 


PREFACE . τ Ἢ ᾿ A ᾿ Ἶ ν ᾿ P . ὃ s 
A List or WorkKs USED . a A > τ 2 - : ‘ ᾽ 
SPECIMENS OF RECONSTRUCTION A . δ - ‘ rs : 


Tue ProverBs ΟΕ BEN SIRA PRESERVED IN RABBINICAL LITERATURE 
GLossary oF Worps : ς a 3: Z ὶ 5 : 2 
Versio Vetus LATINA . A 5 ἷ ἐ : : : > A 


HEBREW TEXT WITH GREEK, SYRIAC, AND ENGLISH VERSIONS . ; 


xix 


XXxi 


XXXVii 


I-41 





PREFACE, 


IN editing the recently discovered Hebrew fragments of the book of Ben Sira, 
we have limited our aim to presenting the original text with as little delay as 
possible, and at the same time giving in a convenient form the materials for further 
study. A full commentary, as well as a detailed comparison of the versions, must 
be left for the future. We shall therefore not discuss the author’s full name, or 
the date of his composition or of the Greek and Syriac translations’. For the 
literature on these points the reader is referred to Schiirer’s admirable work on 
‘The History of the Jewish People in the time of Jesus Christ®.’ In what follows 
we shall confine ourselves to some remarks on what is known, from Jewish sources, 
of Ben Sira and his writings. τ 

It is now generally admitted that Jesus, son of Sirach (Σειράχ, xvo*), of Jeru- 
salem, wrote his ethical work (usually quoted as ‘the book of Ben Sira*’), in 
Hebrew, between 200 and 170 B.C. in Jerusalem. It was translated into Greek by 
his grandson, as stated in the prologue, from which, we also gather that the version 
was made from the Hebrew, in the year 132 B.c.6 The Hebrew of the present 
fragment is (with the exceptions referred to below, p. xiii) classical, not Rabbinical : 
still less is it an Aramaic dialect, such as that of several of the passages quoted in 
both Talmuds (the Palestinian® as well as the Babylonian), in the Midrashim, and 
in later Hebrew writings. 





1 On this subject, see E. Hatch, Essavs in Biblical Greek, vii. p. 254 seq. 

2 English translation, 2nd division, vol. iii. p. 23 seqq. (Clark, Edinburgh, 1886); and later, his 
article on ‘Apocryphen des Alten Testaments’ in the Realencyclopidie fiir protestantische Theologie 
und Kirche, vol. i. p. 650 seqq. (3rd ed., Leipzig, 1896). 

® Schiirer, op. cit., p. 25, explains the name to mean ‘coat of mail.’ In the Hebrew Josippon 
(Pseudo-Josephus) the form JW is a transliteration from the Latin; v. Zunz, Die gottesdienstlichen Vortrige 
der Juden, 2nd ed., 1892, p. 107, note 2. He was not, as sometimes stated, a priest ; Zunz, ibid., p. 106. 

* So most frequently in early Rabbinic literature. S. Jerome (see p. x, note 5) says that it was 
called Parabolae (Ὁ) in Hebrew; cf. Ecclus. 1, 27, and the use of Seno (p. xxvi) and xbnio (p. xx) in the 
quotations. According to Seadyah (ndan BD, ed. Harkavy, p.151, lines 11 and 12) Ben Sira wrote a book 
of instruction (W\s\ WLS, ID ἼΒΌ ἢ see our text, p. 10, 1. 8) similar in character to the book of Proverbs. 

ἢ The many passages in which the translator has misunderstood his original, written only some 
sixty years before his own time, may perhaps serve as a warning to those scholars who are inclined to 
overrate the authority of the LXX version of the Old Testament. 

ΤΕ is remarkable that only five quotations are found in the Palestinian Talmud; see below, 
Ρ. xix seqq. (Nos. I. 4, XVII, XXVI, XXXII, LIV). 


b 


x PREFACE. 


In early times the book seems to have hovered on the verge of the canon, or 
to have been included among the omn> (Hagiographa, see p. xxii below), since 
quotations from it are introduced by Ἤν (as it is said), a phrase applied only 
to the sacred writings. Although afterwards excluded from the canon by the 
Rabbis, it continued to live and to be appreciated both in the Palestinian and the 
Babylonian schools, as is proved by the fact that the text was constantly quoted 
either in the original or in a Rabbinical or Aramaic form. The Rabbis who lived 
before the destruction of the Temple used it without acknowledgement in the ‘ Sentences 
of the Fathers’ (max ‘pip, the earliest production of Rabbinical literature), while 
others quote from it either expressly under the name of Ben Sira, or anonymously, 
or else base their maxims upon it!, Rabbi Akiba and Ben Azai borrowed from 
it verbatim*®, and there is reason to believe that some apocryphal books were 
influenced by it®, Thus the official exclusion from the canon did not involve 
destruction, as in the case of some Christian uncanonical Gospels and Acts: the 
book of Sirach was allowed to be freely read, but it was regarded merely as 
literature and not as sacred‘. Passing on to the later history of the book, we find 
that S. Jerome? (fourth century A.D.) possessed a Hebrew copy, although he did not 
translate it. That the book continued to be known, to individuals at least if not 
generally, is proved by the passages quoted from it (in a language already debased), by 
the Rabbis of the fifth and sixth centuries, in the later Midrashim of the seventh and ~ 
eighth centuries (as the Tanhuma), and in the sayings collected by R. Nathan in 
the ninth century®. Zunz (op. cit. p. 108, end of note e) believes that the early 
liturgist, R. Eleazar haq-Qalir, borrowed from Sirach (I. 5-8) in his liturgy for the 
day of Atonement, in praise of the High Priest. Simultaneously some of the sayings 
of Sirach are quoted by the Babylonian doctors in an Aramaic form’. 

For the tenth century we are on even firmer ground as to the existence of 
the book in its original language. R. S’adyah (myo) Gaon, of Bagdad (920 A.D.), 
and of the Fayyum in Egypt, was blamed by the Qaraites* for sending out 





1 The quotations were first collected by Asaria de Rossi. For a list of them, see below, pp. xix to 
xxviii, and, for the literature dealing with them, Zunz, op. cit., pp. 108, 109, and notes. " 

2 Bacher, Die Agada der Tannaiten, i. p. 277, note 2; p. 417, notes I and 2. 

8. See e.g. the list of parallel passages cited by Mr. Charles in Zhe Book of the Secrets of Enoch (Oxford, 
1896), p. 96, Index I; and Ryle and James, Zhe Psalms of Solomon (Cambridge, 1891), p. Ixiii seq. 

* PAYNI NWI ja Nwpn, J. T. Synhedrin x. 5. 

5 The well-known passage in his preface to the translation of the books of Solomon is as 
follows: ‘Fertur et mavdperos Jesu filii Sirach liber et alius ψευδεπίγραφος,. qui Sapientia Salomonis 
inscribitur. Quorum priorem Hebraicum repperi, non Ecclesiasticum ut apud Latinos, sed Parabolas 
praenotatum, cui juncti erant Ecclesiastes et Canticum Canticorum, ut similitudinem Salomonis non 
solum librorum numero, sed etiam materiarum genere coaequaret. S. Jerome simply adopted the 
old Latin version of the book; see pp. xxxvii to xlvii. 

® Critically re-edited by S. Schechter, Vindobonae, 1887. 

7 Dalman, Grammatik, p. 29. ᾿ 

* A Jewish sect which sprang up in the eighth century under Anan (12)}), and denied the 
authority of oral tradition. See Harkavy in Gratz Geschichte d. Juden, 3rd ed., vol. ν. p. 413 (note 17). 


PREFACE. xi 


missives written in Hebrew provided with vowel-points and accents. They re- 
proached him with endeavouring to give to his correspondence an appearance of 
holiness equal to that of the Biblical text, since the vowel-points and accents were 
supposed, according to tradition, to have been given with the Law on Mount Sinai. 
In answer to this accusation S*’adyah? states that these additions to the text are 
found also in copies of Ben Sira, in the book of the Wisdom of Eleazar ben Irai 
(Iri?), and in the scroll of the Hasmoneans*. In the course of his defence he 
quotes seven (or rather eight, see note 2 below) genuine sayings of Sirach* in classical 
Hebrew, so that it may be concluded that the book was at his disposal in the 
tenth century. The mentions of Ben Sira after this date are scanty and uncertain. 
R. Nissim ben Jacob (eleventh century) of Kairowan, in Tunisia, makes a quotation, 
which however he may have derived from S’adyah. In the eleventh century, according 
to Reifmann®, signs of Sirach’s influence appear in the collection of sayings entitled 
men ana (Choice of Pearls), attributed to the famous poet and _ philosopher 
Solomon ben Gabirol® (Avicebron). The same scholar’ also finds traces of the 
influence of Sirach (ii. 18) in the Jewish daily prayer®, and (xlix. 10 and 11) in 
the hymn® for the outgoing of the Sabbath. He contends further that Sirach has 
an allusion (i. 2) to Aristotle andthe doctrine of the eternity of matter, and that 
even Spinoza was perhaps influenced by Sirach (xliv. 34). These suggestions,-as 
well’as the inference’(from the-Afaiaic-form of the proverb, No. LIV below), that 
he was an Essene, are, to say the least, not convincing. There is no direct trace 
of the existence of the Hebrew Sirach in Spatiy~P¥ovence, or among the Rabbis of 
France, the Rhine-land, and Germany. Rashi!°, the authors of the glosses on the 
Talmud (mspin), and even Maimonides", did not possess the book; and later 
Rabbis, who mention sentences from it, most probably quoted second-hand from 





1 4b: “DD, p. 162. 

* NYY or VY. It is curious to note that the saying... 70D xdpro3 (p. xix), ascribed in the Talmud 
to Ben Sira and found in the Greek version, is quoted by S*adyah (op. cit., p. 178,1. 18) as belonging to 
the Wisdom of Ben Irai. Of this Eleazar b. Irai, Stadyah also quotes two other sentences in classical 
Hebrew, but not in so easy a style as most of Sirach. He says Ben Irai’s book of Wisdom is 
analogous to Ecclesiastes, while Ben Sira resembles the book of Proverbs. Of this enigmatical Eleazar 
ben Irai nothing further is known. Perhaps he is identical with the R. Eleazar who often reports 
sayings NVD 13 DW (see p. xix). Bacher (Die Agada d. Palistinischen Amoréer, ii. 1896, p. 11, 
note 5) identifies him, not very plausibly, with Eleazar ben Pedath. 

* Edited by Dr. M. Gaster; see Notice in Jewish Quarterly Review, vi. p. 570. 

* See pp. xix to xxiii, 

δ᾽ In the Hebrew periodical *DNN, iii. p. 250. 

δ See Steinschneider, Die Hebréischen Uebersetzungen, Ὁ. 382 seqq. (δ 221). 

7 In the essay on Ben Sira in his DWN AYIIN (Prag, 1860), p. 3 seqq. 

® See the Authorised Daily Prayer Book, with a new translation by the Rev. 8. Singer, p. 62, 
δ) OM DIT 5 AD Va ΝῸ AdED, 

* Beginning N'227 wSN. It is not included im the English Authorised Daily Prayer Book. 

10 See p. xx (No. XI). 

ἢ The Sira he quotes in his Commentary on the Mishna (Sanh. xi. 1) must be, to judge from 
his low opinion of him, the compiler of the Alphabet; cf. Reifmann, DN", iii. p. 251. 

b2 


τ. 


xii PREFACE. 


older authorities‘. No doubt it might be said, though the supposition is not very 
probable, that all the quotations from Sirach were made from memory, and that they 
were derived from oral tradition. Recent discoveries however have removed all 
uncertainty on this point. 

Mrs. Lewis, who brought to light the now famous codex of the Syriac Gospels 
in the convent on Mount Sinai, some time ago acquired some manuscript fragments in 
the East*, among which Mr. S. Schechter, Reader in Talmudic in the University of 
Cambridge, recognized one leaf as containing a fragment of Sirach (xxxix. 15 to 
xl. 7) in Hebrew, which he published with English translation, introduction, and 
notes in the Exposttor for July 1896, (p. 1 seqq.). Through the kindness of the 
owner we have since been allowed to make a fresh examination of the leaf, and 
have found reason to alter some of the readings accepted by Mr. Schechter (see 
the Hebrew text, pp. 2 and 4). Although the leaf is mutilated in places, the 
parts which are still intact are abundantly sufficient to show the character and 
style of the composition, and to convince critics that the text is original and not 
a translation. After pointing this out, Mr. Schechter rightly adds: ‘Its correspondence 
with the versions changes almost in every line, agreeing in some places with the 
Greek, in others with the Syriac. In other places, again, it agrees with weither 
of these versions, omitting whole clauses which are to be found both in the Greek 
and in the Syriac, or offering new readings which have been either misunderstood 
or misread by the translators. Certain clauses, again, are to be found in our MS. 
which are wanting in doth versions, or are only reproduced by a very short 
paraphrase. There cannot, therefore, be even the shadow of a doubt that our text, 
represents nothing else but the original. Even the marginal glosses testify to this 2» 
fact. Such differences of plena and defectiva as ΤῊΝ and Ἴνν, or such fine variants 
as YB and 5, cannot possibly have been suggested by any translation, and could 
only have been made from some other copy of the original.’ 

Almost simultaneously the Bodleian Library acquired, through Professor Sayce, 
a box of Hebrew and Arabic fragments, among which we recognized another 
portion of the same text of Sirach, consisting of nine leaves, and forming the 
continuation of Mrs. Lewis’ leaf, from chapter xl. 9 to xlix. 11. These fragments 
cannot be part of the copy mentioned by S*adyah, since they are not provided 
with vowel-points or accents, and also because the writing is not of the tenth 
century, but of the end of the eleventh® at the earliest, as may be seen from the 
facsimiles. The MS. does not seem to us to have been written by a Qaraite. 
There are in both fragments marginal notes* giving the variants of another copy 
of Sirach, or more probably of two other copies. These copies were however 





1 As e.g. Joseph ben Nahmias, Jewish Quarterly Review, iv. p. 164. 

2 See Jewish Quarterly Review, ix. p. 115 seqq. 

8 Mr. Schechter (ibid., p. 4) considers it ‘certainly not later than the beginning of the twelfth 
century.’ 

* These are indicated in the MS. by a small circle ° over the word in the text, which we reproduce. 


PREFACE. xiii 


incomplete, the marginal notes giving their variants only as far as chapter xlv. 8 
(see note in loco), and on xlvii. 8 and g. In the Bodleian fragment there are also 
at least two Persian glosses (ff. 1 and 5°), which point to its having been written in 
Bagdad or Persia, possibly transcribed from S’adyah’s copy. The MS. is written on 
oriental paper, and is arranged in lines, eighteen to the page (in Mrs. Lewis’ leaf-one 
line is cut off), and the lines are divided into hemistichs. There is no indication 
of chapters, but a line is left blank occasionally, as shown in our printed text. 
The MS. is unfortunately damaged in many places, which we have marked by 
dots, showing approximately the number of letters missing, and. by [ ] when 
letters are supplied. Our object being however to give the text of Sirach as 
we found it, we have carefully restricted conjecture to its narrowest limits. In 
some cases we have preferred to leave a lacuna, where either the space in the MS. 
did not allow of what seemed the obvious word, or some letter such as 5, j}, or P was 
excluded; see e.g. xlv. 13°. In every case a letter about which we felt there could 
be any reasonable doubt, has been marked with a horizontal stroke, thus &. On 
some orthographical peculiarities of the MS. see the note appended to the glossary, 
p. xxxvi. As regards the translation again, we have deemed it our duty as editors 
of a unique manuscript, to express the text faithfully, and not to adopt conjectural 
readings, except where the text yielded absolutely no sense. Usually, indeed, the 
meaning is clear; but passages occur which, from whatever cause, are obscure, and 
we cannot feel confident that we have seized the sense of all of them. A (?) in the 
translation indicates doubt either as to the reading or the rendering. There 
are sufficient indications that the text is not everywhere in its original purity, 
and we do not doubt that (as in many parts of the O.T-.) cases will be found in 
which a purer reading has been preserved by one or other of the early versions; 
but a detailed comparison of the Hebrew text and the versions, and a discussion 
of their comparative merits, must, we think, be left to a commentary, as well as 
to a time when, we may hope, more of the original shall have been recovered. 
We have noted, lastly, the more important places in which the language is coloured 
by reminiscences of the Old Testament. 

The language, as already observed, is classical Hebrew, the syntax displaying 
no traces of the peculiar New-Hebrew constructions, such as occur, for instance, so 
frequently in Ecclesiastes 1, though the vocabulary has an admixture of late or Aramaic 
words or expressions, such as might be expected from the date at which the author 
wrote. The latter, together with other words not occurring in Biblical Hebrew, will 
be found collected in the glossary (p. xxxi). The style is occasionally a little heavy, 
but this may sometimes be due to corruption of the text. Otherwise (especially 
chap. xliv. ff.) it is remarkably easy and flowing. It stands throughout on an altogether 
higher level than that, for instance, of Chronicles, Ecclesiastes, or the Hebrew 





The relative & never occurs; the imperfect with Ὁ consecutive occurs frequently; the perfect 
with Ὁ consecutive in 42, 1°. 8°. 11°; the perfect with simple Ὁ only in 39, 32. 44, 2. 16. 20%. 48, 11. 12% 


5 


J 4 


{ 


xiv PREFACE. 


parts of Daniel. We know from Ecclesiastes that the New-Hebrew idiom was in 
process of formation at this time, and it is evident that both New-Hebrew and Aramaic! 
words were current in the Hebrew with which the author was familiar; but the pre- 
dominant character of his style is nevertheless pure and classical. The marginal 
readings are often interesting: the variations which they indicate are frequently 
considerably greater than those noted by the Massorites in the O. T., and resemble 
rather the various readings often presupposed by the LXX, while at other times 
they are noticeable as giving an Aramaic equivalent for a Hebrew word in the text. 
Sirach’s positiog, with regard to the New-Hebrew would no doubt be made clearer 
by the discovery of the originals of other apocryphal books, such as Judith, 
Maccabees i, Enoch, and the Psalms of Solomon. Finally the theory that he wrote 
his proverbs in metre is not supported by the newly-recovered text: the lines are 
very variable in length, and there is no indication that the author sought to adapt 
them to a uniform metrical scheme. 

In the present edition we give:—(a) The Hebrew text, with the marginal notes 
and glosses arranged as in the MS. (6)-The English translation of the Hebrew, 
adopting as far as possible the diction of the reviséd-version—of-the-O-F;—{c) The 
Syriac version (which~was—made~from—the—Hebrew),-aecording-to—Lagarde’s edition, 
a blank space indicating that the translator, or copyist, omitted a passage. (4) The Greek 
translation, according to Dr. Swete’s edition, the blanks again indicating such omissions. 
The uncertain condition of the Greek text is well illustrated by Hatch?, and will 
strike the reader on even a slight examination. Its value for comparative purposes 
is further lessened by the translator’s tendency to paraphrase, as is the case also with 
the Syriac. (4) At the end, the Old Latin, according to Lagarde’s edition of the Codex 
Amiatinus. For more convenient reference we have in all five texts numbered the 
chapters and verses as in Dr. Swete’s edition, and indicated the hemistichs by letters 
of the alphabet in order. The Syriac, Greek, and Latin texts are reproduced exactly 
as in the editions followed. It did not fall within our plan to give the variants 
of these versions. (7) A glossary of noticeable words and expressions. (g) A list of 
proverbs attributed to Sirach in Talmudic and Rabbinical literature, with a translation, 
arranged in-the order of the Greek version. Here again we resolved not to add the 
various readings, since the Talmudic dialect is not the original language of Sirach, 
and moreover, all the new Talmudic fragments found within the last two years 
have not yet been collated. For completeness sake we have added the so-called 
‘Alphabets’ of Ben Sira, a late composition—probably of the eleventh century or perhaps 
even later, but containing some genuine proverbs of Sirach, both in the first and 
second parts 8, The stories given after each proverb in part i. are mostly indecent, and 





’The strong Syriasms which sometimes occur, deserve notice, as ‘1% (42, 5°) and Wnbdn 
(42, 12>), 

2 Op. cit. p. 258 seqq. 

5 In the Bodleian MS. No. 1466 the order is reversed. 


PREFACE. — xv 


written in-mockery of Jewish literature. We reproduce the first 48 (MS. second), with 
a translation: for the second (MS. first), we only refer to the numbers in our list of 
proverbs with which it agrees, ignoring the rest as alien to Sirach. The Alphabets, 
though a late and unedifying compilation *, survived, whilst Ecclesiasticus was 
completely neglected. A Persian text of them was lately acquired by the British 
Museum (MS. Or. 4731), and another copy has just been brought by Mr. E. N. Adler 
from Persia, probably translated from the Constantinople edition (see below, p. xxix). 
(Δ) Some specimens of attempted restorations of the original Hebrew by modern 
scholars confronted with our text. The comparison will, we think, justify the caution 
and reservation which must be observed in attempting to restore lost works on the 
basis of ancient translations*. In the present instance, for example, both versions 
prove to be much freer than was assumed to be the case by those who so used 
them. ᾿ 

In conclusion, we have great pleasure in acknowledging the help of friends who 
have enabled us to carry through the work in a short time in spite of difficulties. 
Mr. J. F. Stenning, of Wadham College, rendered valuable aid in deciphering the 
difficult parts of the MS., including the Cambridge leaf, and in all doubtful places 
he concurs in the readings which we have adopted in our text. He also revised the 
Syriac. Mr. E. N. Bennett, of Hertford College, read the Greek: Rev. F. E. Brightman, 
Librarian of the Pusey House, read the Latin. Professor D. S. Margoliouth has 
also shown an interest in the work in various ways. We feel, however, specially 
grateful to the Regius Professor of Hebrew, Dr. Driver. He revised the translation 
throughout, besides being entirely responsible for the glossary, with the note appended, 
and almost every page of the book owes something to the judgement and accuracy 
which he has been always ready to expend upon it. 





? The Editio princeps is that of Constantinople, 1519. (The Bodleian copy is defective.) For 
the other editions, see Steinschneider’s Catalogus Librorum Hebraeorum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana, 
Berolini, 1852-1860; and Zedner’s Catalogue of Hebrew Books in the British Museum (London, 1867), 
with Van Straalen’s Supplement (1894). 

2 See Reifmann, Hakarmel ii. p. 124 seq. 

* Cf. Driver in The Oxford Magazine, vol. viii (1890), no. 11, p. 182, and no. 12, p. 190 seq. 


A LIST OF WORKS USED. 


Bacuer (W.), Die Agada der babylonischen Amorider. Strassburg, 1878. 

Die Agada der Tannaiten. Strassburg, 1884. 

Batt (C. J.), The Ecclesiastical or Deutero-Canonical Books of the Old Testament, commonly 
called the Apocrypha, edited with various renderings and readings from the best Authorities. 
[The Variorum Bible], Eyre and Spottiswoode, London, ἡ. d. 

Brn Srxs (Wolfsohn, Jehuda Loeb), .., ay pwda pny? NYD 13 perm’ noon. Wien, 1814. 

Bicxett (G.), Die Strophik des Ecclesiasticus, in the Vienna Oriental Journal, vi. (1892), p. 87. 
Compare his restoration of the alphabetical poem (51, 13-20) in the Zeitschrift fiir 
Katholische Theologie, 1882, p. 326 seqq. 

Coronet (Ν. Ν.), ΘΟ AwMN (for the Baraitha Kallah). Vindobonae, 1864. 

Datman (G.), Grammatik des Jiidisch-Palastinischen Aramiisch. Leipzig, 1894. 

Driver (S.R.) in the Oxford Magazine, vol. viii, no, 11 (p. 182), and no. 12 (p. 190). Oxford, 1890. 

Dvxgs (L.), Zur rabbinischen Spruchkunde. Wien, 1851. 

Rabbinische Blumenlese. Leipzig, 1844. 

Epersurim (A.) in the Holy Bible ..... with an explanatory and critical commentary, &c. 
Apocrypha, edited by Henry Wace, D.D., vol. ii. London (Murray), 1888. 

E:cuuorn, Bibliothek. Leipzig, 1787 &c. (vol. ii. p. 691 seqq.). 

Franxer (S. 1), p3y7nN ὈΝΔῚΠ5, Hagiographa posteriora...in linguam Hebraicam convertit . . 
S. Isaac Frankel. Lipsiae, 1830. 

FritrzscuE (O. F.), Libri Apocryphi Veteris Testamenti. Lipsiae, 1871. 

Gastro (R. Salomon ibn), ὮΝ) )5Π ANID 7D, A Choice of Pearls, originally compiled from the 
Arabic .. . translated into Hebrew by R. Jehuda ibn Tibbon, the Hebrew text... accompanied 
by a faithful English translation by the Rev. B. H. Ascher. London (Triibner), 5619-1859. 

Gricer (A.) in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. xii. oe 536 seqq.). 

Gritz (H.), Geschichte der Juden. Leipzig, 1874. 

Hampvurcer (J.), Real-Encyclopadie fiir Bibel und Talmud. Supplement, Band i. p. 77 5664. 
(art. Jesus Sohn Sirach). Leipzig, 1886: 

Harkavy (A.), Studien u. Mittheilungen aus der Kaiserlichen Oeffentlichen Bibliothek zu St. 
Petersburg: fiinfler Theil, erstes Heft. St. Petersburg, 1801. 

Hatcu (E.), Essays in Biblical Greek (p. 246 seqq.). Oxford, 1889. 

Horowitz (J.) in the Monatsschrift fiir Geschichte u. Wissenschaft des Judenthums, vol. xiv. 
(p. ror seqq., p. 136 seqq., p. 178 seqq.). 

Konut (A.), Aruch completum. Viennae, 1878-1892. 

Lacarve (P. A. de), Libri Veteris Testamenti Apocryphi Syriace. Lipsiae, 1861. 

Mittheilungen. Géttingen, 1884 (p. 285 seqq.). 











A LIST OF WORKS USED. xvii 


Lampert (M.), Commentaire sur le Séfer Yesira... par le Gaon Saadya. Paris, 1891. 

MarcotioutH (D. 5.) in the Expositor, April and May, 1890. 

Minrasu Tanuuma, ed. Warsaw, 1879. 

Rasa. Frankfurt, 1705. 

Nevpaver (Ad.) in the Jewish Quarterly Review, vol. iv. (p. 162 seqq.). 

Catalogue of Hebrew MSS. in the Bodleian Library. Oxford, 1886. 

Rapoport (S, J.) in the Hebrew periodical nynyn 23, x. p. 116 seqq. (on Qalir). Wien, 1829. 

Reirmann (J.) in the periodical »)pNn, vol. iii, Warsaw, 1886. 

DVN AYIIN aN. Prag, 1860. 

in the periodical 5pm, ii. p. 124 seqq. Wilna, 1873. 

De Rossi (Asaria), Dy ΝΟ, section AI WN (p. 29 seqq.). Mantua, 1574. 

Scuecuter (S.) in the Jewish Quarterly Review, vol. iii. no. 12 (July, 1891). 

in the Expositor, 5th series, no. xix. (July, 1896). 

Aboth de Rabbi Nathan. Vindobonae, 1887. 

Scnirer (E.) in the English translation, A History of the Jetvish People in the time of Jesus 
Christ, 2nd division, vol. iii, Edinburgh, 1886. 

in the Realencyclopiadie fiir protestantische Theologie und Kirche, 3rd ed. Leipzig, 1896 
(art. Apocryphen des Alten Testaments). 

Seapyan, "ban ἼΒΟ, in Studien ἃ, Mittheilungen aus der Kaiserlichen Oeffentlichen Bibliothek 
zu St. Petersburg, von Dr. A. Harkavy: fiinfter Theil, erstes Heft. St. Petersburg, 1891. 

Stncer (S.), The Authorised Daily Prayer Book. London, 5655-1895. 

Sremscunewer (M.), NWD 727 ΝΠΣΝΒΟΝ, Alphabetum Siracidis utrumque. Berolini, 1858. 

Die Hebraischen Uebersetzungen des Mittelalters. Berlin, 1893. 

Catalogus Librorum Hebraeorum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana. Berolini, 1852-1860. 

Srraaten (5. van), Catalogue of Hebrew Books in the British Museum. (London), 1894. 

Swere (H. B., D.D.), The Old Testament in Greek according to the LXX, vol. ii, Cambridge, 
1891. 

Tatmup, the Jerusalem. Krotoschin, 1866. 

the Babylonian. Frankfurt a. M., 1721. 

Tawrocr (A. J.), Derech Erez Sutta. Kénigsberg, 1885. 

Taytor (C.), Sayings of the Jewish Fathers, comprising Pirge Aboth and Pereq R. Meir. 
Cambridge, 1877. 

Wo trsonn, see Ben Seeb. 

Yersira (Sepher), see Lambert. 

ZepNER, Catalogue of Hebrew Books in the Library of the British Museum. (London), 1867. 

Zouar, ed. Lublin, 1882. 

Zunz (L.), Die gottesdienstlichen Vortrige der Juden... zweite... Auflage .. . herausgegeben 
von Dr. N. Briill. Frankfurt a. M., 1892. 
































SOME ATTEMPTS AT RECONSTRUCTING THE ORIGINAL OF SIRACH, 
CONFRONTED WITH OUR TEXT. 


Sir. 40, 14, 


BALL, 


So shall transgressors come to nought. [/ed. perhaps, therefore (al-ken 


Jor ken).] 


Sir. 40, 19. 

EDERSHEIM (Margoliouth), 
Sons and daughters 

(ΠῚ 724) continue a 

man’s name, &c. (‘...the 

Syriac shows us_ that 

πόλεως is a gloss’). 


Sir. 44, 22. 23. 
BICKELL. 
od npn pnya 7 
sina; tN 55 nana ΣΝ 
YMIDIIT PIA APY NID 
sypon pom Sram savy 
SDM wy ww DAY 


Sir. 45, 25. 
FRITZSCHE. 
yw ad nanny 
mabe nbma amin’ nnd 
synad yan 120 


Sir. 49, 9. 
GEIGER. 


MyD3 ἼΞΙ AYN NN DI 
se ot Sid 








FRANKEL. 
nyo pd Wy 33) DID 
:7on 


FRANKEL. 
ὉΠ YAN ὉΠΊΣΝ sy) 
ὙΠ pnyenx anna 
ΠΟ ΕΥΝΩ ΠΕῚΣΡ 
nerd ἸΠΞ Δ pind apyd 
Ἔν τ» adsan nbn 
spay 


FRANKEL (45, 29). 
ΠΣ Ἢ yaws Wwe 
mim pay ron wndad 
mn ΓΦ ΟΠ [5 

δ) ayndy pind 


FRANKEL. 
by min joy ows prota 
orona 3 ΠΟῚ Senn 
:DOIMIN Ww 








BENZEEB (41, 20). 
7” Ὁ) 7p N33 


BENZEEB (45, 14. 15). 
maya yaw) pnyd ANS 
ΠΊΩΝ NII YAN DATIN 
sue Seow ws by py 
INN OP 73.33 NIP 
ὙΠΟΤΝῚ MAD pas ned ans 

spay wy ow ax 


BENZEEB (46, 18). 
yw ya aymd paws wwe 
12 yo way won wnbad 
ΕἸ» ΡΥ 15 mana ΚΠ Ὁ yna 


BENZEEB (49, 34). 
$3 Ὁ ἼΩΝ ΔΝ ὈΡῚ 
Ὁ ὨΣΊ yA 








SIRACH. 
son’ ΠΥ oxnp 2 


SIRACH, 
sow yoy yp ἪΡ» 


SIRACH. 

3 ppm opnyed ὯΝ 
$Y ΠΊΩΝ Naya (M. 73) 
Ada) wna pwn Ὁ5 nna 
ὙΠΟ Sane ws by nna 
(M. 7233 3933) 72733 
ΠΣ] sindm xb yn 

swy pw pond ΣΡ 


SIRACH. 
wr 12 7 py nna On 
v5 wx ndna mm mond 
ΟΡ Sad ins ΤΌΠΟ was 


SIRACH. 
28 nN ὙΠ. ὮΝ 
rpa[x ans 53 Sabana 


BEN SIRA’S PROVERBS PRESERVED IN TALMUDIC 


AND RABBINIC 


I. 
Sir. 3, 21. χαλεπώτερά σου μὴ ζήτει, 
. ἃ, , , Ν 3¢/ 
καὶ ἰσχυρότερά σου μὴ ἐξέταζε. 
22. ἃ προσετάγη σοι, ταῦτα διανοοῦ" 
οὗ γάρ ἐστίν σοι χρεία τῶν κρυπτῶν. 
α. 


Seadyah in ὅπ "Ὁ (ed. Harkavy), p. 178, 1. 18, quotes 
as an extract from the Wisdom of Eleazar ben Irai (see 
Preface, p. xi) the following : 
penn $x yon vpisna won bs yon xdpina 

ΤΎΠΟΣ poy 75 ew xd ann anmenn ἼΦΝΩ 

This seems to be the original text of Ben Sira. 
Inquire not into that which is too difficult for thee ; 
and that which is concealed from thee search not 

out. 
Attend to that which is permitted to thee : 
thou hast no business with hidden things. 


ὅ. 


soo ποθ sawp Ἴ2 ows (i.e. arybs) atyd ΣῈ 
ΠΡ ΤΠ ΠῸΣ «ΡΠ no Sige ΠΡῚΝ wn ap 
nyinosa poy ἽΡ px jnann 
J. T. Haghigah, ii. (fol. 77°). 
That which is too difficult for thee, why shouldest 
thou know? 
that which is deeper than Sheol, why shouldest 
thou search out? 
Attend to that which is permitted to thee ; 
thou hast no business with hidden things. 


an 


pina wasn bx yon bya ΝΟ 73 ἼΒΟΞ 2.3" 
Joo ΠΟΊΞΩΣ tn 53 yen xdpia oypnn bx Jon 
ΤΎΠΟΣ poy 75 psy prann ΤΠ nos dxwn ba 
B. T. Haghigah, fol, 13%. 
Inquire not into that which is too great for thee; 
and that which is too hard for thee, search not out. 





LITERATURE} 


That which is too difficult for thee do not know; 
and that which is concealed from thee do not ask. 
Attend to that which is permitted to thee ; 
thou hast no business with hidden things. 


d, 


yoo ΟΥ̓ (i.e. ND 72) DS owas dx andy ΠΝ 

$3 Jon ΝΌΘΟΣ cpnn bx ἼΘΙ pina wrsn bx 

piann nenay nos Sawn 53 Jon ΠΡΊΞΩΣ yon 
nyinosa poy 75 jx 


Midrash Rabba mwena, viii. (MS. vii, see Bodl. New 
Heb. Cat., No. 147, fol. 12). 


II. 
Sir. 4, 30. μὴ ἴσθι ὡς λέων ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ cov. 
ΠΣ Na AVN now oN Sy bx odiyd 
B. T. Gittin, fol. 6°. 
Let a man never bring excessive terror into 
his house. 
Il. 
Sir. 5, 4. 
Μὴ εἴπῃς" ἥμαρτον, καὶ τί μοι ἐγένετο ; 
ὃ γὰρ κύριός ἐστιν μακρόθυμος. 
worn ds: Sm Spm syon yon ay’ 75 ἼΩΝ on 
B. T. Haghigah, fol. 16%. 


If the evil propensity say to thee, Sin, for the 
Holy One (blessed be he!) excuseth, do not 
believe. 


IV. 
Sirs 5. δ. 

περὶ ἐξιλασμοῦ μὴ ἄφοβος γίνου, 
προσθεῖναι ἁμαρτίαν ἐφ᾽ ἁμαρτίαις" 

Ν ‘ Ν ε > ‘\ > cal , 
καὶ μὴ εἴπῃς Ὁ οἰκτειρμὸς αὐτοῦ πολύς, 
τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν μου ἐξιλάσεται" 
x Ν ἣν; 2 ‘ > > Lal 
ἔλεος γὰρ καὶ ὀργὴ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ, 

oe PO ‘ 4 ε Ν > A 
καὶ ἐπὶ ἁμαρτωλοὺς καταπαύσει ὃ θυμὸς αὐτοῦ: 


1 The proverbs marked with an asterisk are mentioned with the name of Sirach. 
c2 


XX 


ΠΡ ΟΝ. .py Sy py ΘΠ moan bx vmdp dyy* 
yoy ANY DOM 3 ymdpy ΤῊΣ and O27 yom 
ny my dyer dyn 
Seadyah, p. 176, 1. 19. 
And be not confident of pardon, 
to.add iniquity to iniquity, 
or say, His mercies are great, 
he will pardon the multitude of my iniquities ; 
for mercy and wrath are with him, 
and his might resteth upon the wicked. 


V. 
Sir. 5, 7. μὴ ἀνάμενε ἐπιστρέψαι πρὸς κύριον, 
καὶ μὴ ὑπερβάλλου ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας. 
snn sab ams ὮΝ aw 
ΒΒ. T. Shabbath, fol. 153°. 
Repent one day before thy death. 


VI. 
Sir. 5,15. ἐν μεγάλῳ καὶ ἐν μικρῷ μὴ ἀγνόει. 
Syriac ὡμοςο), I santo ugeo 
Great and small do not injure. 
om 595 12 nn bs 
Aboth, iv. 6. 
Despise not any man. 


VIt- 


Sir. 6, 6. of εἰρηνεύοντές σοι ἔστωσαν πολλοί, 
οἱ δὲ σύμβουλοί σου εἷς ἀπὸ χιλίων. 

nbs sao tnd ὙΠῸ nba pindy wos wn ὈΛΔ 

Seadyah, op. cit., p. 178, 1. 13 also B. T. Yebamoth, 
fol. 63, and Synhedrin, fol. 100%, where the words of 
Micha 7, 5, PND Wow ἼΡΥΤ naw, follow. 
Let those that are at peace with thee be many, 
but reveal thy secret to one of a thousand 
[keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth 

in thy bosom]. 


Sir. 6, 7. VI. 
εἰ κτᾶσαι φίλον, ἐν πειρασμῷ κτῆσαι αὐτόν, 
καὶ μὴ ταχὺ ἐμπιστεύσῃς αὐτῷ. 
8. ἔστιν γὰρ φίλος ἐν καιρῷ αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ οὐ μὴ παραμείνῃ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ θλίψεώς σου. 
89 dy ΠΌΣΡ ran dx ἸΠῸΡ ADDI ame n2p* 


My DVI Wy xd ny 9 ANS wv 
Seadyah, p. 178, 1. 3. 





ECCLESIASTICUS. 


If thou gettest a friend, get him by proving, 
and be not hasty to trust in him; 

for there is a friend according to the occasion ; 
and he will not abide in the day of adversity. 


IX. 
Sir. 6, 13. ἀπὸ τῶν ἐχθρῶν cov διαχωρίσθητι, 
καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν φίλων σου πρόσεχε. 
smn ὙΣΠΊΝΟΥ ΟἼΣΠ qreawn* 
Seadyah, p. 178,1. 8. 
Separate thyself from them that hate thee, 
and be careful of thy friends. 


X. 
Sir. 7, 1. μὴ ποίει κακὰ, καὶ οὐ μή σε καταλάβῃ 
κακόν. 
ΟΕ 12, 2. 
xd war sayn ΝΟ wad aw vp 12 tex ΝΌΤΟΥ 


> Ὧν" 
Bereshith R., p. 445; Midrash Qoheleth v; Midrash 
Tanhuma npr § 1. 
Ben Sira said the proverb: Do not good to 
the evil, and evil will not befall thee. 
See Schechter, 7. Q. &. iii. p. 694, No. 17 and note. 


XI. 


Sir. 7,10. μὴ ὀλιγοψυχήσῃς ἐν τῇ προσευχῇ σου. 
own ddan dx pby nae nyt paw Ὁ5 2 ἼΩΝ 
Tay dy aya TN 
B. T. Erubin, fol. 65%. 


1 Text has mv ‘to teach.’ Rashi (Solomon of Troyes) 
says: I have searched to find this verse in the Hagiographa, 
but did not succeed. Perhaps it is in Sirach. 

Rab said: Let not a man pray whose mind is 
not at rest within him, because it is said: In 
adversity who shall give thanks? 


Perhaps a reminiscence of Ps. 6, 6. 


XII. 


Sir. 7, 17. ταπείνωσον σφόδρα τὴν ψυχήν cov. 
ὅτι ἐκδίκησις ἀσεβοῦς πῦρ καὶ σκώληξ. 
[So NA arrange the lines.] 
nydin Dos [31 ΠΟῪ ὉΔῸΝ Mpnw mm daw na IND IND 
Aboth, iv. 7. 
Cf. No. LVI below. 
Be humble exceedingly in spirit ; 
for the hope of man is a worm, and the son of 
man is a maggot (cf. Job 25, 6). 


BEN SIRA’S 


XIII. 
Sir. 8, 5. 


μὴ ὀνείδιζε ἄνθρωπον ἀποστρέφοντα ἀπὸ ἁμαρτίας" 
μνήσθητι ὅτι πάντες ἐσμὲν ἐν ἐπιτίμοις. 
peyn yor Ὁ ἼΩΝ xd mown dys ΠῚ ὮΝ 
DwNN 
Mishnah Baba Metsia, iv. το. 


If a man repents, one does not say to him, 
Remember thy former doings. 


XIV. 


Sir. 8, 8. μὴ παρίδῃς διήγημα σοφῶν, 
καὶ ἐν ταῖς παροιμίαις αὐτῶν ἀναστρέφου" 
ὅτι παρ᾽ αὐτῶν μαθήσῃ παιδείαν 
καὶ λειτουργῆσαι μεγιστᾶσιν. 
posn stndn by phn now ex 20 ἼΩΝ 
sod mony 
B. T. Sukkah, fol. 21°, and Abodah Zarah, fol. 19°. 


Rab said: Even the ordinary conversation of 
the wise requires learning. 


XV. 
Sir. 8, 18. ἐνώπιον ἀλλοτρίου μὴ ποιήσῃς κρυπτόν. 


sp 1b pos PRY... POST ΝΣ ΣΝ DMAT AwY 
B. T. Pesahim, fol. 49°. 


Six things are said of the people of the land 
(the unlearned) ...; and they reveal not to him 
a secret, 

Sir. 9, 8. AN 
ἀπόστρεψον ὀφθαλμὸν ἀπὸ γυναικὸς εὐμόρφου,... 
ἐν κάλλει γυναικὸς πολλοὶ ἐπλανήθησαν ... 
9. μετὰ ὑπάνδρου γυναικὸς μὴ κάθου τὸ σύνολον, 
καὶ μὴ συμβολοκοπήσῃς pet αὐτῆς ἐν οἴνῳ. 
on bx ΠΡ ΝΟΣ tobn yp in nex poy odyn* 
Ὁ ΠΡ AWS ANINS 5. Dw TAY spond Indy 
sma b> py) innenn 
B. T. Synhedrin, fol. 100; Yebamoth, fol. 63°. 

* So Rashi (ap. Schechter, ibid., p. 700, note 36), ed. 
yop ΤῺ" mya dex. 

Hide thine eyes from a comely woman, 
lest thou be caught in her snares ?; 


* Cf. 9, 3°: μή ποτε ἐμπέσῃς els τὰς παγίδας αὐτῆς. 





Xxi 


PROVERBS. 


turn not aside to her, to mingle wine and strong 
drink with her.: 

for through the beauty of a fair woman many 
have been destroyed, 

and ‘all her slain are a mighty host’ (Prov. 7, 26). 


XVII. 


Sir, 11, 1. σοφία ταπεινοῦ ἀνύψωσεν κεφαλήν, 
καὶ ἐν μέσῳ μεγιστάνων καθίσει αὐτόν. 
ΦῚΣ NWD 2 ΝΒ Ὁ ἢ 
(Prov. 4, 8) Jonny vbadp 
s2e1n oO 3) 

So in J. T. Berakhoth, vii. 2, and in Midrashim: the 
B. T. Berakhoth, fol. 485, quotes Proverbs 4, 8, entire, 
omitting the last three words of the saying. See Reif- 
mann’s essay on Ben Sira in FONT iii. p. 248, 3. 

In the book of Ben Sira it is written: 

Exalt her and she shall lift thee up (Prov. 4, 8), 
and set thee among princes. 


XVIII. 
Sir. 11, 8. πρὶν ἢ ἀκοῦσαι μὴ ἀποκρίνου, 
καὶ ἐν μέσῳ λόγων μὴ παρεμβάλλου. 
DID) WN)... DIMA ΠΟΣῚ ΡΣ p37 Ayaw 
ayn Saas ier van mat ind 
Aboth, v. Io. 
Seven things are in a clod, and seven in a wise 
man. (The wise man) ...does not interrupt 
the words of his companion; and is not hasty to 
reply... 
Cf, Prov. 18, 13. Monatsschrift, 1865, p. 186, note 8. 


XIX. 
περὶ πράγματος οὗ οὐκ ἔστιν σοι χρεία μὴ ἔριζε. 


qa yd an νον oma ppynow 
Midrash Tanhuma (p. 73) 818), πὶ 


Sir. 11, 9. 


For he was busied with matters whereof he 
had no need. 


XX. 
Sir. 11, 28, πρὸ τελευτῆς μὴ paxdpile μηδένα, 
καὶ ἐν τέκνοις αὐτοῦ γνωσθήσεται ἀνήρ. 
BX ἼΒΣΠ) nN 5. Awan bx mp ὉΒΟ 
Seadyah, p. 178, 1. 6. 


Call no one happy before (his) death, 
for by his end shall a man be known.. 


Xxil 


Sir. 11, 29. ΧΧΙ. 
μὴ πάντα ἄνθρωπον εἴσαγε εἰς τὸν οἶκόν σου. 
sma van dsm ΝΟῚ ἼΤ᾽ ino om yrn* 
B. T. Synhedrin, fol. 100%; Yebamoth, fol. 63°. 
Keep away many from the midst of thy house, 
and bring not every man into thy house. 
ΙΝ ἀπ ἄς XXII. 
ἰσχυροτέρῳ σου καὶ πλουσιωτέρῳ μὴ κοινώνει. 
4. ἐὰν χρησιμεύσῃς, ἐργᾶται ἐν σοί 
καὶ ἐὰν ὑστερήσῃς, καταλείψει σε. 
sd κὸν owed pripo pre mena awa nn 
pod pony Px) Indo nywa pam. paw poxy 
PNT nywa 
Aboth, ii. 3. 
Be cautious with (those in) authority, 
for they let not a man approach them but for 
their own purposes ; 
and they appear like friends when it is to their 
advantage, 
and stand not by a man in the hour of his need. 
Monatsschrift, 1865, p. 186, note 8. 


XXIII. 
Sir. 13, 11>. ἐκ πολλῆς yap λαλιᾶς πειράσει σε, 
καὶ ὡς προσγελῶν ἐξετάσει σε. 
ὙΦΠῚ 75 pnen ἼΠΙΝ now ny 22 5" 
Seadyah, p. 178, 1. 15. 

For with much talk will he try thee, 
and will laugh at thee, and search thee out. 
Cf. No. XXXIV below. 


XXIV. 


πᾶσα σὰρξ κατὰ γένος συνάγεται, 


Sir. 13, 16. 


kal τῷ ὁμοίῳ αὐτοῦ προσκολληθήσεται ἀνήρ. 
Cf. 27, 9. πετεινὰ πρὸς τὰ ὅμοια αὐτοῖς καταλύσει. 
72) pow wd my 55 ΦΙΙΞῚ omnes ΦΡΊΦΌΥ, 


% nod one 
B. T. Baba Qama, fol. 92°. 


Thirdly, in the Hagiographa ; as it is written: 
Every bird dwelleth according to his kind, 
and (so doth) man according to his like. 


Sir. 13, 25. XXV. 
καρδία ἀνθρώπου ἀλλοιοῖ τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ, 


2. δε ἃ bo > ΄ 
ἐᾶν εἰς ἀγαθὰ €av τε εἰς κακα. 





ECCLESTASTICUS. 


yd pa ad pa we mae ots 20 
Ber. Rabba, fol. 64°. 
The heart of a man changeth his countenance, 
whether for good or for evil. 


XXVI. 
Sir. 14, 5. 6 πονηρὸς ἑαυτῷ τίνι ἀγαθὸς ἔσται ; 
jaw arn Sei weer Sid yey sia ow 55 
pon by pen xd mwas ὃν yby onmnnd aos ot 
we δ5 xb 
J. T. end of Peah, 
Every one who needs to receive (alms) and 
refuses to take them, is (like) a shedder of blood, 
and it is forbidden to have compassion on him. 
If he has no pity on himself, how much less will 
he have pity on others? 
Sir, 14, ΤΥ, XXVIIL. 
Τέκνον, καθὼς ἐὰν ἔχῃς εὖ ποίει σεαυτόν. 
17. ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ddov ζητῆσαι τρυφήν. 
ἡ γὰρ διαθήκη ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος θανάτῳ ἀποθανῇ. 
18. ὡς φύλλον θάλλον ἐπὶ δένδρου δασέος, 
τὰ μὲν καταβάλλει, ἄλλα δὲ φύει. 
οὕτως καὶ γενεὰ σαρκὸς καὶ αἵματος" 
ἡ μὲν τελευτᾷ, ἑτέρα δὲ γεννᾶται. 
aon 7b em ὮΝ 2 xen ab mn be 
apn ony .npmpnn mind psa ὙΠ Sawa pay 
pvt pa 193 75 a Ὃ dyes pn (ΠΌΣΟΥ) ὍΣ 0 
day bdmy pyy bbn sawn θυ 
B. T. Erubin, fol. 54". 
1 See Kohut, Aruch s.v. γπ (i). 
Rab said to his son Hamnuna: 
My son, if thou hast aught, do good unto thyself, 
for there is no pleasure in Sheol, and death tarries 
not. 
And if thou sayest, It is for my sons and for my 
daughters, 
who shall declare to thee the law in Sheol? 
The sons of men are like the herbs of the field, 
some flourish, and others fade. 
Sir 26; £7, XXVIIL 
μὴ εἴπῃς ὅτι ᾿Απὸ Κυρίου κρυβήσομαι" 
μὴ ἐξ ὕψους τις μου μνησθήσεται; 
ἐν λαῷ πλείονι οὐ μὴ μνησθῶ, 
τίς γὰρ ἡ ψυχή μου ἐν ἀμετρήτῳ κτίσει ; 


BEN SIRA’S 


339 DYS YP 5 oA *NAND Sx wwxn dy * 
MIN Miypa wa. 1D IW TN Nd 
S*adyah, p. 178, 1. 12. 
Say not, I am hidden from God, 
and in the height who shall remember me? 
Among a numerous people I shall not be known, 
or what is my soul among the multitude of spirits? 


Cf. Sir. 18, 16, &c. ΧΣΙΣ, 


οὐχὶ καύσωνα ἀναπαύσει δρόσος; 
οὕτως κρείσσων λόγος ἢ δόσις. 
mana nwwa and vwyd mys ᾿ΠῸ ΠῚ b> 
M73 83 ΤΊΣ O23 Da 
B. T. Baba Bathra, fol. 9». 


He who gives a farthing to a poor man is blessed 
with six blessings, &c.: 

but he who comforts him with words is blessed 
with eleven blessings. 


Sir. 18, 23. XXX, 
πρὶν εὔξασθαι ἑτοίμασον σεαυτόν, (τὴν εὐχήν 
σου N**) 


καὶ μὴ γίνου ὡς ἄνθρωπος πειράζων τὸν κύριον. 
ΠΡΠῺΘ Ayan 53 ὙΥῚΣ 12Π WIN DIA ΝΘ 3 ἽΝ ἢ 
: Midrash Tanhuma ΓΤ} § 8. 

Ben Sira said: 

Before thou vowest, make ready thy vows: 

be not like a deceiver. 


ΧΧΧΙ. 
Sir. 20, 9. ἔστιν εὐοδία ἐν κακοῖς ἀνδρί, 
καὶ ἔστιν εὕρεμα εἰς ἐλάττωσιν. 
Ayn pyo maya by .nawa ΡΨ myna Sy ΤῊΣ 
Mishnah Berakhoth, ix. 3. 


A man gives thanks for evil which results in good, 
and for good which results in evil. 


XXXII. 
Sir. 20, 15. ὀλίγα δώσει καὶ πολλὰ ὀνειδίσει. 


NADY ὈΓΣΓΦ OT) Wal WA ND ΟΣ by 
may OND ΠῚ 
J. T. Berakhoth, iv. 2. 
Deliver not our livelihood into the hands of men 
(1. flesh and blood), 
for their giving is small, and their reproaching 
great, 





PROVERBS. xxiii 


XXXII. 
Sir. 21, 11. 


ε , , Lal Aa > ΄ > a 
ὃ φυλάσσων νόμον κατακρατεῖ τοῦ ἐννοήματος αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ συντέλεια τοῦ φόβου Κυρίου σοφία. 


pons os) .poan min 15. ΠΝ ΣῚ yan ayy ΝΣ 

WI DDD ONS PSX ANA ΡΟΝ 
B. T. Qiddushin, fol. 30°. 
I created the evil propensity : 
I created against it the Law as a safeguard (11. 
a seasoning). 
If ye are occupied in the Law, 
ye shall not be delivered into its hand. 


XXXIV. 
Sir. 21, 20. 


μωρὸς ἐν γέλωτι ἀνυψοῖ φωνὴν αὐτοῦ, 
ἀγὴρ δὲ πανοῦργος μόλις ἡσυχῇ μειδιάσει. 
Cf. also 19, 30. 


{OYIS) III) 2.23 3 DIN ὩΣ nwdwa 
ypnwa AX mS MN 
B. T. Erubin, fol. 65%, 
By three things a man is known, by his purse, 
by the wine-cup, and by his vexation. They say 
to him: By his laughter also. 
Compare Aboth N., p. 865: 
AND) JN ὩΣ, INA AS Ppa ὉΔῚ nwdwa 
ΤΠ ana [Ὁ 


By three things do men test a man, 
by trading (4. giving and taking), and by much 
wine, and by much talking. 


XXXV. 


Cf. Sir. 21, 22. ποὺς μωροῦ ταχὺς εἰς οἰκίαν. 
Also verse 23. 
xb ΠΡ ΙΝ snow πο xv 13 ἼΒΟΞ 25" 
ayy nd os ΟΠΊΝΠΦΏΠ maa Son ww ΟἼΣΠΝ 
MnP nna nay awn (ὉΠ aw nd ΣΝ.) In 
DiNnd ὉΠ mad 02937) «ὩΣ PNwin) NOS. NNN 
B. T. Niddah, τόν, 
Three things I hate, and four I do not love: 
(1) a prince who frequents the house of ban- 


queting; (2)....3; (3)....+; (4) the man that 
enters suddenly the house of his neighbour, 


xxiv 
Sir. 21, 22. XXXVI. 

ποὺς μωροῦ ταχὺς εἰς οἰκίαν, 

ἄνθρωπος δὲ πολύπειρος αἰσχυνθήσεται ἀπὸ 

προσώπου. 

23. ἄφρων ἀπὸ θύρας παρακύπτει εἰς οἰκίαν, 

ἀνὴρ δὲ πεπαιδευμένος ἔξω στήσεται. 
reps ins Jaw wan mad ots san dx adi) * 
yoy mon wes ma dx aman ὍΔ) ba sep 12 
12 ἼΒΌΞ yaw wan Ἔν ows Sono» bx add yom 
way ΠΩΣ weed tas na ὉΝ pray nmap Sux sawp 

wrp7 way Np}, 145, ed. Schénblum; see Schechter, 

J. Q. R. iii. p. 695, No. 21. 

Let a man never hasten into the house of his 
neighbour; for thus it is written in the book of 
Ben Sira: 

The foot of a senseless man hastens to (an- 
other’s) house, 
but a prudent man will subdue many. 

Let a man never look in at the door of his 
neighbour ; for thus (it is written) in the book of 
Ben Sira : 

A foolish man gazes from the door into (an- 
other’s) house, 
but a man’s honour is in the house of his own 
kinsmen. 
Sir. 28, 2. XXXVI. 


τρία δὲ εἴδη ἐμίσησεν ἡ ψυχή pov... 
πτωχὸν ὑπερήφανον, καὶ πλούσιον ψεύστην, 
γέροντα μοιχὸν ἐλαττούμενον συνέσει. 
soy na So sin ἸΌΝ nda nyt ps ΠΡῚΝ 
[iayn by axind pp] «ὮΝ jpn wn 
B. T. Pesahim, fol. 113. 
There are four things that the mind cannot bear. 
They are these: 
A poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a liar, 
an old man that is an adulterer, 
anda ruler that exalts himself above the multitude. 
1 The last clause is not in Sirach. 


XXXVI. 
Sir. 25, 3. ἐν νεότητι οὐ συναγίοχας, 
καὶ πῶς ἂν εὕροις ἐν τῷ γήρᾳ σου; 
ys onyan xd pny ox ΣΝ ΝΌΠ 15) 
napa own 


Aboth N., ch. 24 (p. 78). 
Thus says the proverb : 


If in thy youth thou hast had no delight in them, 
how wilt thou attain them in thy old age? 





ECCLESIASTICUS. 


XXXIX. 
Sir. 25, 13. 
πᾶσαν πληγήν, Kal μὴ πληγὴν καρδίας" 
καὶ πᾶσαν πονηρίαν, καὶ μὴ πονηρίαν γυναικός. 
avo ΝΟΥ axa Ὁ5 ΟΡ sin xd) sin b> 2 ἼΩΝ 


ayn nes xd) myn Ὁ5 wen win ΝΟῚ ann $a ab 
B. T. Shabbath, fol. 11°. 


Rab said: Any sickness, but not sickness of the 
bowels ; ' 

any pain, but not the pain of the heart; 

any ache, but not the aching of the head; 

any evil, but not an evil woman. 


XL. 
Sir. 26, a. 
γυναικὸς ἀγαθῆς μακάριος ὃ ἀνήρ, 
καὶ ἀριθμὸς τῶν ἡμερῶν αὐτοῦ διπλάσιος. 
mbps wo ppp nbys “wN ΠΕΣ ΠΝ * 
B. T. Yebamoth, fol. 63°. 
Happy is the husband of a beautiful woman: 
the number of his days is doubled. 


XLI. 


Sir. 26, 3. γυνὴ ἀγαθὴ μερὶς ἀγαθή, 
ἐν μερίδι φοβουμένων Κύριον δοθήσεται. 
PNA AY AND FAY AWN NWO 13 7WH_I Δ. ἢ 
ΠΡῚΝ ndyad ΠΡῚΝ ayn mes] «1 ὈΠῸΝ ay 
Ἰ[ΠΠΡΡΝ Ὁ. SPINY NID AWAD 
B. T. Synhedrin, fol. 100”; cf. Yebamoth, fol. 63°. 


It is written in the book of Ben Sira: 

A good wife is a good gift; 

she shall be given into the bosom of him that 
feareth God. 

An evil wife is a plague (// a leprosy) to her 
husband. 

What is the remedy? Let him drive her from his 
house (i.e. divorce her), 

and he shall be healed from the plague of her 
(Zt. from her leprosy). 


1 The second part not in Sirach. 


XLII. 


Sir, 28, 12. ἐὰν φυσήσῃς σπινθῆρα ἐκκαήσεται, 
καὶ ἐὰν πτύσῃς ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν σβεσθήσεται. 


BEN SIRA’S PROVERBS. 


“Mya 72 MAI nbn ὌΡΗ nnn ΙΝ δ 73* 
NID) AA Ppr 


M. Rabbah, Leviticus, fol. 153; and anonymously in 
Yalkut, Levit., § 460; Psalm, ὃ 767; Job, ὃ 501. 


Bar Sira says: 
There was a live coal before a man: he blew 
upon it and it flamed; 
he spit upon it and it was extinguished. 
. 
XLII. 
Sir. 30, 23. 
ἀγάπα τὴν ψυχήν σου καὶ παρακάλει τὴν καρδίαν σου, 
καὶ λύπην μακρὰν ἀπόστησον ἀπὸ σοῦ" 
πολλοὺς γὰρ ἀπέκτεινεν ἡ λύπη, 
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ὠφελία ἐν αὐτῇ. 
wow ov  ΠῸ yin xd 5 ἽΠΌ my ayn Ν᾿ 
sw pre odry Sy ὝΨΟΥΣ ayia wee ΠΟ 
B. T. Yebamoth, fol. 63%. 


Be not troubled for the trouble of the morrow, 

for ‘thou knowest not what a day may bring 
forth’ (Prov. 27, 1). 

Perhaps on the morrow he will be no more, 

and be found grieving over a world that is not his. 


XLIV, 
Sir. 30 (33), 33. 
ἄρτος καὶ παιδεία Kal ἔργον οἰκέτῃ. 
34. ἔργασαι ἐν παιδί, καὶ εὑρήσεις ἀνάπαυσιν. 


may anos ΝΟῚ md ΝΠ 
B. T, Baba Metsia, fol. 65", 


For it is better for him that his servant should 
not become an idler. 
So Rashi; cf. Kohut, 4ruch s. v. 12 (ii). 


XLV. 
Sir. 31 (34), 26. 
φονεύων τὸν πλησίον 6 ἀφαιρούμενος συμβίωσιν, 
καὶ ἐκχέων αἷμα ὃ ἀποστερῶν μισθὸν μισθίου. 
PEN ΝΘ MIND ABD my dan b> pM 48 
OD INDw3 
Midrash Tanhuma (p. 12») m3, 7. 
Rabbi Johanan said: Any one who steals the 


worth of a farthing from his neighbour is as 
though he took away his life. 





XXV 


XLVI. 
Sir. 31 (34), 27: 
καὶ ἐκχέων αἷμα ὃ ἀποστερῶν μισθὸν μισθίου. 
yon wer Sor ideo wow row warrsn b> 
B. T. Baba Metsia, fol. 112". 


Every one who suppresses the hire of an hire- 
ling is as though he took from him his life. 


XLVI. 


Sir. 32 (35), 21. προσευχὴ ταπεινοῦ νεφέλας διῆλθε. 


pp ypay xpoo xndp svnn 
Zohar, Levit. 1 (3, p. 62). 


That word mounts up, and cleaves the firmaments. 


XLVIILI. 
Sir. 34 (31), 28. 
ἀγαλλίαμα καρδίας Kal εὐφροσύνη ψυχῆς 
οἶνος πινόμενος ἐν καιρῷ αὐτάρκης. 
Cf. the Syriac (31, 28). 
yonw ΠΕῚ xd inown Aart 
B. T. Yoma, fol. 76%, 


If he acts rightly, (i.e. drinks in moderation, 
Rashi,) it (wine) gladdens him; if he does not 
act rightly, (i.e. drinks to excess,) it ruins him. 


XLIX. 
Sir. 34 (31), 28. 29. 
ἀγαλλίαμα καρδίας καὶ εὐφροσύνη ψυχῆς 
οἶνος πινόμενος ἐν καιρῷ αὐτάρκης" 
πικρία ψυχῆς οἶνος πινόμενος πολύς κιτ.λ. 
Sy MDD XNVIN NNT ΝΠ xx 
Zohar, Levit. »»2w (3, Ρ. 77). 


But the beginning of wine is gladness, and 
the end thereof sorrow. 


L. 


Sir. 35 (32), 4. ὅπου ἀκρόαμα μὴ ἐκχέῃς λαλίαν. 


MNYDI PMD PS 
B. T. Taanith, fol. 5”. 


Men should not talk much at a meal. 


XXVi 


LI. 
Sir. 36 (33), 7- 
διὰ τί ἡμέρα ἡμέρας ὑπερέχει, 
καὶ πᾶν φῶς ἡμέρας ἐνιαυτοῦ ἀφ᾽ ἡλίου; 
8. ἐν γνώσει Kupiov διεχωρίσθησαν, 
καὶ ἠλλοίωσεν καιροὺς καὶ ἑορτάς. 
0 ἼΩΝ NPY ἡ ΠΝ DION on Sew or πον 
1 ἼΩΝ IID Ia ANd ἼΩΝ «ὩΣ. DY AD 
ΝΣ WIT ὯΣ NAW ὯΝ ΠῚ 
Β. T. Synhedrin, fol. 65”; Midrash Tanhuma, Exodus 
morn, ἃ (p. 109g"). 
Turnus Rufus asked this question of R. Akiba, 
and said to him, 
Why is one day different from another? 
He said to him, And why is one man different 
from another? 
He said to him, Because the Lord wills; 
and the Sabbath also is because the Lord wills. 


LI. 


Cf. Sir. 36, 26. πάντα ἄρρενα ἐπιδέξεται γυνή. 
eons andy ὙἹ [Ὁ and 20 wpd wn rox 
B. T. Kethuboth, fol. 757. 


It is better to dwell two together, than to dwell 
a widow. 


LIII. 
Sir. 36, 30>. 
καὶ οὗ οὐκ ἔστιν γυνή, στενάξει πλανώμενος. 
mux a> nny 
B. T. Shabbath, fol. 152%. 
The joy of the heart is a wife. 
nnow xdaomw new paw ote 55 
B. T. Yebamoth, fol. 62°. 


Every man who has no wife, dwells without joy. 


EV: 
Sir. 38, 1. 
τίμα ἱατρὸν πρὸς τὰς χρείας τιμαῖς αὐτοῦ. 
% ὙΌΣ xbw oy pam ΠΝ 739 ὌΝ bwon 
Midrash Rabba, Exodus, c. xxi. 
(The proverb says): Honour thy physician 
before thou hast need of him. 





ECELESTASLICYS, 


The proverb also occurs in an Aramaic form : 


2m ΤΌΣΗ dt sy qroxd pis yd 4 ἼΩΝ 
J. T. Taanith, iii. 6. 
In Midrash Tanhuma, Gen. ypn, § τὸ (p. 51°), it is 
introduced with the words : 


ΝΟ 72 TADS rnd “Hyd AK 
See Schechter, 7. Q. 2. iii. p. 694, No. 16, and note 79. | 


, 


ὯΝ, 

Sir. 38, 4. 

Κύριος ἔκτισεν ἐκ γῆς φάρμακα' 
ἡ. ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐθεράπευσεν καὶ ἦρεν τὸν πόνον αὐτοῦ, 
8, μυρεψὸς ἐν τούτοις ποιήσει μίγμα. 
ΤΙΝ ΝΕ NEA ΠῚ .yANA [Ὁ DD Adyn ΠΝ 

NAP AWA NS AP WwW APN AnD) ASN 

Midr. Rabba, Genesis, viii; Midr. Yalkut, Job, § 501. 
God causes spices to spring up out of the earth: 
With them the physician heals the stroke, 
and of them the perfumer compounds the perfume. 


LVI. 
Sir. 38, 24. 
καὶ 6 ἐλασσούμενος πράξει αὐτοῦ σοφισθήσεται. 
am) "ΠῚ ΠΩ Ἧ ANIA ᾽ν) POya ΝΘ iw 
pix 55 py nm mb>awa 
Aboth N., cap. 33, p. 73” (cf. also Aboth, iv. 14). 
Have little business, but be busied in the Law, 
and eager for the commandments ; 
and behave thyself in humbleness of spirit with 
every man. 


LVII. 


Sir. 39, 25. ἀγαθὰ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ἔκτισται ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, 
οὕτως τοῖς ἁμαρτωλοῖς κακά. 
mynd mew yy osied my vn 
Sepher Yetsira, p. 102, note 1. 


Good is kept for the good, 
and evil is kept for the evil. 


LVIII. 
Sir. 40, 19. 
τέκνα καὶ οἰκοδομὴ πόλεως στηρίζουσιν ὄνομα, 
καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα γυνὴ ἄμωμος λογίζεται: 


BEN SIRA’S 


emg ΠΡ ids cots Sy nyt pam ποῦν 


psa ov>2) «ΠΝΣ ΠΙΦΝῚ 
B. T. Berakhoth, fol. 57>. 


Three things enlarge the understanding of a man. 
They are these: 
a comely dwelling, a comely wife, and comely 
furniture. 
Sir. 40, 25. LIX, 
χρύσιον καὶ ἀργύριον ἐπιστήσουσιν πόδα. 
Sw soon ΠῚ ἜΡΟΝ Ἄϊει ὈΠΟΟΣΣ wwe pn Ὁ5 ΤΙΝῚ 


yhan Sy ΚΡΌΝΟΝ ΟΝ 
B. T. Pesahim, fol. 119%. 


‘And every (living) substance that followed 
them’ (Deut. 11, 6, //. that was at their feet). 
R, Eleazar says: This means the wealth of a man, 
which makes him stand firm upon his feet. 


LX. 
ἀνὴρ βλέπων εἰς τράπεζαν ἀλλοτρίαν, 
οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτοῦ ὃ βίος ἐν λογισμῷ ζωῆς. 
ian yndwS meyer ads: on os ayn ποῦν 
ΕἸΒΔΣ poe prow wor ydy ΠΌΝΟ inwaw ony 
B. T. Betsah, fol. 32”. 
They 


Sir. 40, 29. 


There are three men whose life is no life. 
are these: 

The man who watches the table of his neighbour, 

the man whose wife rules over him, 

and the man whose body is ruled by pains. 


LXI. 


θυγάτηρ πατρὶ ἀπόκρυφος ἀγρυπνία, 

καὶ ἡ μέριμνα αὐτῆς ἀφιστᾷ ὕπνον. 

ἐν παρθενείᾳ μή ποτε βεβηλωθῇ .... 

καὶ συνωκηκυῖα μή ποτε στειρώσῃ. 

AMIVPA ἢ xd DIAS δ ΓΘ mand na 

xd NOW ΠΣ ΠΣ NOY ANI. .AM|nn xow 

NOY ADP . Ὁ nd bn xd NOU NNW ΝΣ 

Ὁ AYN 

B. T. Synhedrin, fol. 100». 

A daughter is a vain treasure to her father : 

for fear about her, he does not sleep ; 

in her youth, lest she be seduced ; 

in her maidenhood, lest she play the harlot; 

when she is marriageable, lest she be not married; 

when she is married, lest she have no sons} 

when she is old, lest she practise sorcery. 


Sir. 42, 9. 


Io. 





PROVERBS. XXVii 


LXII. 
Sir. 9, 12 (Syriac). 


mwxn py anw monn bs 
Aboth, i. 5; Geiger in ZDMG, xii. p. 537. 


And prolong not converse with a woman. 


The following proverbs, ascribed to Ben Sira, are 
not found in the Greek or Syriac versions. 


LXIII. 


(or, IMD) }NYOD DIN 5 777 .DIS 133 obs Ὑπῦ 

End of Derekh Erets Zuta (anonymous) ; Tanya, No. Io 
(with the introductory words m8 RVD 72). See Schechter, 
J. 0. &. iii. p. 695, No. 19. 

The glory of God is the sons of men; 

the glory of the sons of men is their clothing. 


LXIV. 


pyri apa ndpy dan sap 13 ἼΒΟΣ ans * 
or naa ὙΠ inn par dpr.9a00 Sp ΝΥ dy 
nat wo myo ὈΡῚ «ΠΝ ΘΟ ΠΝ inno dp 
ν᾽ papa 
B. T. Baba Bathra, fol. 98%; Yalqut Proverbs, ὃ 956. 
As it is written in the book of Ben Sira: 
I have weighed all things in the balance, 
and have found nothing lighter than bran; 
but lighter than bran is the bridegroom who dwells 
in the house of his father-in-law, 
and lighter than the bridegroom is a guest (11. 
traveller) who introduces another guest, 
and lighter than the guest is ‘he that giveth 
answer before he heareth’ (Prov. 18, 13). 


LXV. 


FYDN) JNDYDN Dy NN WI? ΝΟ 12 ADI ΠΣ ἢ 
na ὙΠΟ PS ΟἼΝΠ ΒΟΟΣ Ova ss nyvsr pap) ΠΕ Π 
yoy Msn inptyy yaad qd) pa mwynA ᾽5 nD 2) 

Baraitha Kallah, ed. Coronel, 7%. See Schechter, 
J. Q. R. iii. p. 697, No. 23. 

It is written in the book of Ben Sira: 
Remember the day of thy being gathered (in death); 
withdraw (Z¢. gather in) reproach and acquire 

virtue (Z/, merits) ; 
for in the day of a man’s being gathered, 
d 2 


XXviii 


neither riches nor great strength accompany him; 
for his work is prepared, it will go before him, 
and his righteousness shall lighten his eyes. 


LXVI. 


pina Sawa mde ἫΝ ioe gD 72 DN Ὃν “2 d9* 
yond “ΒΝ wad ὯΔ IMD WwoID HMA ANNI) 1 
:prprnd 
B. T. Synhedrin, fol. roo. 
See marginal note to Sir. 40, 22, in the Hebrew text. 
All the days of the poor are evil. Ben Sira 
says, the nights also. His roof is the lowest of 
roofs, and his vineyard is in the height of the 
mountains: the rain of other roofs falls on his 
roof, and the earth of his vineyard falls on other 
vineyards, 
LXVII. 
$]D9D ΤΡῚΣ youn yprdr a[*Jnst* 
B. T. Synhedrin, too, 
As it is written: The thin-bearded is cunning 
and the thick-bearded is a fool. 


This proverb is also found in the second Alphabet 
(see below, p. xxix). 


LXVIIL 


Aapnd ΡΟ sp a5 ΝΟ ja ἼΒΌΣ ΦΊΒΟ 
yop pdiyn par ody Sy wp saw ΒΡ 
It is explained in the book of Ben Sira, that 
the Holy One (blessed be he!) is called ‘place’, 
because he is the place of (i.e. contains) the 
world, and the world is not his place. 
See Schechter (7. Q. R. iii. p. 697, No. 24, and p. 706, 
note 109), who points out that the passage is probably 


taken from Bereshith Rabba (43), not from Ben Sira (03). 
See No. I. d. 


1 A common Rabbinical designation of God. Cf. τόπος 
in Philo (e.g. de Somniis, i. § 11, ed. Mangey, i. 630). 


LXIX. 


my ΝΟ ΠῚ ὙΠ ΝΘ 72 TaD] Ins* 
δ) nop 55 om .xnoby op 

Baraitha Kallah, ed. Coronel, 7». 
It is written in the book of Ben Sira: Love 
peace, for on it the world is stayed. Love all 

people, &c. 

The rest of the passage is very corrupt, and cannot be 
translated without resorting to violent emendations. See 


Schechter, ibid., p. 696, and p, 705 for Reifmann’s re- 
construction. 





ECCLESIASTICUS. 


The next two passages have been quoted as belonging 
to Ben Stra, but on insufficient grounds. 


LXX. 
sony ΝΟΌΣ pred 
B. T. Sota, 13; Bereshith R., § 19, beginning. 


According to the camel, so is the burden. 


LXXI. 


Uys OM Ary DY .dIND ἸΝΝῸ ODN ΠΡ» 
J. T. Berakhoth, end. 


In the scroll of the Hasidim it was found 
written : 


For one day thou didst desert me, 
and for two days will I desert thee. 


LXXII. 
The Alphabet of Ben Sira (see above, p. xiv). 


mS ὙΠΟ abt sy ΝΡ apis 
Honour the physician before thou hast need 
of him. 
Cf. above, No. LIV. 


by Πρ (Reifmann conj. 12D) 12 ΝΟῚ 72 
DUM NYD ἘΝ 


The son who is not clear-witted, leave him 
upon the surface of the water and let him swim 
(trade). 


mma Δ ἸΝ ap pa qpdina Sa xo 


The bone that has fallen to thy lot, whether it 
be good or evil, gnaw it. 


mpbad wovdiyr meyap> yy sant 


Gold must be hammered, and a child must be 
beaten. 


yon xd xnav jo ὙΡΟῚΠῚ av ὙΤ 


Be good, and thy portion of goodness do not 
refuse. 


BEN SIRA’S 


amp pnd my xvead md Νὴ 


Woe. to the wicked, and woe to them that 
consort with him. 


roy sia md now nN ΝῊ ἘΝ by qond prt 


Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shalt 
find it at the end of the days. 


Eccles, 11, 1. 


syn xd) pow xb ops con mt 


Hast thou seen white (1. 1n) and black (com- 
bined)? It (the result) is neither black nor 
white. 

The readings are uncertain. 


35 soo xb xeon ayn xd ead ay 


Do not good to the evil, and evil shall not 
befall thee. 


Cf. above, No. X. 
‘yon xb amy jp 7 
Restrain not thy hand from doing good. 


The Bodleian MS. (New Hebrew Catalogue, No. 1466) 
has y2an x? NOD) NOY? ΝΣ [Ὁ TV, never restrain thy 
hand from chastising a child. 


nd oye ΠῸ nyt ΝΟῚ ΝΗ nby xndd 


The bride goes into the canopy, and knows 
not what is coming upon her. 


(MS. sin) xpos wow) xpos sarod 
For a wise man with a sign, for a fool with 
the fist. 
send ΠΙΟῚ MIDI ὙΡΥΩ 
He who honours a man that despises him, 
is like an ass. 
pp pea pw pda ὋΣ 


A fire when it is kindled (? 1. 4p a little fire) 
burns many sheaves, 


Cf. Ep. of S. James 3, 5. 


ΓΔ ΝΘ NID'D ΝΠ NAD 


An old man in a house is a good sign in the 
house. 





ΧΧΙΧ 


PROVERBS. 


pods AON NUD) DY AND NOY NIT 


A good surety is for a hundred days, but an 
evil surety is for a thousand thousand. 


npbne wma mina nD 


Make clear the explanation, and remove 
differences. 


pay 72 py pon aay indy sod ΠΝ qe 


If thou must trade, let thy lot be with the 
lucky. 


mand xbox spiny AMD Ando NNN ΝΡ 


Stock that is near at hand its owner consumes, 
but that which is far off consumes its owner. 


m2 1a ΠΝ md ΠΝῚΡ ΝΟ 
An old friend do not thou repudiate. 


MS. Bodl. : ὝἼΩΣ nx ny) Napyn ra aN Nd ANNOTP JON 


prawn xd ἼΦΒΣ mardi 75 mar pod paw 
Take sixty counsellors, but the counsel of thy 
heart do not abandon. 


Cf. above, No, VII. 


seo mint ΝΟῚ ayaw min ΝῊ o> ΠῚ 


Let the hand be given to thee when it is 
satisfied, but not when it is hungry. 


MS. Bodl. : paw yea MTT Ny Naw TTT NT 7) NN 


LXXIII. 


With regard to the second Alphabet, see the Preface, 
p. xiv. 

The first line (letter δ) is similar to No. XLIII in our 
list of proverbs. Lines 2 (a), 5 (7), τό (9), 17 (8) are 
from No. XVI in our list. Line 3 (3) is from No. VII. 
Line 7 (1) is from No. LXVII. Lines 9 (Ὁ), 10 (), and 
1 (3) from No. LXI. 

The rest is not worth reprinting. 

The Persian translation mentioned above (p. xv) 
(British Museum MS, Or. 4731) begins as follows: 

NEON ENTD 72 WDD 2s) STN | TWOND Dd NI “IW OWI 
RYD [25 RI 

ΤΌΝ FINW ECD PR ID MINI PIT PRY M72 My wn 

SY NTI NOD ΓῺ NN NAT PND) NW ΓΙῸΣ ΤῸ NN NTT OA Wd 


(In Persian characters: Ladiyy2 (σὺ i Cal Baty gi 
ls cmd FE oly Gls ous 5) 


XXX 


The following sayings found in the work “N32 
pan, ascribed to Solomon ibn Gabirol (see 
above, p. xi), are cited by Reifmann (Haasyf, 
iii. p. 250) as showing the influence of Strach. 
The translation, which ts from Ascher's edition, 
ts rather free. 


LXXIV. 
Sir, 19, 10. ᾿Ακήκοας λόγον ; συναποθανέτω σοι" 
θάρσει, οὐ μή σε ρήξει. 
snap 30 snow ὍΝ SpA MANDA aM paNd awry 
m2 wan, No. 318. 


The sage was asked the surest means of keeping 
a secret. Said he, I make my heart its tomb. 


LXXV. 
Sir. 20, 18. 


Ὀλίσθημα ἀπὸ ἐδάφους, μᾶλλον ἢ ἀπὸ γλώσσης. 
pbwoa mi xdy anwd pbwoa ὈἿΝΠ nip ἼΩΝ 
ey ion poway wen way wd pbesa 5. bn 
ny jord 
Ibid. 357. 


He was wont to say, A slip of the tongue is 
more dangerous than the slip of the foot, for the 
slip of the tongue may cost thy head, whilst the 
slip of the foot may easily be cured. 


LXXVI. 


Sir. 20, 30 (and 41, 14). 
Σοφία κεκρυμμένη καὶ θησαυρὸς ἀφανής, 
τίς ὠφέλεια ἐν ἀμφοτέροις ; 
paw popes va vary ΝΡ noon >> qe 
OD PND 
Ibid. 58. 
Wisdom lying dormant is like an unproductive 
treasure. 





ECCLESIASTICUS. 


Sir. 26, 28. ers fel 


Ἐπὶ δυσὶ λελύπηται ἡ καρδία μου, 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ τρίτῳ θυμός μοι ἐπῆλθεν" 
_ ἀνὴρ πολεμιστὴς ὑστερῶν δι᾿ ἔνδειαν, 
καὶ ἄνδρες συνετοὶ ἐὰν σκυβαλισθῶσιν, 
ἐπανάγων ἀπὸ δικαιοσύνης ἐπὶ ἁμαρτίαν. 
byy seme rey dyy Spay sass Sy aden aps 
bond qraye op ps oxy rowsnen ja bao pon 
bps ps vby Sexy nono ὃν 
- Ibid. 66, 67. 
The sage observed, Pity the noble-hearted who 
has fallen; the rich that has become reduced; 
and the wise whose lot is cast amongst the fools. 
None deserves our pity more than the wise who 
has become subjected to the judgement of fools. 


P LXXVIII. 
Sir. 30, 16. 
Οὐκ ἔστιν πλοῦτος βελτίων ὑγείας σώματος, 


ee ee > ΄ ey 5" , 
και οὐκ ἐστιν εὐφροσύνη vTep xapav καρδίας. 


ay 205 ny: ΜΟῚ mina Tey pS 
Ibid. 457. 


There is no greater riches than health, no 
greater pleasure than a cheerful heart. 


LXXIX. 
Sir. 40, 28. Τέκνον, ζωὴν ἐπαιτήσεως μὴ βιώσῃς" 
κρεῖσσον ἀποθανεῖν ἢ ἐπαιτεῖν. 


win xd) apn tps) 
Ibid. 564. 


Better the grave than a fall to poverty. 


GLOSSARY OF WORDS 


not found in the Hebrew of the Old Testament, or found in it only in the passages 


quoted, or referred to. The words marked * are either themselves common, or 


closely resemble words which are common, in New-Hebrew or Aramaic. 


ἘΠΕ pressure, distress, 5 NBIND 46, 5 when there 
was distress to... (Talm.: cf. 28 40 press 
upon, Prov. 16, 26; 28 pressure, Job 33, 73 
Ἂς 25/"%0 be a care to, ἰὰ οὐ." care). 

HON Lodily injury or mishap, 41, 9 (Gen. 42, 4.38. 
44; 20. EX. 21, 22.23). 

DYBS face, 41, 21% (si veral.: v. marg.) in a general 
sense, as in Aram. (with @ cf. 1 Ki. 2, 17 
& pax ny yn Nd, 20. In O.T. max is con- 
fined to two or three particular phrases). 

beyse Joint, viz. of the upper arm, i.e. either the 
shoulder-joint or the elbow (( ἀγκών : cf. 9, 9 
Sur elbow), 41, το (JT nidvxis Jer. 38, 12; 
Coy ‘we Ez. 13, 18; APS Ez, 41, 8 ὃ). 

ΠῚ to set apart, separate, Nif. 46, 8 (Gen. 27, 36. 
Num.11,17. 25. Qoh. 2,10); 20 de withdrawn, 
diminished, 42, 21° (Ez. 42, 6). 

*niWN fires, 48, 3 (NH. pl. of Ms). 

ΓΞ 42,12 perhaps among, cf. G (contr. from 
n22: so Ez. 41,9», and perhaps Prov. 8, 2 
GIB, Job 8,17 Ὁ.  Syr. M5). 

#3 (conj. for m3) fo blind, dazzle, 43, 4 (Syr. 
Iona, ὁόμς ἰ" to blind, said of the sun). 

*73 20 commit adultery, 42, 9. 

ΩΣ (or V3) fo bring to an end, 43, 4 (O. T. Wa 
to come to an end, Ps. 7,10. 12, 2. 17,9; 40 
complete, si vera 1., 57, 3. 138, 8). 

ἘΠΕΣ scde, bank, 40, 16 (cf. 7. Targ. 92, 93 dank; 
2. Aram. Qa side). 

W327 Aindmost part (cf. 533), viz. of a temple, i- 
most temple (i.e. the Holy of holies), 45, 9 
(15 times in 1 ΚΙ, 6-8, 2 Chr. 3-5; Ps. 28, 2; 
and probably 2 Ki. 10, 25 for YY). 





*BIT spot, fault, 44,19 marg. (Talm.: ‘D7 Ps. 
50, 20). 

ἘΒΠῚ fo urge on,impel, partcp. [5 ]3 perhaps 40, 64 
(Est. 3,15. 8,14; OW 6, 12. 2 Chr. 26, 20: 
cf. MBN ¢hrusis, Ps. 140,12. Also Targ.). 

*NYI state of mind, thought, 40, 51 (NH. mind, 
opinion, view, cf. p. xx, No. XI; p. xxiv, No. 
XXXVII. In O. T. only in the objective 
sense of knowledge). 


nN thanksgiving, 47,8 NTN ΠΣ (unless ΠΣ 
should be read, prob. an extension of the 
substantival use of the inf. niin found in 
Neh. 12, 46, cf. 1 Chr. 25, 3. Ezra 3, 11). 

19) multitude (in a weakened sense, of inanimate 
things), 45,9 (so in late Heb., 1 Chr. 29, 16. 
2 Chr. 31, 10). 


TH} destowal, gift, 40,29° marg. (Gen. 30, 30; 
Syr. 59, spec. of a dowry). 

* VWI fo shine, 43,9 (Dan. 12, 3: usually in 
O. T. ἡ warn). 

*MIM shining, 43,8 (cf. so, Targ. Wt: It 
Ez. 8, 2. Dan. 12, 3). 

*WiM warned, well-advised, 42, 85 (NH. (Aboth 
1,9); Targ., Syr., Aram. of Ezra 4, 22). 

* YM fo quake, 48, 12 (Est.5, 9: Qoh. 12, 3; Aram. of 
Dan. 5,19. 6,27. The Pilpel also Hab. 2,7). 

*nipy sparks, flashes, 43, 13, Dp} marg. (Is. 
50,11; cf. DP} Prov. 26, 18 fiery missiles: 
as) shooting-star). 

ἘΠῚ “me, 43, 1 (Qoh. 3, 1. Neh. 2, 6. Est. 9, 27. 
31; and often in the Aram. of Dan., Ezra). 

ἘΠῚ, pl. ON, kend, 49, 8 (Ps.144,13. 2 Chr. 16,143 
Aram. of Dan. 3, 5. 7. 10. 15). 


XXxii 


DN Zo make indignant, 43,17 marg. (BY in 
Qal, Ps. 7,12 αἱ. ; but ? YT shaketh, Ps. 29,8 
for Heb. bony, Is. 23, 11 3). 

NN Joathsomeness, 39, 27 (from Num. 11, 20). 


ἘΠῚ 20 declare, 42,19 (Ps.19, 3, and prob. 52,11 
AIMS for MPN, Job 15,17. 32,10.17. 36, 2, 
and Aram. of Dan.; cf. MIS declaration, 
Job 13, 17). 

jw nN deast of tooth, 39,30 (for the combination, 
cf. the common Syr. expression Jia Laws, 
Deut. 32, 24 [for Heb. Nona-j¥]; Rev. 13, 1, 
&c.: PS. col. 1255. Cf. Sir. 12, 13 ©). 

nipyn things that have passed away, the past, 
42,19 (cf. Abn to pass away, Is. 2, 18. Cant. 
2,11. Job 9, 26. Ps.102, 27; 9 pass away 
Srom, escape, Sir. 42, 20). 

*abn for the sake of, 42, 25 (Num, 18, 21.31: 
Targ. AON, Syr. aXe). 

*IDN reproach, 41, 22° marg., perhaps also 41, 6 
(see the note), and certainly (note the same 
difference between G and (9) 31,31 (Lev. 
20,14. Prov.14,34: 180 20 reproach, Prov. 
25,10. Syr. goa; Targ. 135M). 

DDN Yo close up firmly, stop up, 48,174 (Deut. 
25, 4 Ὁ muzzle; Ez. 39,11 MT. 20 stop 
persons passing through’). 

DN 20 Jay bare (a secret), 42,1 (O. T. AUN Jer. 
49, 10 αἰ}. 

*YBN dusiness, 43,7 (late sense: Prov. 31, 13. 
Qoh. 3, 1.17. 8,6; and ΝΗ... 

ἘΒῚΠ prob. fo shir up, incite, 43,17 (Oi: 20 
reproach, the sense of the root in Heb., yields 
a poor sense). 

Nn fo cut in, engrave, DW engraven, 45, 11 
(Ex. 32, 16,—where, however, as an Aramaism 
is hardly probable, N09 is probably an error 
of transcription for YN, as Jer. 17,1 [and 
win, WIN regularly]; cf. Targ. NI Lev. 
19, 28. Jer. 17, 1). 

fawn reckoning, 42,3. 42, 40 marg.; ἢ also 41, 
21> marg. for mawn (Qoh. 7, 25. 27. 9, 10; 
and NH.: cf. [haem], nian Qoh. 7, 29. 
2 Chr. 26, 15). 





1 With G οἰκοδομέω here, cf. περιοικοδομέω in Ez. 

39, 11 (the word being referred to the mouth of the valley, 

_ apy voom: v. Cornill). Comp. also Deut. 8, 9, Targ. 
Jer. (ap. Levy) δ. ὉΠ) poor xin, i.e. bei/t up firmly. 





GLOSSARY. 


miawn 41, 21> marg.: either an error for fi3¥N, 
or perhaps M30, an Aramaizing inf. Pa. 
from WN; cf. ΓΟ Ez. 24, 26, NBNNT 
Dan. 11, 23. 


*WBD, fem. MWED fas (fig.), gross, unimpression- 
able, obdurate, 42,6 (Ps. 119, 70 WBY, Targ. 
vEO'N. In Targ. and NH. the root and its 
derivatives have the same meaning, as Is. 6, ro 
for ΠΝ, 1 Sam. 25, 25 NMED for 132). 


ἘΠῚ chastisement, suffering, 40, 291 marg. (NH., 
Targ.: but the verb 1D" is common in the 
O. T.). Cf. p. xxvii, No. LX. 

ws (as a noun) substance, properly, 42, 3 (in this 
sense only Prov. 8, 21 W 208 INI, from 
which it is here probably a reminiscence). 

ww very aged, 42,8 (Job 12,12. 15, 10. 29, 8, 
32,6; WY 2 Chr. 36,17). 


babann to maintain oneself, endure (intrans.), 43, 3 
(O. T. Pilpel ὉΞ05 Jer. 20, 9. Mal. 3, 2 a/.; 
Sir. 45, 24. 49, 9). 

*733 20 call by an honourable name or title, 44, 23 
marg. 41, 6 (Is. 44, 5- 45; 4. Job 32, 21. 22). 

*3ND writing, 39, 32. 42, 1. 44) 5» 455 114 (Ez. 
13, 9. 1 Chr. 28, 19. 2 Chr. 2, 10. 35, 4. Dan. 
10, 21; and often in Ezra, Est. Also in the 
Aram, of Ezra and Dan. ‘Targ. 33, Syr. 
o>). 

= 12 whiteness, 43,18 (NH.: mxad must, it seems, 
be read as 1239), 

mba to accompany, 41,12 (Qoh. 8, 15, in Qal: 
in old Heb. only Nif. 3 /o be joined 10... .). 
Cf. p. xxvii, No. LXV. 

προ the act of taking, 42,7 (in O. T. only in 
the concrete sense of /eaching received, lore, 
Prov.1,5 αἰ.). Cf. under nnd. ; 


Dyato loathing (conj. for bay), 40, 29° (cf. O.T. bya, 
with YB? Lev. 26, 11. 15. 30. 43. Jer. 14, 19). 

* TMD 10 smite; ND 42, 5, apparently inf. Pa.= 
naraso (cf. ND a blow, Ez. 26, 9). 

nponn, pl. nipom, diviston in the sense of act of 
dividing, 41, 21>. 42, 3 (in O.T. only diveszon 
=thing divided; cf., however, 1 Sam. 23, 28). 

MPN, pl. NPM, searchings out, care, 44, 4 (in 
Ps. 95, 4 WMD is a place to be searched out, 
remotest part). 

M90 act of stretching out, 41,19. [The readiness 


GLOSSARY. 


with which the author forms (apparently new) 
nomina verbi by prefixing 9, deserves notice : 
comp. in the O.T. Num. το, 2 MIVA IPR? 
ΓΑΒ ΤΙΣ yoods, Deut. το, 11 OYA "2B? yond, 
Jud. 7,15 Bi>NT BED, Is. 53,3 OB WD, 
Ez. 17,9 ΤΙΝ ΤΙΝ ΟΡ, 33, 31 TOXIN 
DY"NIID2, Est. 9, 19. 22 ὙΠ» wn ni nidvin, 
1 Chr. 6,16 #787 M290, 2 Chr. 19,7 OY PS 
ὙΠ ΠΡΟΣ DD NBD...) 

ΤΣ a freasure, 42, 9 (cf. ΤΌΘ Gen. 43, 23 αἰ}. 

ΝῊ hind, 43, 25 (26 times in the Priests’ Code ; 
Deut. 14, 13. 14. 15.18 [= Lev. 11, 14. 15. 16. 
19|; Ez.47, 10: NH. Aid; 2. Aram. nation). 

MND fixed resting-place, fig. for a home, 41, 1. 
44, 6 (O. T. séand, base, 1 Ki. 7, 27 αἰ.). 

ἘΦ. (i.e. 30, as Ps. 45, 9) strings, 39, 15 (Syr- 
Miss, pl. hiss, Aazr, string (of a musical instru- 
ment): Ps. 150, 4 0°32; 45,9 °22 for O°). 

i> from him, 42, 20 marg., for ᾿Ξ, 

“YD standing-place (of water), pond, 43,20 (in 
O.T., but not in this sense). 

DY naked place, 42,18 (2 Chr. 28, 15 [Baer]). 

WO a dropping, 43,22 (cf. TW 10 drop, Deut. 
32,2. 33, 28). 

PW 43, 8 marg.? 

“PED act of depositing, 42,7 marg. (cf. TPB 2 Ki. 5, 
24; and /i7P8). With 7) 725) comp. nwa 
Lev. 5, 21; and Deut. 15, 2. Neh. ro, 32. 

NIP act of buying, 42,4°. (In O.T. only in a con- 
crete sense, /hing possessed, usually = ca/tle.) 

*MIN) discipline, 42, 8 marg. (v. 1. on TDW, 
Perhaps 1 Sam. 20,30. Talm.; Targ. 7179; 
Syr. 09520). 

NAD (or NA ?) the act of giving, 41, 224 (prob.), 
42,7 (in O. T. NAD is a gift), (In Rabb. 
ἸῸΝ NW faking and giving is a common 
expression for commercial dealings, trade [see 
p. xxiii, No. XXXIV; and in Aram., p. xxix]; 
and npdy nn appears in 42, 7 to be used 
similarly.) 

ἘΠΕ comely, becoming, 41,16 (NH.: in O. T. 
the form found is 78) Ps. 33,1 a/.). 

30 20 comport oneself, behave, 40,23 (NH.: Qoh. 
2,3. In Old Hebrew always 10 lead, guide). 

nin? shings to come, 42, το (the Nif. MY) occurs 
frequently in O. T., e.g. 1 Ki. 12, 24; and the 
partcp. Prov. 13, 19 79) AINA, Mic. 2, 4 (?); 
but not with this particular nuance). 





XXxiili 


ἘΠῚ) brightness, light, 43; 1> marg. (Job 3, 43 
cf. the verb twice, Is. 60, 5. Ps. 34,6. Aram. 
in) Dan, 2, 22 Qré, and in Targ., Syr. 309; 
cf. the verb 72, 50). 

2519 eminency, stateliness, 43, 21 (Ez. 7, 11,—si 
vera l.; cf. Arab. τι elasa futt res). 

ἘΠῸΣ fire, 43, 42 (Aram. ἢ), Dan. 3, 6 &c.; 5m). 

ΓΞ) 43, 4¢ appar. (the) Aaditadle (land), (cf. Ex. 
16,35 NIWi3 YN; also ἡ οἰκουμένη, and "λῶν. 

*nyy bys to take counsel, 42, 8 (a N H. expression: 
bp) in Old Heb. is τ Lift or take up; but it 
is rare, and is not found in this idiom). 

520) p) offspring and progeny, 41, 5. 47, 22° (Gen. 
21, 23. Is. 14, 22. Job 18, 19). 

ἘΝΌΝ (i.e. 92) probation, 44,204 (a NH. form 
of noun; Strack ἃ. Siegfried, Lehrb. der 
Neuhebr. Spr. ὃ 52°: comp. for Old Hebrew, 
Konig, Lehrged. ii. τ. § 74. 2). 

DY 10 make sweet, of the voice, 47, 9» marg. 
(so NH.: BY3 in Qal often in O. T.). 

ἘΠῚ the sound of music, 45,9 (μά 57; NH. 
nip"). 

*n¥) prob. 20 make brilliant, 43, 5.13 (comp. 
wes splenduit, fulsit, inclarutt, wy celebrem, 
clarum fecit, wa25 splendens, us splendor, 
fulgor. Usually in Aram. in the fig. senses 
of Ὁ shine, be illustrious or distinguished (Dan. 
6, 4), “riumph, conquer: in O.T. M8) 20 pre- 
stde, 1 Chr. 23, 4. 2 Chr. 2, 1.17. 34, 12. 13. 
Ezra 3, 8.9; in music, 1 Chr. 15, 21, hence 
partcp. O83, Jeader or conductor, Hab. 3, 19, 
and often in titles of Psalms), 

ἘΦ fo strike, knock, 41, 2 (Aram, of Dan. 5, 6; 
Targ., Syr.). 


* ADI fo converse, 42, 12 (:5X00/"= ὁμιλεῖν, 
διαλέγεσθαι, cf. 9, 4 Ὁ ; from dao friendly or 
confidential discourse). 

ἘΠ freasure, 40,18 margy, 41, 12 marg., 14 
marg. (δ Ὁ, |sanc). 

bbinon (denom. from nbbb a mound thrown up 
against a city by besiegers) 10 make oneself a 
mound, fig. for 4o advance against, beset, 39, 24, 
almost (from the context) 20 zmportune, 40, 28 
(Ex. 9, 17, of Pharaoh’s advancing pretexts 
and excuses against the Israelites, in order 

. to escape the necessity of letting them go). 

PDN 43, 4 marg., PBN 43, 23, [0 kindle (Ez. 39, 9. 

e 


XXXiV 


Is. 44,15; Nif. Ps. 78, 21. Targ. PDS, Talm. 
PDI). 

? VYDM lit. zo move as by a tempest, to agitate, 
perturb, 47,18 (YD Is. 54, 11 al: cf. for the 
fig. sense 2 ΚΙ. 6, 11 9") DIS qn ab TYE 
mara). Cf Ὁ didst amaze. 

PED fo suffice, 39, 33 (? P'DD’, as v. 16); * Hif. PBT 
to prove oneself sufficient, be able, 42,17, 10 
supply, 39, 16 (cf. PBY zo suffice, 1 Ki. 20, το; 
PRY sufficiency, Job 20, 22, and perhaps PBY, 
36,18. NH. PBDI: with 39, 16 comp. 
Mechilta nbwa § 6, Wray) IW Pod ON ‘if 
He supplies our needs, we will serve Him’). 

MDD writing, 44, 4° (Ps. 56, 9=do0k). 

220 given to contradiction, 41,2 (Ez. 2,6: cf. 
ico 20 talk emplily, contradict; 1D 10 refuse, 
be disobedient). 

ἘΠῚΡ evil odour, 42,11> marg. (NH. ΠΡ 20 emit 
an evil odour, Talm, SVD evil odour; cf. 
waico 10 corrupt, deprave. In O.T. MD is 10 
extend, hang over, 110 Ex. 26,12 that which 
hangs over; but OMI ANID Jer. 49, 7 
means perhaps ‘their wisdom ἐς corrupted’). 


NY might, 45,18 (Is. 42, 25. Ps. 78, 4. 145, 6). 

δ bayby storm, 43,18 marg. 

WY fo rise up, 47, 1.12 (for the classical OP [47, 23°. 
48,1], as Qoh. 4,15. Dan. 8, 22. 23. 11, 2.3.4. 
4.20.21 al.; cf. Driver, /ntroduction, p. 475). 

ἘΠ 70 be occupied (sq. 3), 42, 8 marg. (Syr. 
© Mix: cf. Qoh. 1, 13. 3, 10). 

*MOMIY humility, 45,4 marg. (NH. zd.; Targ. 
SF): 

*PDY business, occupation, 40,1 (N H.; Targ. poy. 
Cf. ΡΨ, PPYNT, Gen. 26, 20). 


ἈΠΕ fo be licentious, wanton, partcp. fem. ΠῚΠΒ 
42, τοῦ marg. (cf. ONE Jud. 9, 4. Zeph. 3, 4; 
nun Jer. 23, 32). In Aram. the root and 
derivatives have the same meaning, as Sir. 
19, 2. 23, 4.6.16.17 ©, and ᾿Κολωκ τε ἀσέλγεια, 
2 Cor. 12,213. but Arab. 53? is fo act arro- 
ganily ; and this (or an allied sense) is prob- 
ably the meaning of the root in Jud. 9, 4 
(Moore, ‘reckless’). Zeph. 3, 4. Jer. 23, 32. 

*INB licentiousness, wantonness, 41,17 marg. (V.1. 
on M3}. Cf. Gen. 49,4; and see under 108), 

nixde wonders, 43, 25 (the plur. as Ps. 119, 129. 
Dan. 12, 6, and NH.: cf. DNDB Lam. 1, 9). 





GLOSSARY. 


*YPB crash, peal, 46, 17 (Syr. w&). 

ἘΦ WBN fo put far away, 42,9 (read probably 
ΓΒΕ; cf GS in Walton’s Polyglott (ap. 
Lagarde, p. vu) J9:as0. In O.T. 20 set far 

apart, separate, of concrete objects, Gen. 30, 40 
al.: in Syr. spec. of sleep, both in the Peal, 
as Gen. 31, 40, and in the Pael and Afel, Sir. 
31, 1.2, and here in Walton’s text). 

MAMBNI fo be deceived, seduced, 42, τοῦ marg. (in 
O. T. the pass. 798 is used, Prov. 25, 15. Ez. 
14, 9. Jer. 20, 10, as in the text here). 


ΠΡῚΝ 40, 17.24, perhaps, as in NH. (cf. Dan. 
4,24 [A.V.27]), in the sense of almsgiving 
(comp. Delitzsch on Prov. 10, 2; Tob. 4, 7-11 
(where the Aram. text has Nnp7¥). 12,95 
Mt. 6,1; and Ryle and James, Zhe Psalms 
of Solomon, on 9, 6. 20. 15, 15). 

* VISTI 20 shine, 43, 3 (Talm., but rare). 

HAY fo overflow, 47,14 (either Qal asm as G, 
didst overflow with, or Hif. "YM as Θ᾽ [ef. 
24,26 G], didst cause to overflow); 39, 22 
ADSM caused it to overflow (Qal, Lam. 3, 54: 
Hif., Deut. τα, 4 70 cause to overflow, 2 Ki. 6, 6 
to cause to swim). 

*"8¥ prob. figure, form, 43, 21 marg. (Ps. 49,15 
Oré; cf. ΤῸΝ Ez. 43, 11, four times: Targ. WS, 
Syr. Jo, [fem.]). 

ἘΠ (i.e. 73¥) cold, 43, 20 (Prov. 25, 13). 

ἜΤΟΣ growing things, 40, 22. 43,21 (NH.: in 
O.T. ΠῸΣ is used collectively, Gen.19, 25 @/.). 

YUY humble, modest, 42, 84 (Prov. 11, 2 and NH.; 
cf. πὸ γον Mic. 6, 8). 

ἘΠῚΝ 20 need, 42, 214 marg. 

ἘΠῚΝ, WAY need, 39, τό. 21. 30° 33. 42, 23> 
(2 Chr. 2, 15). 

*QS adj. an need of, needing, 42,211; perhaps 
39, 33 Marg. 

«bap 20 receive, 41, τ (Prov.19, 20. Job 2,10. 1Chr. 
12,18. 21,11. 2 Chr. 29, 16. 22. Ezra 8, 30. 
Est. 4, 4. 9, 23.27; and in the Aram. of Daniel). 

. pbp to celebrate, praise, 47,15 (O.T. to mock). 

ἘΦ MDINp, pl. MiP, séalk (οἵ reed), 40, 16 (conj.). 

*DPT fo overlay with a skin or crust, 43, 20 
(DIP Ez. 37, 6. 8). 

ΠΞῚ 43, 23. 25 apparently for 722 BINA (Am, 


4, 4 al.) the great (deep). ΤᾺΝ 
ἘΦ WII 20 be disquieled, perhaps 40, 6 [5 }} (Ps. 


GLOSSARY. 


2,1: οὗ WI] @ busiling throng, Ps. 55, 15, 
NWI Ps. 64, 3, and probably 68, 28 for 7227. 
Often in Targ. for Heb. 27, as Ps. 42, 6). 

* ID) moist, 43,22 marg.(Job 8,16; 287 Job 24,8). 

87 20 lay side by stde as in mosaic work, to tessellate, 
pave, 43, 841 (FAST Cant. 3, 10; cf. ΠΒΣῚ Ez. 
40, 17. 18. 42, 3. 2 Chr. 7, 3. Est. 1, 6, NESW 
2 Ki.16,17. NH. 482; Aram. 439, 213). 

*MNW fo heat, 43,3 (NH.: in O.T. τ doz, Job 
41, 23; so Pi. Ez. 24, 5, Pu. Job 30, 27). 


mANW 42, 7 marg., apparently (si vera 1.) an 
anomalous fem. inf. πε from ΝΣ (cf. iv 
Ps. 89, 10) éaking ; see s.v. NAN, 

PWT fo emit a pale-red colour, 43,9 marg. (cf. 
Pi pale-red, Zech. 1,8; NH. PVD 40 colour 
pale-red), 

*MIW pratse, 44 litle (NH.; Targ. M2¥. Π Ὁ 
laud or pratse, Ps. 63, 4. 117, I. 145, 4. 
147, 12. Qoh. 4, 2. 8,15, and in the Aram. of 
Daniel; MBAYT Ps. 106, 47=1 Chr. 16, 35). 

*DIW flame, 45,19 (700 18, 5: Aram. of Dan. 
3) 22. 7, 9). 

ἘΠΉΦΠ fo look at, 40,29 (13.14,1τ6. Ps. 33,14. 
Cant. 2,9; NH., Targ.). 

W the dropping or casting (i.e. the young) of an 
animal, 40; 19° (Ex. 13, 12. Deut. 7, 13. 
28, 4.18. 51). 

*? URW to confuse, perturb, perhaps 40, 6 W[3e¥) 
is perturbed (Aram,: cf. Luke 1,12 aXe’ 
for ἐταράχθη, John 12,27 μι. for τετάρακται). 

*5FW companion, 41, 18° marg., 42,3 marg. 
(Aram. FRY, kaa). 

mW 10 change, alter (intrans.), partcep. [Ὁ Dv 
different from, 42,24 (so Est. 1, 7. 3, 8); 
Pi. 40, 5; Hithp. (of the moon) 43,8 (72% 
Lam. 4, 1. Mal. 3,6, NH. and Aram.; Div 


1 If the reading be correct, the starry sky, lit up by the 
moon, will be compared poetically to a brightly varie- 
gated pavement. Comp. for the figure Shakespeare, 


Romeo—andSuliet; V. ¥, ‘Look how the floor of heaven 
is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold.’ 





XXXV 


= dissidents, Prov.24,21. The Pi. and Hithp. 
are found earlier, the former 1 Sam. 21, 14 
al., the latter 1 Ki. 14, 2). 

*AYAVN fo narrate, tell, 44,8 (YRS, va Kal’), 

YYW Zo be smeared over, Hif. inf. YY fo smear 
over, fig. close up, of the mouth, 41, 218 marg. 
(In O. T. of the eyes, Is. 6, 10, 29,9. 32,3 
[1 ΠΡ ]}) 

* IW 70 be hot, parched (or perhaps adj. parched), 
43, 22 (2°, ein). 


MN} fo mark out, 43,13 (Ez. 9, 4 [1 Sam. 21, 14 
read AN’). 

*nbyin profit, 41, 14° (cf. NH. npyin), 

*HPONA successor, 44,17 (in a time of destruction 
Noah became a successor, i.e. humanity at 
large perished, but Noah was spared to carry 
on the succession, and keep the race alive’). 
46,12. 48,8 (cf. Oo Nok substitute, represen- 
tative; and Heb. ἘΠ to cause lo come in 
place of, make to succeed, Is. 9, 9). 

*[NM]NA contention, strife, 40, 5 marg. (NH.; 
Targ. TWA: cf. MINA 20 contend in rivalry, 
Jer. 42; 5. 22, 1B). 

*ADA a marvel, pl. OWA, constr. AYYO ‘THA 
43, 25. 48, 14 (Aram, [ΠΩΣ Dan. 3, 32. 33. 
6, 28; AON in 7. Targ., oft. for Heb. nein, 
The veré MA is common in the O. T.). 

*IP'N (1.6. 2A) fo arrange, 47,9 (Qoh. 7, 13. 
12,9; {PF intrans. fo de set right, Qoh. 1,15: 
Aram. ‘RA, &). 

*ninbyin recompences, 48,8 (cf. Talm. pivin, 
D>vIA; Targ. DYPYA, also fem. NDPPAM), 
Ann 42,7 marg., apparently (si vera 1.) TA, an 

anomalous (double) fem. form of NA giving. 


1 Comp. Payne Smith, s. v. JRoaNu (which © uses 
here for πη Π): ‘Apud Sanct. Vit. 83 7. forte sit prosapia, 
soboles, quae locum patris capiat, vel zovus rerum ordo, 

JNaNw Loo ots, de Noacho; veluit Deus 
quod e Noacho JmaSNadS JNoNw Joo, Aphr. 
φῦ, 24. 


Add (perhaps) “"PO¥iI 20 vex oneself, grieve, 42, 101(O.T. WY 20 be little, esp. in position or esteem, 
Jer. 30, 19. Job 14, 21. Zech. 13,7: hence in NH. and Aram. Pi. (Pa.) 20 éreat as μηδ, in an intensified 
sense /o vex, trouble (Syr. to slight, insult), Hithp. (Ethp.) /o vex oneself; cf. p. xxv, No. XLIII). 

With porn b5 40, 11, DaAND dD 41, 10, comp. PIN2) DWI b> x Chr. 29, 11, and yada $5 


2 Chr. 32, 31 (for the classical ,,,>wx 53, e.g. 1 Sam. 9, 19). 


26, 20. Zech. 12, 7. Ps. 119, 11. 80. 125, 3. 


xd ind 45, 26, as Ez. 19, 9. 


e2 


XXXVi GLOSSARY. 


Notr.—The following orthographical peculiarities of the MS. (which, however, do not occur 
uniformly) deserve notice :— 

a. Fod is used to express (a) 7 before a following doubled letter, 39,15 °3, 39, 22 AN 
(i.e. FNM), 42, 17 YO (PON), 44, 204 10, 47,9 IPN; and (8) ὅ, 40, 51 Nw sleep, 40, 29 marg. 
Dy (i.e. DY), 41, τὸ poy (as Job 21, 23. Jer. 49, 31), 6 marg. "2 (perhaps=]3"), 41, 21° marg. 
yen (yy), 42, 12 TNDN. Both these uses of * are common in NH. (Strack u. Siegfried, 
Lehrb, der Neuhebr. Sprache, ὃ 15%). ‘7 occurs 47, 2. 49, 4; 11 44, 25. 47, 1. 48, 15. 16. 22. 

6. Waw is used to express (a) ὥ, 41, 14> IND, 46, 13 (conj.) Sxwnn, and before a doubled 
letter 39, 19 marg. 41, 14> marg. "MDD, 41, 28 marg. IPN, 3 ‘PPIN, 42, τοῦ ANN, 45, 249 ADND, 
46, 15 wp, 47, 3 DI; (8) o (out of a primitive 2), 39, 30° ΣῊΝ (Mass. OD), 43, 24 
INS (VIS), also ΤῊΝ 39,16 (with marg. TY). 33. 42, 23, Sy 40, 1, UY 40, 15, NY 40, 30. 45, 8, 
PIN 41,2 marg. 42,2. 43, 7.12? 44,5. 45,17 (but vc pn), YIN 42,14, WIN 42, 15°, ININ 42, 25> 
marg. 43, τὸ marg. 9. 18. 45,74 marg., NID 43,15 marg., I 43, 32, "ΒΥ 44,19 marg. (Mass. 
‘Bl, in pause ἘΞ), ἜΝ) 45, 124, IBID 46, 199, Ww 48,16 (Strack u. Siegfried, δὲ 15>, 418, 89>, 
oats comp. above, p. xix ff., Nos. I. a-d, XV, XXXIX, etc.). In both @ and ὁ, it must mane 
remain an open question whether this orthography is original, or whether it has been introduced 
by transcribers. Isolated examples of both uses occur in the ©. T., though @ (a) is exceed- 
ingly rare (1 Sam. 17, 35): see ¢.g. Ps. 19,14 OMS, Job 6, 27 D291; Jud. 18, 29 bY, Jer. 31, 34 
pds, Ez. 20, 18 ‘ND; Dan. 11, 6 M3, 30 WP: comp. also nan (Qré 0°37) Ez. 27, 15, nN 
(Qré NPN) 2 Chr. 8,18; and see further Ewald, Lehrduch, § 15%, with the notes; Olshausen, 
Lehrbuch, § 39 ¢, 7, h, k. A non-etymological ἡ is also used somewhat more frequently than is 
usual in the O. T. to express the 6 of a participle, as AMS 41, 22, and elsewhere, and of an 
imperfect, as 40, 6 DIP, 43, 28 pM. 

c. There are many cases of the accidental transposition of letters (especially of 1), giving 
rise to a variation between text and margin: 39, 33 ΤῊΝ and J¥, 40, 3 aw and wd, 41,5 DY 
and pyy, 14> ἽΠΟΝ and mann, 20 Sw and Syiwm, 42, 114 Jnawn and ἽΠΦ 3), 23> Joy 
and 7¥, 43, 4 piso and py, now and mbw, 43,12 x and x, 13 pra and 7pa, nyo and 
mim, 177 ΠῚ and inn, 18 Amy and mim, 44, 23> manda and ANND33, 238 ΝΥ and NYO, 
45, 74 (prob.) mipyin and npn: cf. 39, 30 INII2 and N33, 41, 12 HIN and AWN, 42,57 nnn 
and nen, 45,2 DMN. and oN WoI.. The same error is found sometimes in the O.T., e.g. 
Jer. 2, 25. 17, 23. 42,20. The Massoretic compilation Ochlah w’'ochlah (ed. Frensdorff) enume- 
rates (No. 91) sixty-two instances (not all exegetically certain) of such transposition, which have 
been corrected in the Qré Whether in a given case, the text or the margin has the correct 
reading must be decided, here as in the O. T., upon exegetical grounds. In view of the frequency 
of the error in the present MS., emendations which assume it become the less questionable, viz. 
39, 22 ἸΏ for mid, 40, 29% bys for dayn, 43, 10 De fi for 1", 44,6 "Ὁ for "DDD, 46, 13 
Sonn for Sw, 47,70 DYY for pny, 48, 7 yown for ynwn (cf. below, 4). 

d. δ and \ are several times confused: 40, 13 bin and bn (twice), 18 1} and “ny, 21 bbn 
and ibn, 29¢ yyy and "ΝΟ, 41, 2° wp and wpin, 5 Dy and DY, 12 marg. ΤῊ for 
mip, 162 ‘Maw and yaw, 192 TN and “WIN, 42, 14 Δ and 2), 17° ΤΌΝ and pow, 
43) 5 byq3 and byaa, 4 Nand 32001, 9 NS and “SY, 17 yn) and Sym). This error is one which 
is extremely common in the O. T., both as between the A/#b and the Qré (see Ochlah w'ochilah, 
Nos. 80, 81, 134-148), and also as between the Massoretic text and the versions, especially 
the LXX. 

There are of course other errors of transcription in the MS.; but none recurring with 
sufficient frequency to call for special notice. 

The Tetragrammaton is written regularly ™. 








To face p. xxxvit 


MS. fol. 9 verso (see p. 40) 


XXXIX. 


VERSIO VETUS LATINA. 


[The verses are numbered to agree with the Greek text. Lagarde’s numeration, where it differs, is added in parentheses. ] 


(20) 15° in canticis labiorum et citharis, et sic dicitis in confessione : 
(21) 16 Opera domini universa bona valde. 


, ; ; ‘ : et in sermone oris illius sicut exceptorium 
(22) 17° in verbo eius stetit aqua sicut congeries, 


aquarum. 
(23) 18 quoniam in praecepto ipsius placor fit, et non est minoratio in salute illius. 
, : ; et non est quicquam absconditum ab oculis 
(24) 19 opera omnis carnis coram illo, Sine 


(25) 20 a saeculo usque in saeculum respicit, 
204 et nihil est mirabile in conspectu eius. 


(26) 21 non est dicere Quid est hoc, aut quid est ey 
omnia enim in tempore suo quaerentur. 


illud? 
(27) 22 benedictio illius quasi fluvius inundavit, (28) εἰ quo modo diluvium aridam inebriavit, 
23 sicira ipsius gentes que non exquisierunt (29) quo modo convertit aquas, et siccata est 
eum hereditavit. terra, 
24 et viae illius viis illorum directae sunt: sic peccatoribus offensiones in ira eius. 
(30) 25 bona bonis creata sunt ab initio : sic nequissimis bona et mala. 
(31) 26 initium necessariae rei vitae hominum aqua, ignis et ferrum, 
26¢ lac et panis similagineus et mel et botrus uvae et oleum et vestimentum. 
: ζει, : sic et impiis et peccatoribus in mala ‘con- 
(32) 27 haec omnia sanctis in bonis, 
versantur. 
(33) 28 sunt spiritus qui ad vindictam creati sunt, et in furore suo confirmaverunt tormenta sua. 
ἐς IE 
(34) 28¢ in chal ΤΟΣ ΗΠ ΜΙν etiuadient et furorem eius qui fecit illos, placebunt. 
(35) 29 ignis, grando, fames et mors, omnia haec ad vindictam creata sunt: 
(36) 30 bestiarum dentes et scorpii et serpentes et romphea vindicans in exterminium impios. 
304 et super terram in necessitatem praepara- 
buntur, 
(37) 31 in mandatis eius aepulabuntur, et in temporibus suis non praeterient verbum. 
(38) 32 propterea ab initio confirmatus sum et consiliatus sum, et cogitavi et scripta dimisi. 
(39) 33 omnia opera domini bona, et omne opus ora sua subministravit. 
(40) 34 non est dicere Hoc illo nequius est : omnia enim in tempore suo comprobabuntur. 
(41) 35 et nunc in omni corde et ore conlaudate et benedicite nomen domini. 


1 occupatio magna creata est omnibus ᾿ ; 
et iugum gravem super filios Adam 


hominibus, 
1¢ a die exitus de ventre matris eorum usque in diem sepulturae in matrem omnium. 
2 cogitationes eorum et timorem cordis, adinventio exspectationis et dies finitionis, 


3 a sedentes super sedem gloriosam usque ad humiliatum in terra et cinere, 


XLI. 


XXXViii 


4 “Ὁ eo qui utitur hyacinto et portat coronam 


5 furor, zelus, tumultus, fluctuatio 


(s) 58 et in tempore refectionis in cubile 


6 modicum tamquam nihil in requie, 


(7) 6¢ cor turbatus est in visu cordis sui 


7 in tempore salutis suae exsurrexit, 

8 cumomnicarne,abhomine usquead pecus, 

9 ad haec mors, sanguinis, contentio et 
romphea, 

1o super iniquos creata sunt haec omnia, 

τι omnia quae de terra sunt, in terram 
convertentur, 


13 substantia iniustorum sicut fluvius sicca- 
buntur, 


14 in aperiendo manus suas laetabitur : 


15 nepotes impiorum non multiplicab ramos, 


16 super omnem aquam viriditas, et ad horam 


fluminis 
17 gratia βίους paradisus in benedictionibus, 
18 fili, vita sibi sufficientis operarii condul- 
cabitur, 
19 aedificatio civitatis confirmavit nomen, 


20 vinum et musica laetificant cor, 

21 tibiae et psalterium suabem faciunt melo- 
diam, 

22 gratiam et speciem desideravit oculus, 

23 amicus et sodalis in tempore convenientes, 

24 fratres in adiutorium in tempore tribula- 
tionis, 

25 aurum etargentum et constitutio peduum, 

26 facultates et virtutes exaltant cor, 


(27) 26¢ non est in timore domini minoratio, 
(28) 27 timor dominisicut paradisus benedictionis, 


I 


19 


a) 


=a 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


usque ad eum qui operitur ligno crudo: 

et timor mortis, iracundia perseverans et 
contentio, 

somnus noctis inmutat scientiam. 

et ab eo in somnis quasi in die respectus. 

tamquam qui evaserit in die belli. 

et admirans ad nullum timorem, 

et super peccatores septuplum. 


oppraessiones, famis et contritio et flagella. 
et propter illos factus est catachismis. 
et aquae omnes in mare convertentur. 


et fides in saeculum stabit. 

et sicut tonitruum magnum in pluvia. per- 
sonabunt. 

sic praevaricatores in consummatione tabes- 
cent. 

et radices inmundae super cacumen petrae 
sonant. 


omne faenum evelletur. 
et misericordia in saeculo permanet. 


et in ea invenies thesaurum. 


et super haec mulier inmaculata computatur. 
et super utraque dilectio sapientiae. 


et super utraque lingua suavis. 


et super haec verides sationes. 
et super utrosque mulier cum viro. 


et super eos misericordia liberavit. 


et super utrumque consilium beneplacitum. 
et super haec timor domini. 

et non est in eo quaerere adiutorium. 

et super omnem gloriam operuerunt illum. 


de indigentia misera. 


(29) 28 fili, in tempore vitae tuae ne indiges: 
(30) 29 vir respiciens in mensam alienam, 


29¢ alit enim animam suam cibis alienis. 


(32) 30 in ore inprudentis condulcabitur inopia, 


melius est enim mori quam indigere. 
non est vita eius in cogitatione victus : 


(31) vir autem disciplinatus et erudituscustodietse. 


et in ventre eius ignis ardebit. 


de memoria et iudicium mortis. 


I O mors, quam amara est memoria tua. 


(2) τὸ viro quieto et cuius viae directae sunt in 


omnibus, 


homini iusto et pacem habenti in substantiis 
suis, 


et adhuc valenti accipere cibum. 


XL. 4—XLII. 5?. XXxix 


(3) 2 © mors, bonum est iudicium tuum homini indigenti et qui minoratur viribus, 
(4) 2° defecto aetate et cui de omnibus cura est et incredibili qui perdit sapientiam. 
i pee te , memento .....e te fuerunt et quae 
(5) 3 noli metuere iudicium mortis. tine 
superventura sunt tibi: 
4 hoc iudicium a domino omni carni. (6) etquidsupervenietin beneplacito altissimi? 
42 sive decem sive centum sive mille anni. (7) non est enim in inferno accusatio vitae. 
(8) 5 filiabominationum. fiunt fili peccatorum, et quiconversantur secus domosimpiorum. 
(9) 6 filiorum peccatorum periet hereditas, etcum semine illorum assiduitas obprobrii. 
(10) 7 de patre impio quaeruntur filii, quoniam propter illum sunt in opprobrio. 
(11) 8 vae vobis, viri impii, qui dereliquistis legem domini altissimi. 


(12) 9 etsinatifueritis,in maledictione nascemini, 
9Ὁ et si mortui fueritis, in maledictione erit 
mors vestra. 
(13) 10 omnia quae de terra sunt, in terram 
convertentur ; 
(14) 11 luctus hominum in corpore ipsorum : nomen autem impiorum delebitur. 
(15) 12 curam habe de bono nomine: hoc enim 
magis permanebit tibi 
(16) 13 bonae vitae numerus dierum. bonum autem nomen permanebit in aevo. 
(17) 14 disciplinam in pace conservate, filii : 
14> sapientia enim abscondita et thesaurus 


sic impii a maledicto in perditionem, 


quam mille thesauri magni pretiosi. 


quae utilitas in utrisque ? 


invisus, 
(x8) 15 melior est homo qui abscondit stultitiam quam homo qui abscondit sapientiam 
suam, suam. 
: (19) 16 verum tamen reveremini in his quae pro- 
cedunt de ore meo. 
(20) 166 non est enim bonum omnem in Teveren- et non omnia omnibus bene placent in 
tiam observare, fide, 


ab omnibus vitiis declinandum. 


(21) 17 erubescite patrem et matrem de fornica- , : 
et a praesidente et a potente de mendacio, 


tione, 
(22) 18 a principe et iudice de delicto, a synagoga et plebe de iniquitate, 
(23) 18¢ a socio et amico de iniustitia 19 et de loco in quo habitas, (24) de furto, 
1g de veritate dei et testamento, de discubitu in panibus 
τοῦ et ab obfuscatione dati et accepti, (25) 20 a salutantibus de silentio, 
20» a respectu mulieris fornicariae, 21 ab aversione vultus cognati. 


(26) πε avertas facie . m a proximo tuo, 
21» et ab auferendo partem et non restituendo. (27) 21° ne respicias mulierem alieni viri, 


22 et ne scruteris ancillam eius, neque steteris ad lectum eius. 
(28) 22¢ a . Ὁ amicis de sermonibus improperii, et cum dederis, ne improperis. 
XLII. 1 non duplices sermonem auditus de revelatione sermonis absconditi, 
: : ς et invenies gratiam in conspectu omnium 
τὸ et eris vere sine confusione, : 
hominum : 
18 ne pro his omnibus confundaris, ne accipias personam ut delinquas. 
2 de lege altissimi et testamento, de iudicio iustificare impium, 
3 de verbo sociorum et viatorum et de datione hereditatis amicorum, 
4 de aequalitate staterae et ponderum, et de adquisitione multorum et paucorum, 


5 de corruptione emtionis et negotiatorum et de multa disciplina filiorum 


XLIII. 


xl ECCLESIASTICUS 


6 supermulieremnequam bonumestsignum. 
7 et quodcumquetrades,numera et appende, 


8 de disciplina insensati et fatui 


80 et eris eruditus in omnibus, 
9 filia patris abscondita est vigilia, 
οὐ ne forte in adulescentia sua adultera 
efficiatur, 
το ne quando polluatur in virginitate sua, 
τοῦ ne forte cum viro commorata transgre- 
diatur, 
11 super filiam luxuriosam confirma custo- 
diam, 
11° a detractionein civitate et abiectione plebis, 


12 omni homini noli intendere in specie, 

13 de vestimentis enim procedit tinea, 

14 melior iniquitas viri quam benefaciens 

mulier, 

15 memor ero igitur operum domini, 

15¢ in osermonibus domini opera eius. 

16 sol inluminans per omnia respexit, 

17 nonne dominus fecit sanctos 

17° quae confirmavit dominus omnipotens 

18 abyssum et cor hominum investigavit, 
(19) 18¢ cognovit enim dominus omnem scientiam, 

19 annuntians quae prae . terierunt et quae 

superventura sunt, 

20 et non praeterit illum omnis cogitatus, 

21 magnalia sapientiae suae decoravit 

21¢ neque adiectum est (22) neque minuetur, 
(23) 22 quam desiderabilia omnia opera eius, 
(24) 23 omnia haec... ent et manent in saeculum, 
(25) 24 omnia duplicia, unum contra unum, 
(26) 25 uniuscuiusque confirmavit bona, 

1 altitudinis firmamentum pulchritudo est, 

2 sol in aspectu annuntians in exitu, 


3 in meridiano exurit terram, 


4 fornacem custodiens in operibus . rdoris. 
49 radios igneos exuflans 
5 magnus dominus qui fecit illum, 
6 iter (6) luna in omnibus in tempore suo, 
7 a luna signum αἰεὶ festi, 
8 mensis secundum nomen eius est, 
(9) 8¢ vas castrorum in excelsis, 
(10) 9 species caeli gloria stellarum 


et servo pessimo latus sanguinare. 


(7) ubi manus multae sunt, clude, 


~~ 


datum vero et acceptum omne describe. 

et de senioribus qui iudicantur ab adulescen- 
tibus, 

et probabilis in conspectu omnium virorum. 

et sollicitudo eius auferet somnium, 


et commorata cum viro odibilis fiat. 
et in paternis suis gravida inveniatur : 
aut certe sterelis effictatur. 


ne quando faciat te in opprobrium venire 
inimicis. 
et confundat te in multitudinem populi. 


et in medio mulierum noli commorari. 
et a muliere iniquitas viro. 


et mulier confundens in opprobrium, 


et quae vidi, adnuntiabo. 


et gloria domini plenum est opus eius. 
enarrare omnia mirabilia sua 

stabilis in gloria sua? 

et in astutia illorum excogitavit. 

et inspexit in signum aevi, 


revelans vestigia occultorum. 


et non abscondit se ab eo ullus sermo. 

qui est ante saeculum et usque in saeculum, 

et non eget alicuius consilio. 

et tamquam scintillam quam est considerare. 

et in omni necessitate omnia obaudiunt ei. 

et non fecit quicquam deesse. 

et quis satiabitur videns gloriam eius? 

species caeli in visione gloriae. 

vas ammirabile, opus excelsi. 

et in conspectu ardoris eius quis poterit 
sustinere ? 

tripliciter sol exurens montes. 

et refulgens radiis suis obcaecat oculos. 

et in sermonibus eius festinavit. 

ostensio temporis et signum aevi. 

luminare quod minuitur in consummatione. 

crescens ammirabiliter in consummationem, 

in firmamento caeli resplendens gloriosum. 

mundum inluminans in excelsis dominus. 


XLIV. 


(11) 10 
(12) τα 
(13) 12 
(14) 13 
(15) 14 
(16) 15 
(17) τό 
(18) 17 
(19) 17° 


(20) 18 


(21) 19 
(22) 20 


20° 


(23) 21 
(24) 22 


(28) 23 


(26) 24 
(27) 25 
(28) 26 


(29) 27 
(30) 28 
(31) 29 
(32) 30 


(33) 


(34) 30° 
(35) 31 
(36) 32 
(37) 33 


(5) 4 
5 
6 


XLII, 6—XLIV. 6. 


in verbis sancti stabunt ad iudicium, 

vide arcum, et benedic qui fecit illum: 

giravit caelum in circuitu gloriae suae : 

imperio suo adcelebravit nivem, 

propterea aperti sunt thesauri, 

in magnitudine sua posuit nubes, 

in conspectu eius commovebuntur montes, 

vox tonitrui eius verberavit terram, 

sicut avis deponens ad sedendumadspargit 
nivem, 

pulchritudinem candoris eius ammirabitur 
oculus, 


gelum sicut salem effundet super terram, 


frigidus ventus aquilo flavit, 

super omnem congregationem aquarum 
requiescit, 

devoravit montes et exuret desertum, 

medicina omnium in festinationem ne- 
bulae, 

in sermone eius siluit ventus, 

cogitatione sua placabit abyssum 

qui navigat mare, enarrat pericula eius, 


illic praeclara et mira et mirabilia opera, 


propter ipsum consummatus est itineris 
finis, 


multa dicimus et deficiemus verbis, 


gloriantes ad quid valebimus ? 
terribilis dominus et magnus vehementer, 


glorificantes dominum, 


be . edicentes dominum, exaltate illum 
quantum potestis : 

exaltantes eum replebimini virtute : 

quis vidit eum, et enarrabit ? 

multa abscondita sunt maiora his: 

omnia autem dominus fecit, 

laudemus viros gloriosos, 

multam gloriam fecit dominus 

dominantes in potestatibus suis, 

et prudentia sua praediti, 

et inperantes in praesentiis populorum 

sanctissima verba, et in pueritia sua 

requirentes modos musicos 

homines divites in virtute, pulchritudinis 
studium habentis, 


et non deficient in vigiliis suis. 

valde speciosus est in splendore suo. 

manus excelsi aperuerunt illum. 

et adcelerat coruscationes emittere iudicii sui. 
et evolaverunt nebulae sicut aves. 

et confracti sunt lapides grandinis. 

et in voluntate eius aspiravit notus. 
tempestas aquilonis et congregatio spiritus. 


et sicut lucusta demergens descensus eius. 


et super imbrem eius expavescit cor. 


et dum zelaverit, fiet tamquam cacumina tri- 
buli. 
et gelavit cristallus ab aqua: 


et sicut lorica induit se aquis. 


et extinguet viridem sicut ignem. 
et ros obvians ab ardore venienti 
efficiet eum. 


humilem 


et plantavit illum dominus ihs. 


et audiente ... ribus non ammirabimur. 
varia genera bestiarum et omnium peccorum et 
creatura beluarum. 


et in sermone eius composita sunt omnia. 


consummatio autem sermonum ipse est in om- 
nibus. 

ipse enim omnipotens super omnia opera sua. 

et mirabilis potentia ipsius. 

quantumcumque potueritis, supervalebit adhuc, 
et ammirabilis magnificentia eius. 


maior est enim omni laude. 


ne laboretis, non enim pervenietis. 

et quis magnificavit eum sicut est ab initio? 
pauca enim vidimus operum eius. 

et pie agentibus dedit sapientiam. 

et parentes nostros in generatione sua. 
magnificentia sua a saeculo. 

homines magni virtute 

nuntiantes dignitatem prophetarum. 

et virtute prudentiae populi 


et narrantes carmina scribturarum. 


pacificantes in domibus suis. 


f 


XLV. 


xiii 


7 omnes isti in generationibus gentis suae 
gloriam adepti sunt, 
8 qui de illis nati sunt, relinquerunt nomen 
9 et sunt quorum non est ..memoria: 
9° et nati sunt quasi non nati, 
10 sed illi viri misericordiae sunt 
11 et cum semine ipsorum perseverat 
11¢ & 12 semen in testamento stetit, 
13 usque in aeternum manet semen eorum, 


14 corpora ipsorum in pace sepulta sunt, 


15 Sapientiam ipsorum narrent populi, 
16 Enoch placuit deo, et translatus est in 
paradiso, 


17 Noe inventus est perfectus iustus, 


(18) 17° ideo redimissum est reliquum terrae, 
(19) 18 testamenta saeculi posita sunt apud illum, 
(20) τὸ Abraham magnus pater multitudinis 
gentium, 
20 qui conservavit legem excelsi, 
(21) 20° in cane eius stare fecit testamentum, 
(22) 21 ideo iure iurando dedit illi 
219 crescere illum quasi terrae harenam, 
219 et hereditare illos a mari usque ad mare 
(24) 22 et in Isaac eodem fecit modo 
(25) 22° benedictionem omnium gentium dedit illi. 
(26) 23> agnovit eum in benedictionibus suis, 
234 et divisit ei partem, 
(27) 23f et conservavit illis homines misericor- 
diae, 
1 dilectus a deo et hominibus 
2 similem illum fecit in gloria sanctorum, 
3 et in verbis suis monstra placavit. 
3¢ et iussit illi coram populo suo, 
4 in fide et lenitate ipsius sanctum fecit 
illum, 
5 audivit enim eum et vocem ipsius, 
5¢ et dedit illi coram praecepta, 
58 docere Iacob testamentum, 
6 excelsum fecit Aaron fratrem eius, et 
similem sibi de tribu Levi. 
7 et dedit illi sacerdotium gentis, 
74 et circumcinxit illum zona gloriae: 
8 induit illum stolam gloriae, 
8° circumpediles et femoralia et humeralem 
posuit ei, 
g” aureis plurimis in gyro, 


(6) 
(7) 


(9) 
(10) 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


et in diebus suis habentur in laudibus. 


narrandi laudes eorum. 
perierunt quasi qui non fuerunt, 
filii ipsorum cum illis. 
quorum pietates non defuerunt, 
bona hereditas. (12) nepotum illorum 
(13) et filiorum ipsorum propter illos 
et gloria eorum non derelinquetur. 
et nomen eorum vivet in generationes et 
generationes, ; 
et laudem eorum nuntiet ecclesia. 


ut det gentibus paenitentiam. 


et in tempore iracundiae factus est recon- 
ciliatio, 

cum factum est diluvium. 

ne deleri possit diluvio omnis caro. 


et non est inventus similis illi in gloria, 


et fuit in testamento cum illo. 

et in temtatione inventus est fidelis. 

gloriam in gente sua, 

et ut stellas exaltare semen eius, 

et a flumine usque ad terminos terrae. 

propter Habraham patrem ipsius. 

23 ettestamentum confirmavit super capud Iacob. 
et dedit illi hereditatem, 
in tribus duodecim, 


(23) 


invenientes gratiam in oculis omnis carnis. 


Moses, cuius memoria in benedictione est. 
et magnificavit eum in timore inimicorum, 
glorificavit illum in conspectu regum, 

et ostendit illi gloriam suam. 


(3) 


et elegit illum de omni carne. 


induxit illum in nubem. 
legem vitae et disciplinae, 
et iudicia sua Israhel. 


(8) 7 statuit ei testamentum aeternum, 


et beabit illum in gloria, 


et coronavit illum in vasis virtutis. 
g et cinxit illum tintintabulis 


(11) dare sonitum in incessu suo, 


XLVI. 


ΧΕΙ͂Ρ. 7—XLVI. 53, 


οὗ auditum facere sonitum in templo 
(12) το stola sancta auro et hyacintho 
τοῦ iudicio et veritate praediti. 
11) figuratis 
114 insculptilis in memoriam 
(14) 12 coronam auream supra mitram eius 
12° gloriam honoris et opus virtutis, 


(15) 13. sic pulchra ante ipsum non fuerunt alia . 


13° sed tantum filii ipsius soli 
(17) 14 sacrificia ipsius consummata sunt igni 
(18) 15 complevit Moses manum eius, 
(19) 15° factus est illi in testamentum aeternum 


158 fungi sacerdotio et habere laudem 


(20) 16 ipsum elegit ab omni viventem 

16¢ incensum et bonum odorem in memoriam 
(21) τη dedit illi in praeceptis suis 

17° docere Jacob testimonia 


(22) 18 quia contra illum steterunt alieni, 


18¢ homines qui erant cum Dathan et Abiron 
(23) 19 vidit dominus deus et non placuit illi, 
(24) 19° fecit illis monstra, 
(25) 20 et addidit Aaron gloriam 

ace et primitias fructuum terrae divisit illi. 
nam sacrificia domini edent 
(27) 22 ceterum in terra gentes non hereditabit, 


21 


(28) 22 Finees filius Eleazari 
23¢ in imitando ipsum in timore domini 
238 in bonitate et alacritate animae suae 
(30) 24 ideo statuit ad illum testamentum pacis, 
245 ut sit illi et semini eius 
(31) 25 et testamentum David regis 


26 ut daret sapientiam in cor nostrum, 
26¢ ne abolerentur bona ipsorum, 
1 fortis in bello Iesu Nave 
1¢ qui fuit magnus secundum nomen suum, 
19 expugnare insurgentes hostes, 
(3) 2 quam gloriam adeptus est*in tollendo 
manus suas 
(4) 3 quis ante illum sic restitit ? 
(5) 4 aut non iracundia eius impetus est sol, 
(6) 5 invocabit altissimum potentem 
5° et audivit illum magnus et sanctus deus 


xliii 


in memoria filii gentis suae. 
et purpura opus textile viri sapientes 
(13) 11 torto cocco opus artificis 
in ligatura auri et opere lapidarii 
secundum numerum tribum [51]. 
expraessam signo sanctitatis, 
desideria oculorum ornata. 
usque ad originem. (16) non indutus est illa 
alienigena aliquis, 
et nepotes eius per omne tempus. 
cotidie. 
et unxit illum oleo sancto, ν 
et semini eius sicut dies caeli, 
et glorificare populum suum in nomine 
suo. 
afferre sacrificium deo, 
placare pro populo suo. 
potestatem in testamentis iudiciorum 
et in legem suam lucem dare Israhel. 
et propter invidiam circumdederunt illum in 
deserto 
et congregatio Core in iracundiam. 
et consumti sunt in inpetu iracundiae. 
et consumsit eos in flamma ignis. 
et dedit illi hereditatem, 
panem ipsis in primis parabit in satietate : 
quae dedit ipsi et semini eius. 
et pars non est illi in gente: 
ipse enim pars eius est et hereditas. 
terti. . in gloria 
et stare in reverentia gentis, 
placuit deo Israhel. 
principem sanctorum et gentis suae, 
sacerdotii dignitas in aeternum. 
filio Iesse de tribu Iuda, 
25 hereditas ipsi et semini eius, 


(26) 


22° 


(29) 


iudicare gentem suam in iustitia, 

et gloriam in gentem eorum aeternam fecit. 
successor Mosi in prophetis, 

maximus in salutem electorum dei, 

ut consequeretur hereditatem Israhel. 


et iactando contra civitates romfeas? 


nam hostes ipse dominus perduxit. 
et una dies facta est quasi duo? 

in oppugnando inimicos undique, 

in saxis grandinis virtutis valde fortis. 


f2 


XLVII. 


xliv 


(7) 6 impetum fecit contra gentem hostilem, 
(8) 66 ut cognoscant gentes potentiam eius, 


6° et secutus est a tergo potentes. 
7b ipse et Caleb filius leffonne, 
"ἃ et prohibere gentem a peccatis 
8 et ipsi duo constituti a periculo liberati 
sunt, 
8¢ inducere illos in hereditatem, 
(11) 9 et dedit dominus ipsi Caleb fortitudinem, 
9 ut ascenderet in excelsum terrae locum, 
(12) 10 ut viderent omnes filii [51] 
(13) 11 et iudices singuli suo nomine 
11¢ qui non aversi sunt a domino nostro, 


(10) 


12 et ossa eorum pullulent de loco suo. 
(16) 13 dilectus a deo suo Samuhel 


138 propheta domini, renovabit imperium 
(17) 14 et lege domini iudicavit congregationem, 


15 et fide sua probatus est propheta. 


(19) 16 et invocavit deum potentem 


τό in oblatione viri inmaculati. 
17> et in sonitu magno auditam fecit vocem 
suam. 


(22) 19 et ante tempus vitae suae et saeculi 


19° pecunias et usque ad calciamenta ab 
omni carne non accepit, 
(23) 20 et post hoc dormivit et notum fecit regi, 
20° et exaltavit vocem suam de terra 
1 post hoc surrexit Natham 
2 et quasi adeps separatus est a carne, 


3 cum leonibus lusit quasi cum agnis, 


4 iniuventute sua. (4) numquid non occidit 
gigantem, 
(5) 45 in tollendo manum in saxo fundae 
(6) 5 nam invocavit deum potentem 
5¢ tollere hominem fortem in bello 
(7) 6 sic in decem milibus glorificavit eum, 
6¢ in offerendo illi coronam gloriae. 


7» et extirpavit Filistim contrarios 


(9) 8 in omni opere. dedit confessionem 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


et in descensum perdidit contrarios, 

quia contra dominum pugnare non est 
facile. 

et in diebus Mosi misericordiam fecit, 

stare contra hostem 

et perfringere murmur malitiae. 


(9) 7 


a numero sescentorum milium peditum 


in terram quae manat lac et mel. 
et usque ad senectutem perman‘tt illi virtus, 
et semen ipsius obtinuit hereditatem, 
quia bonum est obsequi sancto deo. 
quorum non est corruptum cor, 
(14) ut sit memoria illorum in benedictionem, 
(15) et nomen eorum permanet in aeternum : 
permanens ad filios illorum sanctorum 
virorum gloria. 


et uncxit principes in gente sua. 
et vidit dominus Iacob, 
(18) et cognitus est in verbis suis fidelis, quia 
vidit deum lucis. 
in oppugnando hostes circumstantes un- 
dique 
(20) r7 et intonuit e caelo dominus, 
(a1) 18 et contrivit principes Tyriorum, et omnes 
duces Filisthim. 
testimonium praebuit et in conspectu 
domini et Christi : 


et non accusabit illum homo. 


et ostendit illi finem vitae suae, 

in prophetiam delere impietatem gentis. 

prophetam in diebus David, 

sic David a filiis Israhel. 

et in ursis similiter fecit sicut cum agnis 
ovium 


et abstulit obprobrium de gente? 


et deiecit exultationem Goliae. 

et dedit in dexteram eius 

et exaltare cornum gentis suae. 

et laudavit eum in benedictionibus domini 

contrivit enim inimicos undique, 

usque in in hodiernum diem: contrivit 
cornum ipsorum usque in aeternum 

sancto et excelso in verbo gloriae. 


(8) 7 


ALVI. 6—XLVIII. 45. 


(10) 8¢ de omni corde suo laudavit dominum, 


XLVIII. 


(11) 9 stare fecit cantores contra altare, 
(12) 10 et dedit in celebrationibus decus, 


τοῦ ut laudarent nomen sanctum domini 
(13) 11 ΧΡΒ purgavit peccata ipsius 
11° et dedit illi testamentum regum 


(14) 12. post ipsum surrexit ἡ 


(15) 13 Salomon imperavit in diebus pacis, 
13° ut conderet domum in nomine suo 
: 14 quem ad modum eruditus est in iuventute 
sua 
15 et terram retexit anima tua. 
16 ad insulas longe divulgatum est nomen 
tuum, 
(18) 17 in cantilenis et proverbiis et compara- 
tionibus 
(19) 18 et in nomine domini 
(20) 18¢ collegisti quasi oo... . um aurum, 
(21) τὸ et inclinasti femora tua mulieribus : 
(22) 20 dedisti maculam in gloria tua, 
2c¢ inducere iracundiam ad liberos tuos, 
(23) 21 ut faceres imperium bipertitum, 
(24) 22 deus autem non relinquit misericordiam 
. suam, 


225 neque perdet ab stirpe nepotes electi sui, 


(25) 229 dedit autem reliquum Iacob 
(26) 23 et finem habuit Salomoncum patribus suis. 
23° gentis stultitiam (28) et minutum pruden- 
tiam 


235 et dedit Efraim viam peccandi, 


24» averterunt illos de terra sua. 


1 et surrexit Helias propheta quasi ignis, 
2 qui induxit in illos famem, 


non poterant enim sustinere praecepta 
domini. 
3 verbo domini continuit caelum, 
4 sic.amplificatus est Helias in mirabilibus 
᾿ suis. 


xlv 


et dilexit deum qui fecit illum, 

et dedit illi contra inimicos potentiam. 

et in sono eorum dulces fecit modos. 

et ornavit tempora usque ad consumma- 
tionem vitae, 

et amplificarent mane dei sanctitatem. 

et exaltavit in aeternum cornum eius, 

et sedem gloriae in Isrl. 

filius sensatus, et propter illum deiecit 
omnem potentiam inimicorum. 

cui subiecit deus omnes hostes, 

et pararet sanctitatem in sempiternum. 


(16) et inpletus est quasi flumen sapientia 
(17) et replesti in comparationibus enigmata : 


et dilectus in pace tua, 


et interpraetationibus miratae sunt terrae. 


cui est cognomen deus Israhel 

et ut plumbum complesti argentum. 
potestatem habuisti in tuo corpore. 

et profanasti semen tuum 

et incitaris stultitiam tuam, 

et ex Efraim imperare imperium durum. 


et non corrumpit neque delebit opera sua, 


et semen eius qui diligit dominum, non 
corrumpit. 

et David de ipsa stirpe. 

et relinquit post se de semine suo 


(27) 
Roboam, qui avertit gentem consilio suo. 


(29) 23f et hieroboam filium Nabath qui peccare 
fecit 151]. 
24 et plurimaredundaverunt peccata ipsorum 
(30) valde, 
(31) 25 et quaesivit omnem nequitiam usque dum 
perveniret ad illos defensio, 
et ab omnibus peccatis liberavit eos. 
et verbum ipsius quasi fax ardebat. 
et inritantes illum invidia sua pauci facti 
sunt: 


et deiecit a se ignem terrae. 


et quis potest similiter gloriari tibi? 


XLIX. 


xlvi 


5 qui sustulisti mortuum ab inferis 
6 qui deiecisti reges ad perniciem et con- 
fregisti facile potentiam ipsorum, 
7 qui audis in Sion iudicium 
8 qui ungis reges ad paenitentiam 
9 qui receptus es in turbidine ignis, 
qui inscriptus es in indiciis temporum 
τοῦ conciliare cor patris ad filium 
11 beati sunt qui te viderunt et in amicitia 
tua decorati sunt. 
post mortem autem non erit tale nomen 
nostrum, 
(13) 12 Helias quidem in turbidine tectus est, 


10 


129 in diebus suis non pertimuit principem, 
(14) 13. nec superavit illum verbum aliquod, 
(15) 14 in vita sua fecit monstra, 
(16) 15 in omnibus istis non penituit populus, 
15° usque dum eiecti sunt de terra sua, 
(17) 15° et relicta est gens perpauca, 
(18) 16 quidam ipsorum fecerunt quod placeret 
deo, 
(19) 17 Ezechias munivit civitatem suam, 
17° et fodiit ferro rupem, 


(20) 18 in diebus ipsius ascendit Sinnacerim, 


18¢ et extulit manum suam in Sion, 
(21) το tunc mota sunt corda et manus ipsorum, 
(22) 20 et invocaverunt dominum misericordem : 
205 et sanctus dominus deus audivit cito 
vocem ipsorum. 


neque dedit illos inimicis suis, 


(24) 21 subiecit castra Assyriorum, 
(25) 22 nam fecit Ezechias quod placuit deo, 
225 quam mandavit illi Esaias propheta, 
(26) 23 in diebus ipsius retro redit sol 
(27) 24 spiritu magno vidit ultima, 
25 usque in sempiternum. (28) ostendit futura 
1 memoriam Josiae in compositionem odoris 
(2) τὸ ἴῃ omni ore quasi mel indulcabitur eius 
memoria, 
(3) 2 ipse est directus divinitus in paenitentia 
gentis, 


(4) 3 et gubernavit ad dominum cor ipsius, 


(5) 4 praeter David et Ezechiam et Iosiam 
(6) 4° nam reliquerunt legem potentem 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


de sorte mortis in verbo domini dei. 


6» et gloriosos de lecto suo. 


(12) 


(23) 


204 


et in Coreb iudicia defensionis 

et prophetas facis successores post te. 
in curru equorum igneorum. 

lenire iracundiam domini, 

et restituere tribus Iacob. 


nam nos vita vivimus tantum, 


et in Helisaeo completus est spiritus eius : 


et potentiam nemo vincit illum. 

et mortuum prophetavit corpus eius. 
et in morte mirabilia opera eius. 

et non recesserunt a peccatis suis, 
et dispersi sunt in omnem terram. 
et princeps in domo David. 


alii autem multa commisserunt peccata. 


et induxit in medium ipsius aquam, 

et aedificavit ad aquam puteum. 

et misit Rapsacen, et sustulit manum suam 
contra illos, 

et superbus factus est potentia sua. 

et doluerunt quasi parturientes mulieres. 

expandentes manus, extulerunt ad caelum, 


non est commemoratus peccatorum illorum, 


sed purgabit illos in manu Esaig¢ sancti 
prophetae. 

et contrivit illos angelus dei. 

et fortiter ibit in via David patris sui, 

magnus et fidelis in conspectu dei. 

et addidit regi vitam. 

et consolatus est lugentes in Sion 

et abscondita ante quam evenirent. 

factam, opus pigmentarii. 


et ut musica in convivio vini. 


et tulit abominationes impietatis. 


et in diebus peccatorum corroboravit pie- 
tatem. 

omnes peccatum commiserunt: 

reges Iuda, et contemserunt timorem dei. 


ΧΡ ΞΟ tab, xlvii 


(7) 5 dederunt enim regnum suum aliis, et gloriam suam alienae genti. 
(8) 6 incenderunt electam sanctitatis civitatem, et desertas fecerunt vias ipsius 
6¢in manu Hieremiae. (9) 7 nam male 


: ui a ventre matri T t proph 
Gataaversat ἡϊοτα q 6 matris consecratus est propheta 


5° evertere et eruere et perdere et iterum aedificare et renobare. 
(xe) 8 Ezechiel qui vidit conspectum gloriae quam ostendit illi in curru Cerubin. 
si Por. sapere abla cio ageing bene facere illis qui ostenderunt rectas vias. 
imbri 
(12) το et duodecim prophetarum ossa pullulent de loco suo: 
τοῦ nam conroboraverunt Iacob et redimerunt se in fide virtutis. 
(13) τα quo modo amplicemus Zorobabel ? nametipse quasi signum in dextera manu inIsrahel. 


(14) 12 et Hiesum filius Iosedec qui in diebus suis aedificaverunt domum. 





41 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 9 verso.) 
24 By a spirit of might he saw the end, 


25 For ever he declared things that should be, 
XLIX. 1 The name of Josiah is like incense of sweet spices, 
1° His memory is sweet as honey on the palate, 
2 For he was grieved for’ our backslidings, 
3 And he made his heart perfect toward God, 
4 Except David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, 
4¢ And forsook the law of the Most High, 
5 So he turned their horn backward, 
6 And they set on fire the holy city, 
6° By the hand? of Jeremiah, 7 for they afflicted him, 
7° To pluck up and to break down and to destroy 
(and) to overthrow, 
8 Ezekiel saw the vision, 
9 Also he made mention of Job, 
10 Moreover the twelve prophets, 
τοῦ Who recovered Jacob to health, 
τι [How shall we magnify [Zerubbabel |? 


12 . 


Ὁ τὴ) (Amos 6, 6) for 5m. 


Text, perhaps: inherited the yoke (Sy) of our backslidings. 


and comforted the mourners of Sion. 

and hidden things before they came. 

salted, the work of the perfumer : 

and as music at the banquet of wine. 

and he made the abominations of vanity to cease ; 

and in days of violence he wrought godliness. 

they all did corruptly ; 

the kings of Judah, till they were ended. 

and (gave) their glory to a foolish, foreign nation ; 

and made her ways desolate. 

yet from the womb he was formed (to be) a prophet, 

and in like manner to build up, to plant, and to make 
strong. ) 


«and declared divers kinds of chariot. 


who maintained all the w[ays of righteousness. 
may their strength® flou[rish out of their places. 
and restored him by 


2 Ὁ in the days of, as Ὁ. 


3 ? bones, as (ὃ G. 


24 πνεύματι μεγάλῳ ἴδεν τὰ ἔσχατα 
4 ματι μεγάλᾳ σχατα, 
25 ἕως τοῦ αἰῶνος ὑπέδειξεν τὰ ἐσόμενα 
XLIX. 1 μνημόσυνον ᾿Ιωσείου εἰς σύνθεσιν θυμιάματος, 
ο 2 ὶ , < aN λ θ U4 
1° ἐν παντὶ στόματι ws μέλι γλυκανθήσεται, 
2 αὐτὸς κατευθύνθη ἐν ἐπιστροφῇ λαοῦ 
1 9 
/, ‘ 4 ‘ 4 > a 
3 κατεύθυνεν πρὸς Κύριον τὴν καρδίαν αὐτοῦ, 
4. παρὲξ Δαυεὶδ καὶ ἱΕἙ(ζεκίου καὶ ᾿Ιωσείου 
4° κατέλιπον γὰρ τὸν νόμον τοῦ ὑψίστου, 
Ἂς A 4 ws, ΓΆΡ: 
5 ἔδωκαν γὰρ τὸ κέρας αὐτῶν ἑτέροις 
i eo. 
6 ἐνεπύρισεν ἐκλεκτὴν πόλιν ἁγιάσματος, 
6¢ ἐν χειρὶ ᾿Ιερεμίου" 7 ἐκάκωσαν γὰρ αὐτόν, 
© ἐκριζοῦν καὶ κακοῦν καὶ ἀπολλύειν, 


~~ 


8 Ἰεζεκιήλ, ds εἶδεν ὅρασιν δόξης 

A > , “ » -“ s » 
9 καὶ γὰρ ἐμνήσθη τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἐν ὄμβρῳ, 
το καὶ τῶν ιβ΄ προφητῶν αι τὶ 
10° παρεκάλεσεν δὲ τὸν Ἰακώβ, 
11 πῶς μεγαλύνωμεν τὸν Ζοροβαβέλ; 
12 οὕτως ᾿Ιησοῦς υἱὸς ᾿Ιωσεδέκ᾽ 


καὶ παρεκάλεσεν τοὺς πενθοῦντας ἐν Σειών" 
καὶ τὰ ἀπόκρυφα πρὶν ἣ παραγενέσθαι αὐτά. 
ἐσκευασμένον ἔργῳ μυρεψοῦ" 

καὶ ὡς μουσικὰ ἐν συμποσίῳ οἴνου. 

καὶ ἐξῆρεν βδελύγματα ἀνομίας" 

ἐν ἡμέραις ἀνόμων κατίσχυσεν τὴν εὐσέβειαν. 
πάντες πλημμελίαν ἐπλημμέλησαν" 

οἱ βασιλεῖς ᾿Ιούδα ἐξέλιπον. 

καὶ τὴν δόξαν αὐτῶν ἔθνει ἀλλοτρίῳ" 

καὶ ἠρήμωσαν τὰς ὁδοὺς αὐτῆς 

καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν μήτρᾳ ἡγιάσθη προφήτης, 
ὡσαύτως οἰκοδομεῖν καὶ καταφυτεύειν. 

ἣν ὑπέδειξεν αὐτῷ ἐπὶ ἅρματος χερουβείμ' 
καὶ ἀγαθῶσαι τοὺς εὐθύνοντας ὁδούς. 

τὰ ὀστᾶ ἀναθάλοι ἐκ τοῦ τόπου αὐτῶν. 

καὶ ἐλυτρώσατο αὐτοὺς ἐν πίστει ἐλπίδος. 
καὶ αὐτὸς ὡς σφραγὶς ἐπὶ δεξιᾶς χειρός. 

οἱ ἐν ἡμέραις αὐτῶν οἰκοδόμησαν οἶκον. 


XLVII, 24—XLIX. τῷ. 40 
(fol. 9 verso.) 


ΕἾΝ Sax on nvanw ΠῚ ANA ΠΥῚΣ 24 
ΕἸΣ. ab mano ΤῊΣ pain ody sy 25 
2npn awys ndorn DD Nps wR OW τ XLIX. 
spn anwn dy mms Nt pnd wat 7NI τὸ 
:San mayin *naw wnawe dy dma 5 2 
:I0n AwY DON D2 125 Sse bx om 3 
simnvn pbs iw wpm mip ad 4 
yon sy may sad wy nmin says 49 
ΝΣ 4539 m5 ona sind pp in 5 
PNM ww wap np ins 6 
ΣΝ) Wy Som sim My 3 7 OW VI 6° 
srymbdy Syx5 nad yoy pans tasndy ΚΉΠΟΥ wainsd 7b 
ΠΩΣ yr Δ men myn Sypin 8 
pay 5] 53 Sabann 2YN NN VII DN 9 
:on[opon nn} oneyy ‘nn ΝΣ Wy DW DN τὸ 
tee IW apy’ ns wdnn ὝΦΝ τοῦ 
AS) ak 3 ae vale Se AL Mannan AR 
oe OMe, eh e Ot πον κἄτι ν 
iss G15. 3- 2 Exod. 30, 35. 31, II. 3.2 Kings 23, 5. 11, 5. * Deut. 32, 21. 
75 ἘΠΕ] it ΤΟΥ αὶ ΤΟΣ 7 Perhaps >[722 ΤῊ]. 
+\Seong? Jesh pao πω Jaw Jhosatay buosso 24 
ὁ οἷν Veo lance : JLSL? hue com hraSs> 490 25 
Jarrad? Jloliqms fadoy μά rope y! μα ομοσ tr XLIX. 
Jeanne fadraso SX JKuaaal «οἷο 03009 Ihe Jom fess yl τὸ 
Shady? Jers ΨΥ Lancs gro waghly eo 2 
JKaas par Jadu uwdaro coad Jods pralo 3 
“dae odo μωρὸ [rol μὸν gro sad tamd> 4 
Jeswll brows Ἰγοομ δῦ ὅλο foass anaac 4° 
slic Joos ondelo μω} «ϑομοδν ϑομο δ 
odin gordo φογὶο clazas Kuda οίῶδο 6 
char ool ford gs Joo 7b μού waar 6° 
lot Simo |Naosso9 ας row Nuhobvo 8 
#406 Shaner) ohuio/ godoy 1907 oc? Nx olo9 
+\Oormhawh gedorir χϑομϑοξςς, \OSoW ses email elo τὸ 
ὁ poh «οὐ adohlo δ ἢ creole 10° 
ὁ μβϑοῦν Jeo? Sx bow οὐ Joo DSNasiok waa fasc τὶ 


ωωβϑρο οϑολοὺ yoohetamxms? ἢ ὥς» Waa fo 12 


39 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 9 recto.) 
129 All his life long he quaked before none, 


13. No matter was too hard for him, 

14 In his life he did wonders, 

15 For all this the people turned not, 

15° Till they were rooted up from their land, 
15¢ But there were left to Judah a few, 

16 There were of them that dealt uprightly, 

17 Hezekiah strengthened? his city, 

17° And hewed the rocks with* brass, 

18 In his days came up Sennacherib, 

18¢ And he stretched out his hand against Sion, 
το [Thenwere]they melted in the pride of their heart, 
20 So they ca[lled] unto God Most High, 

20¢ And he [heard] the voice of their prayer, 

21 And [he smote the c]Jamp of the Assyrian, 
22 [For Heze]kiah [did] that which was go[od, 


25 ς 


23 
1 Reading xn, as (δ; see 2 Kings 13, 21. 
> Reading "ΤΠ. 
12° καὶ ἐν ἡμέραις αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἐσαλεύθη ὑπὸ ἄρχοντος, 


n , > ε a ἣν ΔΝ 
13 πᾶς λόγος οὐχ ὑπερῆρεν αὐτόν, 
3 Led > a 3 , 
14 καὶ ἐν ζωῇ αὐτοῦ ἐποίησεν τέρατα, 
. tal ’ > , ς , 
15 ἐν πᾶσιν τούτοις οὐ μετενόησεν ὃ dads, 
6 ἕ é , > a “ 1 Ὁ Ἂς 
15° ἕως ἐπρονομεύθησαν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς αὐτῶν 
15° καὶ κατελείφθη ὁ λαὸς ὀλιγοστός 
: x 5 don , ὝΠΟ , 
16 τινὲς μὲν αὐτῶν ἐποίησαν τὸ ἀρεστόν, 
17 “E¢exias ὠχύρωσεν τὴν πόλιν αὐτοῦ, 
co» , 5 , 
(7° ὥρυξεν σιδήρῳ ἀκρότομον, 
18 ἐν ἡμέραις αὐτοῦ ἀνέβη Σενναχηρεὶμ 
18° καὶ ἐπῆρεν ἣ χεὶρ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ Σειών, 

, 3 , 7 Ἂ “- > n 
1g τότε ἐσαλεύθησαν καρδίαι καὶ χεῖρες αὐτῶν, 
20 καὶ ἐπεκαλέσαντο τὸν κύριον τὸν ἐλεήμονα, 
20° καὶ ὃ ἅγιος ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ταχὺ ἐπήκουσεν αὐτῶν, 
21 ἐπάταξεν τὴν παρεμβολὴν τῶν ᾿Ασσυρίων, 
22 ἐποίησεν γὰρ “E¢exias τὸ ἀρεστὸν Κυρίῳ, 
22° ἃς ἐνετείλατο ᾿Ησαίας ὁ προφήτης 


cal ε an 
23 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις αὐτοῦ ἀνεπόδισεν 6 ἥλιος, 


and no flesh had dominion over his spirit ; 
and from its place his flesh prophesied' ; 
and in his death marvellous works. 

and ceased not from their sins, 

and were scattered through all the earth. 


‘and still a judge to the house of David. 


and there were of them that trespassed wondrously. 
when he turned aside waters into the midst of it, 
and stopped up mountains for a pool. 

and sent Rabshakeh ; 

and blasphemed God in his pride. 

and were in anguish as a woman in travail ; 

and spread forth their hands unto him ; 

and saved‘ them by the hand of Isaiah; 

and discomfited them with the plague. 


and] was strong? in the ways of David. 


? In the Hebrew with a play on the name Hezekiah. 
* In the Hebrew with a play on the name Isaiah. 


καὶ ov κατεδυνάστευσεν αὐτὸν οὐδείς. 

᾿ , 2 4 a > a. 
καὶ ἐν κοιμήσει ἐπροφήτευσεν τὸ σῶμα αὐτοῦ 
καὶ ἐν τελευτῇ θαυμάσια τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ οὐκ ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν, 
καὶ ἐσκορπίσθησαν ἐν πάσῃ τῇ γῇ, 
καὶ ἄρχων τῷ οἴκῳ Δαυείδ. 
τινὲς δὲ ἐπλήθυναν ἁμαρτίας. 
καὶ εἰσήγαγεν εἰς μέσον αὐτῶν τὸν Γώγ᾽ 

3 , Ὁ o> 

καὶ φκοδόμησεν κρήνας els ὕδατα. 
καὶ ἀπέστειλεν ἱΡαψάκην, καὶ ἀπῆρεν" 

Ν A ες , > a 
kal ἐμεγαλαύχησεν ὑπερηφανίᾳ αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ ὠδίνησαν ὡς αἱ τίκτουσαι" 
ἐκπετάσαντες τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῶν πρὸς αὐτόν. 
καὶ ἐλυτρώσατο αὐτοὺς ἐν χειρὶ ᾿Ησαίου" 
καὶ ἐξέτριψεν αὐτοὺς ὁ ἄγγελος αὐτοῦ. 

cee een τ 
καὶ ἐνίσχυσεν ἐν ὁδοῖς Δαυεὶδ τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ, 
Ν > a 

6 μέγας καὶ πιστὸς ἐν ὁράσει αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ προσέθηκεν ζωὴν βασιλεῖ" 


XLVI, 


sw dans ben xh 
rw S13) 2ynnnD 
ΠΝ ‘AN any) 
ronson sdan ΝΟῚ 
ryan 553 Ey 
rpyp sy ΠΣ ny 
by weber on wm 
ro mon bx myna 
:mpp pn pon 
:mpy an ΠΝ nd 
simeaa dx A 
sattys bm 

roas vox wre 
ΕἸΜΙ 2 Dye 
:Mpwa oY 

2 83792 ΡΠ] 


eas No os ga Ilo 


πο un? ohasse 

Jars onrdS go 00:2 Ilo 

JKarpro Nas od,5h/0 

weeo? ἐμοῖς fagNom dass 

+ Jog NO Jogu ammoly poor Kilo 
ΒΕ HAS Salo 


6.5» dX LOHDH® Fem 
Jods? Nx Jhaupas Q+K0 


“οδο boise γερ μον wid0 
haar [oral p> κυ wide 
Kos Jhommso wo? Jando 
$2099 ohwiols groo 

ehsBsy fanmaco 

hada89 codse SX aamohlle 


12°23. 38 
(fol. 9 recto.) 

Sop tyr xd yom 129 
yon ΝΌΒΣ xd nat 55 13 
mixdp) mwy yn τά 
pyt aw xb mer 552 15 
DYIND INDI AWN ἫΝ 15° 
sym mm anes re 
ἜΝ Wy DMD wv 16 
YY pr ἸΠΡΙΠΝ 17 
Dv ΠΟΤ ayM 17° 
ain ΠῸΝ Ὁ 18 
ws Sy op Ὁ τ8ὸ 
nad psa m2] . . 19 
why dx bx ΕΓ Ὶ 20 
ondan*byp .. . . ΟἿ 208 
WR MND]... 27 
[apon ns wp[tm].... 22 


3 Zech. 6, 12. 


hes? g> go SI II ὡοιδδοου go 12° 
contro Kamal) I Ilo Noo 13 
eWaet® gad wordaud 14 

elas ash JI E> Geoda50 15 

» ooh? ee oda? rows τρὸ 
+eOHOPQmd.> |τϑομ Io 158 
Jhaash opary yoouse hu 16 
wJNtegso wtd μοι 17 


FD prnleo ondd® Bde ooHAWGad 18 
carson, SD οὐ peilo 18¢ 


sohad; wae Nqrs Jod/ οἷο 20° 
ladohly obsearo soho ar 


Fag? Lote x? Show 22 
fans Lisa? o1A99 22° 
elesoa pe opehay abso 23 


XLVIII. 


37 
(fol. 8 verso.) 
235 Ample’ in foolishness and lacking understanding, 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


Rehoboam by [his coun]sel let loose [the people ; 


238 Until there arose—let him have no memorial !—Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made [Israel to sin. 
24> to drive them out [of] their land. 
25 and he sold himself to all evil. 


238 And he gave unto Ephraim a stumbling-block, 
248 And his sin was great exceedingly, 
1 Till there arose a prophet like fire, 


_.2 And he brake for them the staff of bread, 


XLVIII. 


By the word of God he shut up the heavens, 
How terrible wast thou, O Elijah! 

Who didst raise up one that expired from death, 
Who broughtest down kings to the pit, 

Who anointedst one filled with retribution, 
) Who heardest® reproofs in Sinai, 

Who wast taken up by a whirlwind on high, 

10 Who art written down‘ as ready for a season, 
τοῦ To turn the heart of the fathers fo the children, 
11 Happy* he that saw thee and died(?)... . 
12 Elijah . ‘ 

129 With a do[uble] measure ® he multiplied signs, 


oN Dnun Ὁ Ww 


1 In the Hebrew with a play on the name Rehoboam. 
4, 5 seq. 5 Reading ἼΩΝ, as & (5. 
portion :’ Zt, a mouth—i. ec. a portion—of two. 


23° λαοῦ ἀφροσύνην καὶ ἐλασσούμενον συνέσει 


- 


μ᾿ 


23% καὶ ἔδωκεν TO ᾿Εφράιμ ὁδὸν ἁμαρτίας. 
b ἃ a EVAL Gee “ pier Gee 
24” ἀποστῆσαι αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς αὐτῶν 


1 καὶ ἀνέστη ᾿Ηλίας προφήτης ὡς πῦρ, 
a 5» , > > ‘ , 
2 ὃς ἐπήγαγεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς λιμόν, 
ἐν λόγῳ Κυρίου ἀνέσχεν οὐρανόν, 
ὡς ἐδοξάσθης, ᾿Ηλεία, ἐν τοῖς θαυμασίοις σου" 
ς ν ὁ 
ὁ ἐγείρας νεκρὸν ἐκ θανάτου 


B) 


ἀκούων ἐν Σεινὰ ἐλεγμὸν 


ὁ χρίων βασιλεῖς εἰς ἀνταπόδομα, 


ς 


3 

4 

5 

6 ὃ καταγαγὼν βασιλεῖς els ἀπωλίαν 

7 

8 

9 6 ἀναλημφθεὶς ἐν λαίλαπι πυρὸς 

ὁ καταγραφεὶς ἐν ἐλεγμοῖς εἰς καιρούς, 

καὶ ἐπιστρέψαι καρδίαν πατρὸς πρὸς υἱὸν 

μακάριοι οἱ ἰδόντες σε καὶ οἱ ἐν ἀγαπήσει 
κεκοσμημένοι, 


12 ᾿Ηλείας ὃς ἐν λαίλαπι ἐσκεπάσθη" 


7 


3.1 Kings 19, Io, 14. 
6 With allusion to 2 Kings 2, 9, where the same phrase is rendered ‘ double 


24 
25 


whose words were like a burning furnace. 

and by his jealousy? made them few in number. 
Ὁ Sie ieee ks τον 5 fires. 

he who is like thee may glory ! 

and from Sheol, according to the will of the Lord ; 
and honourable men [from] their beds ; 

and a prophet to succeed in thy place ; 

and judgements of vengeance in Horeb ; 

and by troops of fire [into heaven] ; 

to make anger to cease before...... 

and to give understanding to the tr[ibes of Isra]el. 
and Elisha. .... 

and he was learned in every utterance of his mouth. ) 


5 Reading yown, as ©. + Mal. 





‘PoBodp, ds ἀπέστησεν λαὸν ἐκ βουλῆς αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ Ἰεροβοὰμ υἱὸν Ναβάτ, ὃς ἐξήμαρτεν τὸν 
3 ᾿ς 
Ισραὴλ 
καὶ ἐπληθύνθησαν αἱ ἁμαρτίαι αὐτῶν σφόδρα, 
καὶ πᾶσαν πονηρίαν ἐξεζήτησαν, ἕως ἐκδίκησις 
ἔλθῃ ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. Ὁ Ow Ling 
καὶ ὁ λόγος αὐτοῦ ὡς λαμπὰς ἐκαίετο" 
καὶ τῷ ζήλῳ αὐτοῦ ὠλιγοποίησεν αὐτούς" 
κατήγαγεν οὕτως τρὶς πῦρ. 
\ ica , lal 
καὶ τίς ὅμοιός σοι καυχᾶσθαι; 
Soeur , € 
καὶ ἐξ Gdov ἐν λόγῳ Ὑψίστου 
καὶ δεδοξασμένους ἀπὸ κλίνης αὐτῶν" 
καὶ ἐν Χωρὴβ κρίματα ἐκδικήσεως" 
καὶ προφήτας διαδόχους μετ᾽ αὐτόν" 
ἐν ἅρματι ἵππων πυρίνων" 
/ Ν Ν a 
κοπάσαι ὀργὴν πρὸ θυμοῦ 
καὶ καταστῆσαι φυλὰς Ἰακώβ. 


καὶ γὰρ ἡμεῖς ζωῇ ζησόμεθα. 


\ ἂν, ἐν. 
καὶ ᾽Ελεισαῖε ἐνεπλήσθη πνεύματος αὐτοῦ, 


XLVI, 23°—XLVII. 124, 


:o[y wny]ya ‘py an oyam 

..+[njs ΝΠ ΌΠῚΠ awe ps 13. bya 
spnoqw[D] onvind 22} 
:?aapnn my 525 os 

ΣΡ. TWN MIN 

:DO'yOT wNP3 

TWN ace ese 

sawan’ 7/1] ws 

2 py Seen 

spn] ὩΣ 229) 

nnn sonn xa 
:[Ὁ]Ρ0 ‘wae INH ἡ 

δεν εν ΟΝ MNT 

ee [7050 ἣν mawnd 

2 b[sw wale pandy 

m ἜΝ 2 

eee [ΡΡ]Ό[ΝὉ] 


simp ΝΥ 593 ΠΟ) 


“at 


τὰν ΝῚ ὙΦ Che 


1 Exod, 32, 25. 3.1 Kings 21, 20, 25; 2 Kings 17, 17. 


POSS. ONDINE 457 -spdaui 

ρα" upelo Mer gas io proiad 

«ooh? — woul Wes 

yeh) JKans No Saxo 

senor? Jia) “οἱ J.a. obdwo 

«οὐ Sho oLd>0 

“λα lasrlNro μεροῖν. Joe ce Jdas gud) KAN) Kalo 
swabs oo λαοὶ»; eo 

ehizroy ret | ge? Samm ee 

-cohamias © Ἰσλμωο, Gucaro 


-1IK> Joo Lave 

βοὰν, ων laced 

ρον ora Jlly pro 
1208S. λᾶαν, o;ammndo 
ehnd bunso WI? Uso .} pe 
ward? fas? Jlass Naso 
«200 Soo 


® Mal. 4, 5 sq. 


36 
(fol. 8 verso.) 
mya tomy nd ann 23° 
1 om Sx pp awe ἫΝ 23¢ 
Swoo omand in 235 
sso inson Stan 248 
WND ND OP WS Ty 1 XLVIIL 
ond myn ond raw 2 
prow ἽΓΥ]ν bx rata 3 
WON [AJM ND ΠῸ 4 
nie yu o'pon 5 
nnw dy pod sina 6 
movden xdo neon 8 
minsin ὍΣ yyowm 7 
τον mypa mpbsn 9 
®pys poo ΊΠΩΠ τὸ 


os Sy mas ad swnd τοῦ 


2 ADD ἽΝ ἼΣΝ αἱ 
we ee PLN] τὸ 
naA AAS [Ὁ5}]Φ  12¢ 


4 Only the tail of the letter remains, 


Janam zatowo JLaNac \eon.so 23° 
202 oS Joo Wo 239 
JRXook paio/ Minos cone 238 
12g OOS hue neste 248 
esau bases bass por hows XLVIIL 
hia (oom vhulo 2 
λον Ilo Jozroy ob dros 3 
vibadat hu? Saw? Jao 4 
Jaro wl? 5 


24b 


25 


+Sohatmass oy crois sale 7 
5. Garda arco ward 8 
Nas Ids. apello 9 
μος pee ooo τὸ 
Joo? Sx kus aa®amad ic? 
ΝΟ μος, corasal τ 
“ρον. ato)/ )5, ols Jas? [2 
JLo μῶν Wego 120 


35 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 8 recto.) 


11... . the Lord took away his transgression, 


and exalted his horn for ever, 


11 [And galve him the ordinance of the kingdom, .and established his throne over Jerusalem. 


12 [And]amongthepeopletherearose noneafter him, 
13 Solomon reigned in days of prosperity, 

13° Who established an house for his name, 

τι How wast thou wise in thy youth! 

15 Theearth.. 
17 With songs, proverbs, dark sayings, and figures, 


18 Thou wast called by the glorious name, 

18¢ And thou didst heap up gold as iron, 

19 But thou gavest thy loins unto women, 

20 So [thou] didst put a blemish upon thy glory‘, 

205 [To bring] wrath upon thy issue, 

at That [they should become] two tribes, 

22 [Nevertheless] God forsaketh not mercy, 

22¢ He will not [cut off from his chosen] progeny 
and offspring, 

228 So he gave unto [Jacob a remnant], 

23 And Solomon slept....... 


1 i,e. HYM, as GS. Or HEM) didst overflow with instruction, as G. 
mgm, FRE 
3 Deut. 28,10, &c. See 1 Kings 8, 43, R.V. marg.; and cf. Sir. 36, 12 S. 


11 Κύριος ἀφεῖλεν τὰς ἁμαρτίας αὐτοῦ, 

11° καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ διαθήκην βασιλέων 

12 μετὰ τοῦτον ἀνέστη 

18 Σαλωμὼν ἐβασίλευσεν ἐν ἡμέραις εἰρήνης, 
13° ἵνα στήσῃ οἶκον ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ 

14 ὡς ἐσοφίσθης ἐν νεότητί σου, 

15 γῆν ἐπεκάλυψεν ἡ ψυχή σου, 

16 εἰς νήσους πόρρω ἀφίκετο τὸ ὄνομά σου, 

17 ἐν φδαῖς καὶ παροιμίαις καὶ παραβολαῖς 

18 ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ, 

18° συνήγαγες ὡς κασσίτερον τὸ χρυσίον, 

το πὰρανέκλινας τὰς λαγόνας cov γυναιξίν, 

20 ἔδωκας μῶμον ἐν τῇ δόξῃ σου, 

20° ἐπαγαγεῖν ὀργὴν ἐπὶ τὰ τέκνα σου, 

21 γενέσθαι δίχα τυρανυΐίδα 

22 ὁ δὲ Κύριος οὐ μὴ καταλίπῃ τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ, 
22° οὐδὲ μὴ ἐξαλείψῃ ἐκλεκτοῦ αὐτοῦ ἔκγονα, 
22° καὶ τῷ ᾿Ιακὼβ ἔδωκεν κατάλιμμα, 

23 καὶ ἀνεπαύσατο Σαλωμὼν μετὰ τῶν πατέρων, 


.»- 


an understanding son, dwelling securely. 

and God gave rest to him round about, 

and set up a sanctuary for ever. 

and didst make instruction to overflow’ like the Nile: 
-and thou didst celebrate song in the height (?) : 
thou didst greatly move? the nations: 

which is called over® Israel, 

and didst multiply silver like lead ; 

and lettest them have dominion over thy body ; 
and didst profane thy couch, 
and sighing upon thy bed; [arise). 
and that out of Ephraim a kingdom of violence (might 
nor letteth any of his words fall to the ground. 


nor destroy them that [lo]ve him ; 


and to [David] .... 
and left of his [seed] af[ter him]. 


2 Zit. move as with a tempest (cf. 2 Kings 6, 11). 
* Cf. 44, 19 and 33, 22 SG. 


καὶ ἀνύψωσεν εἰς αἰῶνα τὸ κέρας αὐτοῦ, 


. καὶ θρόνον δόξης ἐν τῷ Ἰσραήλ. 


υἱὸς ἐπιστήμων, καὶ Ov αὐτὸν κατέλυσεν ἐν πλατυσμῷ" 
ᾧ ὁ θεὸς κατέπαυσεν κυκλόθεν, fz 
Ν A ς A n 
καὶ ἑτοιμάσῃ ἁγίασμα els τὸν αἰῶνα. 
δ .Φ , ε / 
καὶ ἐνεπλήσθης ws ποταμὸς συνέσεως. 
καὶ ἐνέπλησας ἐν παραβολαῖς αἰνιγμάτων" 
ΠῚ , a , 4 
καὶ ἠγαπήθης ἐν τῇ εἰρήνῃ σου 
καὶ ἐν ἑρμηνίᾳ ἀπεθαύμασάν σε χῶραι" 
τοῦ ἐπικεκλημένου θεοῦ Ἰσραήλ, 
καὶ ὡς μόλιβον ἐπλήθυνας ἀργύριον. 
καὶ ἐνεξουσιάσθης ἐν τῷ σώματί σου" 
καὶ ἐβεβήλωσας τὸ σπέρμα σου, 
καὶ κατενύγην ἐπὶ τῇ ἀφροσύνῃ σου, 
καὶ ἐξ ᾿Εφράιμ. ἄρξαι βασιλείαν ἀπειθῆ. 
καὶ οὐ μὴ διαφθαρῇ ἀπὸ τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ σπέρμα τοῦ ἀγαπήσαντος αὐτὸν οὐ μὴ ἐξάρῃ" 
καὶ τῷ Δαυεὶδ ἐξ αὐτοῦ ῥίζαν. 
καὶ κατέλιπεν μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐκ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτοῦ 


E2 


XLVII. 11-23». 34 


ΟΡ pdyd om 
sodwiy Sy pon ἸΝΌΘῚ 
:moad jw town 12 

span > mn by 
repo syd ayy 

:7DND AND AYN) 
saw ofa odpm 

:mayon py 

:dsne by snpan 

ΠΟΘ MIAN Π ΒΡ) 
ΕἼΣ pdwen 
ὍΝ ns SSnm 
:qaowe by ΠΙΟΝῚ 
:pon ΠΡΟ onaNn 
rryas ya dy ΝΟῚ 
pow xd yalme] 


rank fcr att tak τν ea 


73... . [Ya] any 


1 Proy. 10, 5. ? Gen. 49, 4. 


(fol. 8 recto.) 
wyD ὌΣΝΠ ὅλο , yu 
nado npn 3) {{ΠῸ] τι 
WINN Wy px BPI[] τὰ 
mby ona ΡΟ andy 13 
wowd ma pon Wwe 13° 
ἼΨΞ non ΠῸ τὰ 
ree goat 
ΠΌΡΟΣ aon S[w]o awa 17 
33297 DWI NNTP 18 
ant Siaa ἼΣΥΠῚ 18° 
pop> pwd inn τὸ 
ὙἼ223 Dw jn[n} 20 
spayey by A... 20° 
moaw wd... . Far 
son eno xd Six]... 22 
JON PIV. 6 ee ND 22° 
τ ee DIMM 22° 
Sy , Do mandy ase 23 


* The whole word looks most like wwyn (? wun made aged), or ὌΝ (tyr 


in despair), but no verb tw is quoted, and way seems unsuited to the context. 


“με pod puilo 
pods Qi? So 


«οὕ» yoodo e os ound Jodo 


Βροξβο .ydoam> Jhaaaw "δον οὐ hargto 
λον Jesus 
syne Gaam~wo 

shaasis Losol/ Jhanmtso 
No]pcae? SX ομοὶὴν 
Jey y! μοίωο 

“Fre? gl? Κδϑαὶο 
ephvaal Lisyo 

-yooanas Ns cowhhyy 
Join hoard. prio) hor ew 
οὐ NX CorBdYo bow Ilo 
wey I corassyy 30 
Jed Jhaadro woe Mus do 
ὁ NDS οὐ poo 


οοῦ δ, od Bra Jos? elo 
Jhands09 brmias od Some 11° 


ome μδαϑ Jin farol lar oso poo 13 


#pPSSdS omaad Jo lave Shoo 13° 
2 oman phodpo Lico pow faeo 14 


pan fpr Jord Jhidgd bros τό 
shokkas IKsanuye Iso 549 17 

Jena? Co οὐδ᾽ Ποῖ ommas Miollo 18 
choo Jia? yl Kaioo 18¢ 

.yasol, fais Kaowo 19 

wyidel> Lroars Maou 20 

05 ots Sa Vox asbund 20° 

+ aads chi ASKS. 21 
sohaaad aaa } Jos? elo 22 
seoamnds Κ᾽ eras Io 22° 
Jhasjaex sons Sho 22° 
,\oaa a ὥϑαο 23 


XLVII. 


XLVII. 


33 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 7 verso.) 

1g And at the time of his resting upon his (last) bed, he called the Lord and his anointed to witness, (saying,) 
19° From [whom] have I [taken] a ransom or a secret gift*? and no man answered against him. 

199 Also till the time of his end he was found prudent in the sight of the Lord and in the sight of all living. 

20 And even after his death he was sought, and declared to the king his ways, 20° and lifted up his voice 
from the earth in prophecy. 

1 Moreover after him rose up Nathan, 

2 For like fat separated? from the holy (offering), 

3 He mocked at lions as at a kid, 

4 In his youth he smote a mighty man, 

4° When he swung his hand upon the sling, 

5 For he called unto God Most High, 

5¢ To thrust away the man skilled in battles, 

6 Therefore the daughters sang of him, 

6¢ When he had put on the diadem he fought, 

7» And set nakedness‘ among the Philistines, 


to stand before David. 
so was David (separated) from Israel. 
and at bears as at the herds of Bashan. 
and took away an everlasting [reproach], 
and brake the pr[{id]e of Goliath. 
and he put strength in his right hand, 
and to exalt the horn of his people, 
and titled him with ten thousand *. 
7 and subdued the adversary round about ; 
and brake [their h]orn in pieces unto this day. 
to God Most High [with words of gl]ory, 
and every [day] aaa ae 
and the sound of [....and of har]|ps* he set in 
order, 


8 In all his works he gave thanks 

s¢ With his whole heart loving him that made him, 

g Stringed instruments of song (he set®) be[fore 
the altar], 

δι so Meron ly Ms as . . « [year by y]ear. 

τοῦ While [they pr]aised his holy name, the sanctuary? resounded before the morning. 


3. Lit. lifted off; see Lev. 4, 8. 10. 19, &c. 3. See 
6 Marg. harp. The vertical note has, He made a sweet 


1 Perhaps oY) a pair of sandals; cf. (Ὁ here, and in 1 Sam. 12, 3. 
1 Sam. 18, 7. * py (Ὁ) for ony. 5 So the marg. adds, 
sound of melody. 7 This is written above thé word judgement. 


\ roy ’ n 2 , , \ a ΠῚ X , \o¢ 
Ig Kal πρὸ καιρου κοιμήσεως αἰῶνος ἐπεμαρτύρατο ἔναντι Κυρίου καὶ χριστοῦ 19° Δρηματα καὶ EWS 
G , 5) , x > in a 6 es ae 
ὑποδημάτων ἀπὸ πάσης TAPKOS OVK εἴληφα και οὐκ ἐνεκάλεσεν auT® ἄνθρωπος. 


\ na a a \ 
20 καὶ pera τὸ ὑπνῶσαι αὐτὸν προεφήτευσεν καὶ ὑπέδειξεν βασιλεῖ τὴν τελευτὴν αὐτοῦ, 20° καὶ ἀνύψωσεν 
ἐκ γῆς τὴν φωνὴν αὐτοῦ ἐν προφητείᾳ, ἐξαλεῖψαι ἀνομίαν λαοῦ. 


1 καὶ μετὰ τοῦτον ἀνέστη Nadav 

2 ὥσπερ στέαρ ἀφωρισμένον ἀπὸ σωτηρίου, 
3 ἐν λέουσιν ἔπαιζεν ὡς ἐν ἐρίφοις, 

4 ἐν νεότητι αὐτοῦ οὐχὶ ἀπέκτεινεν γίγαντα, 
4° ἐν τῷ ἐπᾶραι χεῖρα ἐν λίθῳ σφενδόνης 

5. ἐπεκαλέσατο γὰρ Κύριον τὸν ὕψιστον, 

5° ἐξᾶραι ἄνθρωπον ἐν πολέμῳ" 

6 οὕτως ἐν μυριάσιν ἐδόξασεν αὐτόν, 

6° ἐν τῷ φέρεσθαι αὐτῷ διάδημα δόξης. 

7 καὶ ἐξουδένωσεν Φυλιστιεὶμ τοὺς ὑπεναντίους 

ἐν παντὶ ἔργῳ αὐτοῦ ἔδωκεν ἐξομολόγησιν 

8᾽ ἐν πάσῃ καρδίᾳ αὐτοῦ ὕμνησεν 

9 καὶ ἔστησεν ψαλτῳδοὺς κατέναντι τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου, 
Io ἔδωκεν ἐν ἑορταῖς εὐπρέπειαν, 

10° ἐν τῷ αἰνεῖν αὐτοὺς τὸ ἅγιον ὄνομα αὐτοῦ 


προφητεύειν ἐν ἡμέραις Δαυείδ. 
οὕτως Δαυεὶδ ἀπὸ τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ. 
καὶ ἐν ἄρκοις ὡς ἐν ἄρνασι προβάτων. 
καὶ ἐξῆρεν ὀνειδισμὸν ἐκ λαοῦ 
καὶ καταβαλεῖν γαυρίαμα τοῦ Γολιάθ; 
καὶ ἔδωκεν ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ αὐτοῦ κράτος 
τῇ ὀεξιφ ρᾶτος, 

> , / cel > a 
ἀνυψώσει κέρας λαοῦ αὐτοῦ. 

Μ 9. A . > 7 7 
καὶ ἤνεσεν αὐτὸν ἐν εὐλογίαις Κυρίου 

7 ἐξέτριψεν γὰρ ἐχθροὺς κυκλόθεν, 

ἕως σήμερον συνέτριψεν αὐτῶν κέρας. 
ἁγίῳ Ὑψίστῳ, ῥήματι δόξης" 
καὶ ἠγάπησεν τὸν ποιήσαντα αὐτόν. 


καὶ ἐξ ἤχους αὐτῶν γλυκαίνειν μέλη" 
ἡ “2. 


καὶ ἐκόσμησεν καιροὺς μέχρι συντελείας, 


καὶ ἀπὸ πρωὶ ἠχεῖν τὸ ἁγίασμα. 


XLVI. 19—XLVII. τοῦ, 32 
(fol. 7 verso.) 
ΕἿΣ my xO ot day 2n[npd Joo ody rar τοῦ ἸΠΎΦΟΥ PYM aswD dy om Ny τὸ 
tn ὍΘ spyay spa syd ΠΣ INP NY TY OI το 
pasa yp pax gw 200. syaot dnd aay wt an vans: pa 20 


ΕἼΤ ὮΒΟ aynnd ind ΩΝ Wns pyr XLVIL 
ssw ῬΥ [5 ΦῚΡὉ own adns "5 2 
ΕἸΣ ssa pray yaa pny nas 3 
roy... . 04 ma(a] mon ya 4 
rm) ma[Np]n ἼΣΟΙ yop dy wm wna 4° 
iy a2 NY my Se Se wp a 5 
yoy Ip mx omady monde yay ws ny aid se 
ἘΠΕῚ MID ma > wy 15 by 6 
ΕἼΣ yon Dapp 7 ponds spy iniwya 69 
[: 5] ΠΡ Faw on ayn py onwde2 jinn 7> 
smd]... . dy dxd nina ina inwyn 52a 8 
ΒΕ δον μα ΟΒΗῚ ΠΩ ams 15 Ὁ52 858 ΠῚ 
a, Ὁ ΣΡ ofa]... Ap vee oe DY MIMI 9 pon 
£ fo La Rae ae oie ey Beste 
δ rae yy [Ὑ]ΡᾺ snd wap ov AX [pd)dna τος 
Β 438.89; 45 2 1 Sam. 12, 3. 5 Lev. 4,8. 10. 19. * Deut. 32, 14. 5 Above newn is written wipn. 
Ω 


wae I as) go Lusiane Jeans 15° yomnaso pr00 ἱρέβο pro tou? sd NX uwhwy Lisise 19 
«ον. yoo) I pas Noo 


ὁ Jorbue νόθος, Jlarass odo bs3/ εἰ puilo 209 sof Jada caso Nia) cobar dhs E289 20 


02 ped cadmas has (hy po oso = XLVIL 
Nope? co 0? pi μοο ΡΥ co 9. pe? ay μοι 2 
Sexo? yo? MSlro SBS μὲς yo? Jhani? 3 
Od? Jem santo -Jeatgd Sfo ohadgs 4 
Ὡς ohasiona oda isho βδοϑ ons? au) 4° 
lasek ols coro Jos? Pro dur So 5 
Nuc? onads 30 θόρον, loro wale Jina NJord 5° 
Jhases μω “ον ro Sho 6 
sedge (OSD EX Jhico soho y wash? ὯΝ 6¢ 
\oowse 42) fuscad fos οἷο μὰ Eo sisllo 7> 
Jenulto JNngohy Jas Ibs Joo She Μμο Spo 8 
“μοῦ po Naso 24> fwd GA odaaso 80 


ehnnd sro Pro Joos τοδὶ oudal o 
ead μα So IN5505 IKudalh cow τὸ 


BI « ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 7 recto.) 

69 [Yea], because he followed fully after God, 

7» [H]e, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, 

74 To turn away wrath from the congregation, 

8 Therefore’ they also, two alone, were reserved?, 
89 To bring them into their inheritance, 

9 And he gave strength unto Caleb, 

9° To make him® to tread upon the high places of 

the land, 

το That all the seed of Jacob might know 

11 Also the judges every one by his name, 

11¢ And who drew not back from (following) after 

God— 

13 The lover®ofhis people,& acceptable to his Maker, 
13° A nazirite of the Lord in prophecy, 

138 [The pro]phet of God established a kingdom, 
14 By [his law he com]manded the congregation, 
15 By... . he was [san|ctified a gazer (prophet), 
16 He also [called] unto God, 
16¢ When he offered up [a sucking lamb], 


7 and in the days of Moses wrought godliness, 
in standing fast when the assembly cast off restraint, 
and to still the evil report ; 
out of six hundred thousand men on foot, 
a land flowing with milk and honey. 
and even unto old age it remained with him ; 


and that his seed also should possess an inheritance; 


that it was good to follow fully after the Lord. 

every one whose heart had not turned aside “, 

may their memory be blessed, 12 and their name 

succeed to their sons. 

(was) he who was lent from his mother’s womb, 

Samuel, who was judge and priest. 

and anointed leaders’ over the people. 

and the God of Jacob visited (them). 

and by his wordalso he was confirmedasa shepherd’, 

[when] his [ene |mies [pressed hi]m* round about, 
17 and [the Lord] thun[dered out of heaven] ; 


17> With a mighty crash his voice was heard, 18 and he subdued the garrisons of the foe, and des[troy Jed 


all the lords of the Philistines. 


1 Reading 13. 5 ? v2 were delivered (G GS). 
Ἢ 


5 ? anN beloved by. 
5, 2, R.V. marg. 


6° Kal yap ἐπηκολούθησεν ὀπίσω Δυνάστου. 
7” αὐτὸς καὶ Χαλὲβ vids ᾿Ιεφοννή, 

γἃ κωλῦσαι λαὸν ἀπὸ ἁμαρτίας 

8 καὶ αὐτοὶ δύο ὄντες διεσώθησαν 

8° εἰσαγαγεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς κληρονομίαν, 

9 καὶ ἔδωκεν ὁ κύριος τῷ Χαλὲβ ἰσχύν, 

9° ἐπιβῆναι αὐτὸν ἐπὶ ὕψος τῆς γῆς; 

το ὅπως ἴδωσιν πάντες οἱ υἱοὶ Ἰσραὴλ 

11 καὶ οἱ κριταί, ἕκαστος τῷ αὐτοῦ ὀνόματι, 
11° καὶ ὅσοι οὐκ ἀπεστράφησαν ἀπὸ Κυρίου, 


12 τὰ ὀστᾶ αὐτῶν ἀναθάλοι ἐκ τοῦ τόπου αὐτῶν, 


13 ἠγαπημένος ὑπὸ κυρίου αὐτοῦ 


13° προφήτης Κυρίου κατέστησεν βασιλέα, 
14 ἐν νόμῳ Κυρίου ἔκρινεν συναγωγήν, 

15. ἐν πίστει αὐτοῦ ἠκριβάσθη προφήτης, 

16 καὶ ἐπεκαλέσατο τὸν κύριον δυνάστην, 
16° ἐν προσφορᾷ ἀρνὸς γαλαθηνοῦ" 


8 Reading 12477, or (Jer. 39, 14) Ὑ7--. 
δ swan for ΝΘ, with a play on the name Samuel; cf. 1 Sam. 1, 28. 
δ᾽ Or perhaps mm (as a seer); cf. (δ, and 1 Sam. 3, 20. 9, 19. 


* sm for nwa; cf. G S. 
7 y Sam. 9, 16. 2 Sam. 


9 Perhaps.zm2. ” 1 Sam. 7, 9. 


7 καὶ ἐν ἡμέραις Μωυσέως ἐποίησεν ἔλεος, 

ἀντιστῆναι ἔναντι ἐχθροῦ, 

καὶ κοπάσαι γογγυσμὸν πονηρίας. 

ἀπὸ ἑξακοσίων χιλιάδων πεζῶν, 

εἰς γῆν ῥέουσαν γάλα καὶ μέλι. 

καὶ ἕως γήρους διέμεινεν αὐτῷ, 

καὶ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ κατέσχεν κληρονομίαν" 

ὅτι καλὸν τὸ πορεύεσθαι ὀπίσω Κυρίου. 

ὅσων οὐκ ἐξεπόρνευσεν ἣ καρδία 

εἴη τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν ἐν εὐλογίαις" 

καὶ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῶν ἀντικαταλλασσόμενον ἐφ᾽ 
υἱοῖς δεδοξασμένων αὐτῶν. 


ἔχρισεν ἄρχοντας ἐπὶ τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ" 
ἐπεσκέψατο Κύριος τὸν ᾿Ιακώβ. 

καὶ ἐγνώσθη ἐν πίστει αὐτοῦ πιστὸς ὁράσεως. 
ἐν τῷ θλίψαι ἐχθροὺς αὐτοῦ κυκλόθεν, 


17 καὶ ἐβρόντησεν an’ οὐρανοῦ Κύριος, 


κα 


΄-, 


17° καὶ ἐν ἤχῳ μεγάλῳ ἀκουστὴν ἐποίησεν τὴν φωνὴν αὐτοῦ, 18 καὶ ἐξέτριψεν ἡγουμένους Τυρίων καὶ 


πάντας ἄρχοντας Φυλιστιείμ. 


XLVI. 6°18. 


Ton AwY ΠΟ 3) 7 
Sap 2ynpa aynnd 
Say Asst mawndy 
pda Ads min wen 
swan adn nar 
soy ΠΟ ΠΟῪ WI 
:nbm) wy ayn on 
sm vain xded a 5 
2125 ΝΣ xd awe 55 
Παρ ΠΌΤ peer 12> maiad ona ὙΠ) 
yon yo2n bywnn 
rman paw Sxinw 
spy Sy ova neon 
apy nds apa 
ἘΠΡΥΎ ΝΣ 37a ὮΝ) 
:papp vate... 
A Sy PON C's El 


30 
(fol. 7 recto.) 
Sx vane tndp 5. [na] oe 
mop 12 205) Ν[Π] 7> 
myo pn awnd γὰ 


yoyx2 nwa on or od 8 


yas andra dx oxrand se 
nosy 2030 inn 9 
yrs sna dy “ὈΞΥΥΊΠΡ οὐ 
spy yt 55 nyt qynd τὸ 
YOUD WR DOW τα 
bx vane ΔῸΣ ΝΟῚ ie 
wey Sw wy AMS τ 
NII MD 139 
nado pon bx [sa]> 139 
DAD MS) aoe cee ae. 
mn ΞΡ] ΡΣ ees 


bx] ὉΓΝ7 «νον [JA on τό 


2b... Ἰπῦν8 169 


ronwdp ὍΣΟ 55 [ne ἼΔ]ΝῚ ὋΣ Say Tyo 18 ἸΡῚΡ yrows ws ΨΡΘ 17> 


3 Prov. 29, 18. Exod. 32, 25. 
ΣΦ 1 Sam. 7, 13. 


1 Num, 14, 24. 
® Deut. 33, 24. 


9] λαβὰς pad lacs uwdsso 7 
ehoss JRSjoK>s pass 
μα ὅθ ὁ ee has bag adgasdo 
slaszo Jad. boise bill 
omy pool/ ohaarc ds ho dso 
μα, μὴ od5) oto 
wwordte9o Jodsty cpoasay poe 
yours Lay ly No 
JNodaad \oovs0y Joo 
Souda Jans odado oomAS fag oma yaaawo 
sols Joie go NIkale eo 
μορο μὲν Nulasn 
sass Jadaso μα ueawo 


w20nduy οὐδ 4099 μου ὺ 


CHF prs yoo ~~ Ιμῷ za), 


μωο μον ce pdior7 
μά δὲ borg woods polo 50,2 igcda yoods sah τὸ 


5. Num. 14, 37. 
8 1 Sam, 10, 5. 13, 3. 4. 


* Cf. Jos. 14, 9 (777). 5 Ps. 44, 18. 
® 1 Sam, 7, 7, &c. 


Jord? so poe co οἷο 69 
μθο, :.ὡ» @doo οο 7? 
JKmars οαϑορονΝ, 74 
ΟΝ (Sow FAwd> «WHO 8 
yooholas οὐ adsaad. 80 
Ιαροὶ adXaS conc 9 
haste οδροὶ SX habs. 9° 
ΦΌΩΣ GI) Bp? Sho τὸ 
oad Pag HQ ΤΙ 
Jost? omoasas gx case IIo 11° 
μᾶοα. gel (OMMER, LFS 12 
ομ ὥς prwdo 13 
hasaas Jesfs 13° 
JhaaNso Kish obdsas9 138 
JNA aL φῶϑ parts 14 


oo glo 16 
hades Jexo? ο,δροϑῶ 16° 


code wane) fms broaso 17) 


XLVI. 


XLVI. 


29 
(fol. 6 verso.) 
23° In his jealousy for the God of all, 


23¢ Whose heart made him willing, 

24 Therefore for him also did he establish an 
ordinance, 

24° Which should be to him and to his seed, 

25 Also his covenant (was) with David 

25° An inheritance of fire in presence of his glory 

259 And now bless ye the Lord, the good, 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


and stood in the breach of his people. 
and he made atonement for the children of Israel. 


a covenant of peace to maintain the sanctuary ; 


an high priesthood for ever. 

the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, 

was the inheritance of Aaron unto all his seed. 
who hath crowned you with glory ; 


26 And given you wisdom of heart, 26¢ that your goodness [and] your [mig]ht be not forgotten through 


perpetual generations. 
1 Amighty man of valour was Joshua the son ofNun, 
1° Who was formed that there might be in his days 
1° To execute vengeance upon the enemy, 
2 How glorious was he when he stretched out his 
hand, 
3 Who was he that could stand before him? 
4 Did not the sun stand still by his hand, 
5 For he called unto God Most High, 
s¢ And God Most High answered him with stones 
ὁ p28s Melee τὸν δ ey Rigel ame, Τὺ 
6° That every banned nation? [might know 


1 Jos. 10, 11. 


23° ἐν τῷ (yAGoat αὐτὸν ἐν φόβῳ Κυρίου 
23° ἐν ἀγαθότητι προθυμίας ψυχῆς αὐτοῦ" 

24 διὰ τοῦτο ἐστάθη αὐτῷ διαθήκη εἰρήνης, 
24° ἵνα αὐτῷ Fj καὶ τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ 

25 καὶ διαθήκην τῷ Δαυεὶδ 

25° κληρονομία βασιλέως υἱοῦ ἐξ υἱοῦ μόνου, 


26 δῴη ὑμῖν σοφίαν ἐν καρδίᾳ ὑμῶν, 

26° ἵνα μὴ ἀφανισθῇ τὰ ἀγαθὰ αὐτῶν, 

I κραταιὸς ἐν πολέμοις ᾿Ιησοῦς Ναυή, 

1° ὃς ἐγένετο κατὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ 

τὸ ἐκδικῆσαι ἐπεγειρομένους ἐχθρούς, 

ὡς ἐδοξάσθη ἐν τῷ ἐπᾶραι χεῖρας αὐτοῦ 


[Ὁ 


τίς πρότερον αὐτοῦ οὕτως ἔστη ; 
οὐχὶ ἐν χειρὶ αὐτοῦ ἀνεπόδισεν ὁ ἥλιος, 


ne B&D 


ἐπεκαλέσατο τὸν ὕψιστον δυνάστην 
5° καὶ ἐπήκουσεν αὐτῶν μέγας Κύριος 
6 κατέρραξεν ἐπ᾽ ἔθνος πόλεμον, 

6° ἵνα γνῶσιν ἔθνη πανοπλίαν αὐτῶν, 


the minister of Moses in prophecy, 
a great salvation to his chosen ones ; 
and to give Israel his inheritance. 


when he swung the javelin against the city! 


for he fou[ght] the battles of the Lord. 

so that one day [became two]? 

when he was pressed upon [round about]. 
of [hail and coa]ls [of fir]e; 

and in [the descent?] ; 

that the Lord watched their battles. 


? For the idea, see Deut. 7, 2. Jos. 10, 40. 11, 12. 20, &c.; for the expression, cf. Is. 34, 5. 


καὶ στῆσαι αὑτὸν ἐν τροπῇ λαοῦ 

καὶ ἐξιλάσατο περὶ τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ. 
προστάτην ἁγίων καὶ λαῷ αὐτοῦ, 
ἱερωσύνης μεγαλεῖον εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. 

υἱῷ ἐκ φυλῆς Ἰούδα, 

κληρονομία ᾿Ααρὼν καὶ τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ. 


κρίνειν τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ, 

καὶ τὴν δόξαν αὐτῶν εἰς γενεὰς αὐτῶν. 

καὶ διάδοχος Μωσῆ ἐν προφητείαις, 

μέγας ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ ἐκλεκτῶν αὐτοῦ, 

ὅπως κληρονομήσῃ τὸν ᾿Ισραήλ. 

καὶ τῷ ἐκκλῖναι ῥομφαίαν ἐπὶ πόλεις. 

τοὺς γὰρ πολεμίους Κύριος αὐτὸς ἐπήγαγεν 
καὶ μία ἡμέρα ἐγενήθη πρὸς δύο; 

ἐν τῷ θλίψαι αὐτὸν ἐχθροὺς κυκλόθεν" 

ἐν λίθοις χαλάζης δυνάμεως κραταιᾶς" 

καὶ ἐν καταβάσει ἀπώλεσεν ἀνθεστηκότας, 
ὅτι ἐναντίον Κυρίου ὁ πόλεμος αὐτοῦ" 


XLV. 23°—XLVI. 69. 28 


ἸῸΝ Tp pa Ty" 
syne va by a 
swiprn dsd2d tmbw nna 
spdy ay aby mans 
sam nod ow 12 
ΟΡ b25 pias: ndma 
:Na9 DINs Wwyon 


(fol. 6 verso.) 
ὑπ mbyd qwapa 23° 
yd Ἰ2Ὶ) WN 23° 
pn ΡΠ xb na 150 24 
yyy ab man ὝΦΝ 249 
37 Dy NI DI 25 
yaa Ed wx ndna 25¢ 


apn NS NI 973 ANY 259 


sod nnd panna] saw moe xd ΠΡ 266. aS moan nad jny 26 


PANNA AWD Mw 
ΕΠ ada aywn 
dye nse Sonandy 
gay Sy ‘pts ina 
fron]}ss ον miondn 5 
ἘΝ sree me ὮΝ 
wee [0 mpoND 
Pet ce στε 
ὩΣ ΧΕ ΟΝ 


sonondi δὴ ΠΡῚΣ 5 


' Ps. 106, 23. 2 Num. 25, 7-13. 


loans JRXboK5 pero Nol eco? paso 


Nu pene? SX hase 236 


elndprxo od funy 

spdyoas JNo5 Jasco 

οὐ 4D 

eoardItro od «ϑϑον» Lulsaso 


els κοῦ yl Joosa ehh? Jharass 
“οὐ: βιοϑαϑ 

sleadiasoy ἡ Suze? Guard obiamdo 
"μαῦρο No Que 40 

ssa co aso? 15402 NJoo 

reeds Gh pu boas Jooro 

Ιωροὶ ο΄.οἱ» Φομο 

wu) Jason gro JNsiaco 5:5} 

θόλος «Ξοὶο 

Oo 2:0) oo Jodly 


3 Num. 25, 12. 


no ya perm om 12 yaar XLVI 
yora mynd ay ὝΦΝ 1 
ΔῊΝ Mp? oprmd τϑ 
) ἸΠῚΣΣ WIN AD 2 
ayn Ὁ sin 3 
wown soy ya xbn 4 
why Sie be ap oD 5 
ΝΣ yydy Sy gray 89 
SU Getie aa Os 
pan 1 53 ΠΙΝῚ] ᾿νοῦ oe 


* Jos. 8, 18. 26. 


Jntepsa> eg? Migs 23° 


Jo? od bas INsodsas μὸν Ngo 24 
GdIII ad Jooho 24° 

τοῦ alo 25 

Δ voosvands> δον μίϑω 2:9 

JoSI οο.5 Sxu.ar0 25° 


cong saac oorag ag Wy Ngoo 26° comes ood qs slaN» πα, (oad Som? 26 


ὁ δ. 139 yoosas 
se rams Mw :5 Ἰῶς τ XEVEL 

οἷ ashisad τὸ 
Jaco Jean Oo νον ο 1° 
rorgeloy fofts parse 2 od JL bo. 
TV OHOW~D PAWS war alw 3 
lesoe pe ΟΕ ΕΥῚ Spo 4 
womtdo Joss pro odyr Sw 5 
Jolas contro 5° 
Ἱμοο row SX Jawo 6 
whroee rors (ODD Gd qeo 6° 


27 ECCLESIASTICUS 
(fol. 6 recto.) 


14 His meal-offering should be wholly burnt, and every day twice continually. 
15 And Moses filled his hand’, and anointed him with the holy oil. 
15° And it was unto him an everlasting covenant, and to his seed as the days of heaven, 


e To minister and to execute the priest’s office ; he iets 
τὸ ' P and to bless his people in his name. 


unto him, 
16 And he chose him out of all living, to bring near the burnt-offering and the fat pieces; 
16¢ And to burn a sweet savour and a memorial?, and to make atonement for the children of Israel. 


gtd and made him to have authority over statute and 
17 And he gave him his commandments, 7 


judgement, 
17° So he taught his people statutes, and judgements unto the children of Israel. 
18 But strangers were incensed against him, and were jealous of him in the wilderness; _[anger. 
18¢ The men of Dathan and Abiram, and the congregation of Korah in the violence of their 
ig And the Lord saw it and was angered, and consumed them in the heat of his anger: 
τοῦ And he brought upon them a sign, and devoured them with his flaming fire. 
20 And [he increased] to Aaron his glory, and gave him his inheritance ; 
20° The holy f[irst-fruits*] he gave to him for bread, 21 that they should eat the fire-offerings of the Lord; 
208s 6 5c .+.+.... they should divide, 21» and (they should be) a gift to him and to his seed; 


22 Only[inthelandofhis people |heshouldnotinherit, | andamongst themheshould not divide an inheritance; 
22¢ The fire-offerings of the Lord [should be their 


: Ἢ ὁ ous Le, τς» ἐς ἔδρα, 
portion and their inheritance] 


23 Moreover Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, inmight..... 
Δ i.e. consecrated him; see Exod. 28, 41. Lev. 8, 33, R.V. " Lev. 2, 2, &c. 3. Supplying [ΓΝ]. 
14 θυσίαν αὐτοῦ ὁλοκαρπωθήσονται καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐνδελεχῶς δίς. 
15. ἐπλήρωσεν Μωυσῆς τὰς χεῖρας καὶ ἔχρισεν αὐτὸν ἐν ἐλαίῳ ἁγίῳ" 
15° ἐγενήθη αὐτῷ εἰς διαθήκην αἰώνιον, καὶ ἐν τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ ἐν ἡμέραις οὐρανοῦ, 
15° λειτουργεῖν αὐτῷ ἅμα καὶ ἱερατεύειν, καὶ εὐλογεῖν τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι. 
16 ἐξελέξατο αὐτὸν ἀπὸ παντὸς ζῶντος, προσαγαγεῖν κάρπωσιν Κυρίῳ, 
16° θυμίαμα καὶ εὐωδίαν εἰς μνημόσυνον, ἐξιλάσκεσθαι περὶ τοῦ λαοῦ σου. 
17 ἔδωκεν αὐτὸν ἐν ἐντολαῖς αὐτοῦ, ἐξουσίαν ἐν διαθήκαις κριμάτων, 
17° διδάξαι τὸν ᾿Ιακὼβ τὰ μαρτύρια, καὶ ἐν νόμῳ αὐτοῦ φωνῆσαι Ἰσραήλ. 
18 ἐπισυνέστησαν αὐτῷ ἀλλότριοι καὶ ἐζήλωσαν αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, 
18° ἄνδρες οἱ περὶ Δαθὰν καὶ ᾿Αβειρὼν καὶ ἣ συναγωγὴ Κόρε ἐν θυμῷ καὶ ὀργῇ" 
19 εἶδεν Κύριος καὶ οὐκ εὐδόκησεν, καὶ συνετελέσθησαν ἐν θυμῷ ὀργῆς" 
19° ἐποίησεν αὐτοῖς τέρατα, καταναλῶσαι ἐν πυρὶ φλογὸς αὐτοῦ. 
20 καὶ προσέθηκεν ᾿Ααρὼν δόξαν, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ κληρονομίαν" 
20° ἀπαρχὰς πρωτογενημάτων ἐμέρισεν αὐτοῖς, ἄρτον πρώτοις ἡτοίμασεν πλησμονήν" 
21 καὶ γὰρ θυσίας Κυρίου φάγονται, ἂς ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ τε καὶ τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ. 
22 πλὴν ἐν γῇ λαοῦ οὐ κληρονομήσει, καὶ μερὶς οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτῷ ἐν λαῷ, 


αὐτὸς γὰρ μερίς σου, κληρονομία. 
. 23 καὶ Φινεὲς vids ᾿Ελεαζὰ τρίτος εἰς δόξαν, 

ρ 
D2 


— ——_ 





XLV. 14-23). 


rpyoye won ov do 
ΣΦῚΡΠ ows Ne 
Pony wr way 
syow2 yoy mx aby 
soradm aby. wand 
sSyawy saa Sy ἸΒΞΟῚ 
spawn pina ind wo 
rSyaw wa ns Dawn 
2703 13 INP 
ΒΝ ΤΣ Mp nay 
fps pana pbsy 
ΟΝ ΣΦ pdsx 
sindma xd inn 
2*nbayr owe 218 


hagas? buaso onarco 

elesnay JKr0ds yl odo 
SAS HSS ad;amdo 
JLaSS asrasod 

Σου odo SX armaado 
ehisgo faatas ofdalo 


Jid_sad o> aifo 

elaooks wiacy JKaaio 
Jeans wl solo 

oad? looks «οἱ Θυροὶο 


“οϑο, os Sono 


οὐ ο oS 

yooar λας 9 ag lo 
@Nuliene? Meo oholivo 
«τοῦ INSL θοῦ ohosates 


(fol. 6 recto.) 


taypn SS3 snn[30] τὰ 

3.1) ΠΝ nen xdo[] 15 
ndiy na xd ὙΠΠῚ rs¢ 

1 ynady mw το 

wn S50 33 ANIM τό 

‘may nm nm ΩΡΠΡῚ τόθ 
ym xd yn 17 

pn wy nx andy 170 

per 12 Sm 18 

DVANI INT WIN 186 

RINN NT τὸ 

mis pnd NM τος 

ynas paned ... . 120 
ond 1b 155 w5P 1... 75 208 


syyardy ab mamey 21> oA] «6. ν νιν 20d 
:abma pom xd non bry ἅδε, ΝΕ, TM 22 
Sear oS PO, & . ee @ " ee) ᾧΦ' b . []" SUN 225 
rot ata n= νον 72] ὈΠΡῚΒ ὉΔῚ 23 
' Lev. 6,15. 2 Lev. 8, 33. 5 Ps. 89, 30. * Lev. 2, 2. 8 Tg) 4.1%. 48) 24 
® Job 18, 5. 7 Or possibly 4 or nm. § Deut, 18, 1. 9 Deut. 18, 1. Jos. 13, 14. 


wore) Jacss Loads pmo 15 
“pSady fared od Looe 15° 
Qasmens, 15° 
very θοῦ ESO ὕόμθῶς τό 
«μαῶϑο fudro 16¢ 


bb,509 oS Como 17 


sLugoas ον. αὐτο 18 
“proto che wits? 18° 

Sajo Jo? Jiwo 19 

Shams yoo Jiro τοῦ 

Jerse? ion! S® poo 20 
ΓΦ Ἰδῳωοο hayany Inn 20° 


shia. οἱ. I θοῦ» 05 22 
ois fuss SS} 229 


Id) -> Won Ld elo 23 


25 ECCLESIASTICUS 
(fol. 5 verso.) 


5 And made him to hear his voice, and caused him to drawnear into the thick darkness; 
5¢ And set* a commandment in his hand, even the law of life and understanding; 
5° To teach in® Jacob his statutes, and his testimonies and judgements unto Israel. 


6 And he exalted a holy man, even Aaron of the 
tribe of Levi, : 

7b And put majesty upon him $, and he ministered unto him in his glory *. 

7a And he girded him about tas} with the —s and-clothed Wien with belles: 
horns of ἃ wild-ox °, 

8 Andheclothedhim with the perfection of ΒΟ ΤΩΣ τ and adorned him with glory and strength; 

s¢ The breeches, the coats, and the robe, 9 and [compassed him] with bells, 

g> And pomegranates, a multitude round about, to make music with his steps ; 

οὗ To make the sound® of him to be heard in the 
inmost temple, 

το Holy garments, of gold, blue, and purple, the work of the designer: 

10° The breastplate of judgement, the ephod, and 
the waist-cloth, 

11» Pleasant stones upon the breast-plate, "the engravings of a signet with settings; 

114 Every precious stone fog a memorial with graven 
writing, 


7.and set him for an everlasting ordinance ; 


for a memorial to the children of his people. 


11 and scarlet, the work of the weaver ; 


according to the number of [the tribes of Is]rael ; 


and the plate®, [having engraven on it, as on a sig- 


12 The crown of pure gold, the robe, and the mitre, net,] Holiness ; 


12¢ Majesty, glory, and the praise of strength, the desire [ of the eyes, and the perfection of beauty. 

13 Be[{fore them were no]t [any such, and no] stranger [should put them on for ever]. 

13° He [trusted him and] his sons after this manner, cau navn His: Sous: (40) SSS ὦ 
generations ; 

1 Marg. and gave. ? Marg. unto. 3 Marg. gave him his majesty. * Marg. in blessing. 5 So text; but the 
idea seems incongruous. ?D1 mwen, with lofty adornment, or (marg.) with beauteous adornment; cf. @. ® So text; but 
‘bells’ seems a faulty anticipation of verse 9%. Marg. npwn is obscure. 7 Marg. his adornment. 8 Exod. 28, 35. At 
verse 9* the margin has in Persian: 34) 291 G sigs wl ‘This MS. reached thus far.’ ® Exod, 28, 36. 

5 ἠκούτισεν αὐτὸν τῆς φωνῆς αὐτοῦ, καὶ εἰσήγαγεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὸν γνόφον, 
5° καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ κατὰ πρόσωπον ἐντολάς, νόμον ζωῆς καὶ ἐπιστήμης, 
5° διδάξαι bine Ἰακὼβ διαθήκην καὶ κρίματα αὐτοῦ τὸν ᾿Ισραήλ. 


: ᾿Ααρὼν ὕψωσεν ἅγιον ὅμοιον αὐτῷ ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ 
ρ γιον ὅμ 


ἔ ὑτὸν διαθήκην ald 
dx duds Acvel! 7 ἔστησεν αὐτὸν διαθήκην αἰῶνος, 


7” καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ἱερατίαν λαοῦ" ἐμακάρισεν αὐτὸν ἐν εὐκοσμίᾳ, 

γἃ καὶ περιέζωσεν αὐτὸν περιστολὴν δόξης" 
8 ἐνέδυσεν αὐτὸν συντέλειαν καυχήματος, καὶ ἐστερέωσεν αὐτὸν σκεύεσιν ἰσχύος, 

a \ , 3,2 4 ἃ ὶ é , τὰ ey 

8° περισκελῆ καὶ ποδήρη Kat ἐπωμίδα 9 καὶ ἐκύκλωσεν αὑτὸν ῥοίσκοις, 

b a , , 2 A ae Nene ete ny 

9” χρυσοῖς κώδωσιν πλείστοις κυκλόθεν, : ἠχῆσαι φωνὴν ἐν βήμασιν αὐτοῦ, 

οὗ ἀκουστὸν ποιῆσαι ἦχον ἐν ναῷ εἰς μνημόσυνον υἱοῖς λαοῦ αὐτοῦ" 
το στολῇ ἁγίᾳ, χρυσῷ καὶ ὑακίνθῳ καὶ πορφύρᾳ, ἔργων ποικιλτοῦ, 

, 

τοῦ λογίῳ κρίσεως, δήλοις ἀληθείας, IT κεκλωσμένῃ κόκκῳ, ἔργῳ τεχνίτου, 
11” λίθοις πολυτελέσιν γλύμματος σφραγῖδος, ἐν δέσει χρυσίου, ἔργων λιθουργοῦ, 

ἃ .) , > a , > N io ta yy. 
τι εἰς μνημόσυνον ἐν γραφῇ κεκολαμμένῃ κατ᾽ ἀριθμὸν φυλῶν ᾿Ισραήλ 

an φ ~ ε 

12 στέφανον χρυσοῦν ἐπάνω κιδάρεως, ἐκτύπωμα σφραγῖδος ἁγιάσματος, 
12° καύχημα τιμῆς, ἔργον ἰσχύος, ἐπιθυμήματα ὀφθαλμῶν κοσμούμενα. 
13 ὡραϊα πρὸ αὐτοῦ οὐ γέγονεν τοιαῦτα, _ ἕως αἰῶνος οὐκ ἐνεδύσατο ἀλλογενὴς 
13° πλὴν τῶν υἱῶν αὐτοῦ μόνον, καὶ τὰ ἔκγονα αὐτοῦ διὰ παντός. 


XLV. 5-13'. 24 


sdpnyd yey 
tmyan) on myn 
ΝΣ popwnr pny 


spdiy pnd waow 7 
ΠΡῸΣ :yy592 ἸΠΠ Δ) 
mewn sp yoya ἸΠΦ ΟΝ 


:ny) 223 NEY 

?? DNOYD IMP 9 
syyy2 ΠΟ) nnd 
syoy sa riatd 
Sawn ΠΝ 

s4am ΠΟ nydin en τι 
:*(p'}xdoa nin ΠΡ 
roxn[ey] .... tepnd 
SPUD ele since 0 PMD 
sp] «6.6. [Tono 
MG ake ΡΠ] 


som yo 15} 


aid τας Unt BULL CLL 


2 Exod. 28, 33. 
8 Exod, 28, 36. 


1 Num. 23, 22. 24, 8. 
5 Exod. 25, 7, &c. 7 Exod. 32, τό. 
not seem to permit of Ὁ". 


so SDESN. 09480 5 


JoFas0 ἔχων booms 

SAHA LOHdLIO υσοροῖρο 
Lass fired omamo 7 

νοφροὶν βοοι» -ομῶς Ὁ 


ρον μὰ opnso 


3 Exod. 28, 6. 15. 
® Probably [Ὁ Ὁ my2}b; see 40, 4 and 47,6. The MS, does 
10 From the traces remaining of the bottoms of letters, this may be m9) yi) 1) porn. 


(fol. 5 verso.) 
yap ne yw 5 
ΓΝ 3 De 5° ™ 
yon apyra dd 9 Ny 
n> nod pny ne ΦΥῚΡ Oy 6 
spa’ydy inn 70 oma 
ἸΏΝ may WN 7 own 
nanan 5:55 ἸΠΌ ΟΝ 8 
Sym mana ΝΟΣ 85 
DAD pM D1 ob 
dip Wasa wownd of 
poms) ndon ant wp "2 τὸ 
ANN) TN DAW JWT τοῦ 
qwnn by Syn sax rib 
Tryin sansa patd mp yas $5 114 
ney Sy wp mpy 12 
ty ndant yas nn τοῦ 
7+.» [Ν]0 [on] foe} a3 


1m yaad... ἦν ΝΠ 13° 


imspn 


* Exod. 39, 22. 5 Ts, 54, 12. 


COHAWES Fem90 5° 
seoramasay Naim) Mas aadxad 50 
wads? 335. i oon) fas ohas/ puilo 6 


sma οκωω CO Load Smo 7b 


πον INCU omaadto 8 


XLV. 


XLV. 


23 


17 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 5 recto.) 


Noah the righteous was found perfect, 


17° For his sake was there a remnant, 


18 
19 
20 
20° 
21 
218 
22 


229 


By an everlasting sign was it made? with him, 
Abraham was the father of a multitude of nations, 
Who kept the commandment of the Most High, 
In his flesh he made him an ordinance, 
Therefore he promised him with an oath, 

To cause them to inherit [from se]a to sea, 

To Isaac also did he raise up a son ἡ, 

He gave him (?)* the covenant of every ancestor, 


23» And he confirmed him in the blessing °, 


234 
a3 
I 


2 


3 


And he set him in tribes, 

[And he brought ou]t of him a man, 
[A man beloved of] God and men, 
[And G]od® glorified him, 

By [his words ™] 


35 And gave him a charge unto [his people], 


4 


® Marg. titled him with the birthright. 
8 Or whom he remembered (Ὁ) unto good; cf. Neh. 5, 19. 13, 31. 
with terrors (Deut. 4, 34. 34, 12). 


17 
ive 
18 
19 
20 


20° 


ge 
4 


For his faithfulness and meekness, 


1 See Glossary. ? Marg. he made (it). 


1 Marg. word. 


Νῶε εὑρέθη τέλειος δίκαιος, 
ss cal > , ’ “Ὁ “ 
διὰ τοῦτο ἐγενήθη κατάλιμμα τῇ γῇ, 
διαθῆκαι αἰῶνος ἐτέθησαν πρὸς αὐτόν, 
᾿Αβραὰμ μέγας πατὴρ πλήθους ἐθνῶν, 
ὃς συνετήρησεν νόμον Ὕψιίστου, 

τ ‘ > a ὔ 
καὶ ἐν σαρκὶ αὐτοῦ ἔστησεν διαθήκην, 

Ν a ΄ > a 
διὰ τοῦτο ἐν ὅρκῳ ἔστησεν αὐτῷ 
πληθῦναι αὐτὸν ὡς χοῦν τῆς γῆς, 
καὶ κατακληρονομῆσαι αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ θαλάσσης 

ἕως θαλάσσης 

γ. μάν, Ν 
καὶ ἐν τῷ Ἰσαὰκ ἔστησεν οὕτως 
εὐλογίαν πάντων» ἀνθρώπων καὶ διαθήκην, 
5 / 1 > > ¢ > fel 
ἐπέγνω αὐτὸν ἐν εὐλογίαις αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ διέστειλεν μερίδας αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ ἐξήγαγεν ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρα ἐλέους, 
ἠγαπημένον ὑπὸ θεοῦ καὶ ἀνθρώπων 
ὡμοίωσεν αὐτὸν δόξῃ ἁγίων, 
ἐν λόγοις αὐτοῦ σημεῖα κατέπαυσεν, 
ἐνετείλατο αὐτῷ πρὸς λαὸν αὐτοῦ, 

7 Ν 4 bl nm £ 7 

ἐν πίστει καὶ πρᾳύτητι αὐτοῦ ἡγίασεν. 


3 Marg. spot. 
7 Marg. and one who found. The other MS. probably read ton wx in the first half 


in a season of destruction he became the successor’; 
andthroughthe covenant with him, the flood ceased; 
that he would not destroy all flesh. 

he put no blemish * upon his glory ; 

and entered into a covenant with him: 

and when he was proved he was found faithful. 
that he would bless the nations in his seed, 

and from the River unto the ends of the earth. 
for the sake of Abraham his father ; 


23 and the blessing rested on the head of Israel ; 


and gave him his inheritance ; 

in twelve parts. 

who’ found favour in the sight of all living, 
(even) Moses, whose memory is unto good*, 
and strengthened him in the heights’ (of heaven). 
and gave him boldness before the king ; 

and sh[ewed him of his glory]. 

he chose him out of all [flesh] ; 


* Marg. did he confirm it likewise. 5 For ym. 


® Marg. and the Lord glorified him. 10 Marg. 


ἐν καιρῷ ὀργῆς ἐγένετο ἀντάλλαγμα" 

διὰ τοῦτο ἐγένετο κατακλυσμός" 

ἵνα μὴ ἐξαλειφθῇ κατακλυσμῷ πᾶσα σάρξ. 
καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη ὅμοιος ἐν τῇ δόξῃ, ; 

καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν διαθήκῃ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, 

καὶ ἐν πειρασμῷ εὑρέθη πιστός" 
ἐνευλογηθῆναι ἔθνη ἐν τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ ὡς ἄστρα ἀνυψῶσαι τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ, 


καὶ ἀπὸ ποταμοῦ ἕως ἄκρου γῆς. 


δι’ ᾿Αβραὰμ τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ 


23 καὶ κατέπαυσεν ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν Ἰακώβ᾽ 


καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ἐν κληρονομίᾳ" 

ἐν φυλαῖς ἐμέρισεν δέκα δύο" 

εὑρίσκοντα χάριν ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς πάσης σαρκός 
Μωυσῆν, οὗ τὸ μνημόσυνον ἐν εὐλογίαις" 

καὶ ἐμεγάλυνεν αὐτὸν ἐν φόβοις ἐχθρῶν" 
ἐδόξασεν αὐτὸν κατὰ πρόσωπον βασιλέων" 
καὶ ἔδειξεν αὐτῷ τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ" 

ἐξελέξατο αὐτὸν ἐκ πάσης σαρκός" 


XLIV.'17—XLV. 4. 22 


a: saponin nn nbs nyd 
than Son inary 

sqwa 55 mnwn tndad 

ἘΝῚ roy apa 1Π) Nd 
ΟἿΌΣ naa 83 

ΕἾΝ NYDD DIT 

oma waa ad 

PPO YDEN IY) TAD 

:Y3N ὉΠΊΩΝ “Ways 

sSynw we Sy ans msn 
sindns ab inn 

swy δ pond 

wen pm ΟΞ ya IN ND 
ΠΣ yor nw 
EDM] ἸΠΥΟΝῚ 


ω- 


2 


ὈΝΩΔ 
ΕἼΡΟ ad ἸΠΡΙΠῸ 
coves LRP 
... 59019 ὙΠ 
τ Gen. 6, 9. 2 Gen. 9; 12, &c. 


most to resemble that of an 8 or Ὁ. 


Jsadsd Jheda Joo h2egr fists 
«ἀθο ooh Joo We Jos? od favo 
eens So poh Jy 

ones |rcars col) Io 

sors borne Sro 

2 ada HO woke? ov aacoiso 

Nasty frasds yootds qrile aris? 
Wrasdr ods gro Nad ods) Shwdo 
baile on2da0% Joop bo gwo 
.woas/ por? Ssafro 

Nuicaele ond SX huwhso 

lice od Sono 

sqabSa dK asilc ange 
shine QoS Wd> rom waar 
JNcdaaS. 07909 καθὸ 

seesoda acho 

JaS2© peo osarclo 

ον odanalo ey One ae 

elas? Cis (SOD GO Homa, 


Ww 


(fol. 5 recto.) 
Ipyon ΝΟΣ py Ala] 17 
nny mm yaya 17° 
yoy miss ΟῚ» mis 18 m3 
Δ A AX DAMIAN 19 
yoy myn Te Ww 20 
pn ab nna ὙΦ. 20° 


> mpm myfrajwa 15. dy 21 


py ἽΝ of) ndymand ase 
13 ppm pny ὩΣ) 22 » 
ὉΠ pes d> ΤΡῚΣ 225 
ADVI ND 23> 
paws way 234 
wr i Ns] 23f 
pws ond[s 2Π]Ν τ XLV. 
pdfs] = εἰ δα τῷ bie » 
PNT Shi ΤΟ [3718 3 ὙΠ 
os ΛΌ[Ν] myn 3° 
IM3yI MONI 4 


wo 
M232 


wan} 


3 Of the letter before m only the top remains. It seems 
* Exod. 6, 13. 


“pde o> woke bows wo 17 
Jhasjaaxc Loo obSp.o 17° 
J5sa> od bea. JNaodro 18 
sfrasisy JNndsoe be? ports? τὸ 
Lda» comme ΝΘ pays 20 
ehsano odd prol/ orcad 20° 
od? od boas Jhroasis bo Nags 21 
ehoooy JLo ye? ADI) Gagcaradro 21° 
shod μος ~ io? olgasS 21° 
hoo .»»...}} οἷο 22 
ῥάδομο 3.05 Jodase 22° 
Ἀν, μου ὠεραθ 15d Lom ον 23? 
Apdad ἰθὺ οβαλοὴο 234 
slas9) Jemg, oso ange 287 
elas? Cas οὐλϑ ole Jod/ pe ΠΩ EF XLV. 
JNovaa> ondio 2 


whoa Ss A220 39 


eohannasasc οἱ λϑο θη 4 


21 
(fol. 4 verso.) 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


PRAISE OF THE PATRIARCHS. 


XLIV. 1 Let me now praise godly men, 


XLIV. 


2 Great glory the Most High allotted (to them’), 

3 Rulers? of the earth in their royalty, 

3¢ Who gave counsel ὃ by their understanding, 

4 Princes of nations in their prudence, 

4° Wise of meditation in their writing, 

5 Who sought out music according to rule ὅ, 

6 Men of worth, and supported δ with strength, 

7 All these in their generation (were honoured’), 

8 There be of them that have left a name, 

g And there be of them which have no memorial, 

g° ‘They were as though they had not been, 

το Nevertheless these were godly men, 

11 With their seed their goodness remaineth sure, 

13 Their memory standeth fast for ever, 

14 [Their bodies were buried in p]eac[e, 

16 Enoch [was fJound perfect, and walked with the 
Lord, and was taken, 


1 Marg. adds this. ? So marg. 
® Reading 5) ΟῚ. 7 Marg. in their days. 
assembly recounteth their praise. 


3 Marg. Counsellors. 
8 Marg. adds here: 15 The congregation heareth their wisdom, and the 


our fathers in their generations. 

and they were great from days of old: 

and men of renown in their might ; 

and saw all things in their prophecy ; 

and potentates in their care? ; 

and governing in their watchfulness ; 

and took up the proverb in writing ; 

and that lived quietly upon their places. 

and from their birth’ was their glory. 

that men might tell of it in their inheritance: 

and have ceased as they have ceased ; 

and their children after them. 

and their hope [shall not peri]sh ; 

and their inheritance unto chil[dren’s children] ; 

and their righteousness [shall not be forgotten]; 

but their name liveth] unto all generations ὃ, 

being an example (4. sign) of knowledge to all 
generations. 


* Zit. searchings out. 5 Marg. measure. 


Πατέρων ὕμνος. 


Αἰνέσωμεν δὴ ἄνδρας ἐνδόξους 
πολλὴν δόξαν ἔκτισεν ὃ κύριος, 
κυριεύοντες ἐν ταῖς βασιλείαις αὐτῶν, 


- 


° 


ww i b 


"2 3 > 
βουλεύσονται ἐν συνέσει αὐτῶν, 
ἡγούμενοι λαοῦ ἐν διαβουλίοις 
σοφοὶ λόγοι ἐν παιδείᾳ αὐτῶν" 
ἐκζητοῦντες μέλη μουσικῶν, 
ἄνδρες πλούσιοι κεχορηγημένοι ἰσχύι, 
πάντες οὗτοι ἐν γενεαῖς ἐδοξάσθησαν, 
εἰσὶν αὐτῶν οἱ κατέλιπον ὄνομα 
καὶ εἰσὶν ὧν οὐκ ἔστιν μνημόσυνον 

, © > , 
kal ἐγένοντο ὡς ov γεγονότες, 
το ἀλλ᾽ ἢ οὗτοι ἄνδρες ἐλέους, 


we ὦ “τ: ὦ σι ot Nae 


° 


i=) 


Il μετὰ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτῶν διαμενεῖ 

ἐν ταῖς διαθήκαις 12 ἔστη σπέρμα αὐτῶν, 
18 ἕως αἰῶνος μενεῖ σπέρμα αὐτῶν, 

τὸ σῶμα αὐτῶν ἐν εἰρήνῃ ἐτάφη, 

15 σοφίαν αὐτῶν διηγήσονται λαοί, 

16 ἉἙνὼχ εὐηρέστησεν Κυρίῳ καὶ μετετέθη, 


καὶ τοὺς πατέρας ἡμῶν τῇ γενέσει. 
τὴν μεγαλωσύνην αὐτοῦ am αἰῶνος. 
καὶ ἄνδρες ὀνομαστοὶ ἐν δυνάμει" 
ἀπηγγελκότες ἐν προφητείαις" 

καὶ συνέσει γραμματείας λαοῦ, 


, > -- 
διηγούμενοι ἔπη ἐν γραφῇ 
εἰρηνεύοντες ἐν παροικίαις αὐτῶν" 
καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις αὐτῶν καύχημα. 

a >A 3 
τοῦ ἐκδιηγήσασθαι ἐπαίνους, 

ΠΡ. , ε > ey. 
καὶ ἀπώλοντο ὡς οὐχ ὑπάρξαντες, 
καὶ τὰ τέκνα αὐτῶν μετ᾽ αὐτούς. 
ὧν αἱ δικαιοσύναι οὐκ ἐπελήσθησαν" 
2 ΙΝ oe , ee 
ἀγαθὴ κληρονομία ἔκγονα αὐτῶν 

\ 7 An > > iA 

καὶ τὰ τέκνα αὐτῶν δι᾿ αὐτούς, 
καὶ 7) δόξα αὐτῶν οὐκ ἐξαλειφθήσεται 
καὶ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῶν ζῇ εἰς γενεάς" 
καὶ τὸν ἔπαινον ἐξαγγέλλει ἐκκλησία. 
ὑπόδειγμα μετανοίας ταῖς γενεαῖς. 


om 


Doi2 


XLIV. 1-16. 


roby man naw 


᾿ ΠΥ MIs 
roby mow day 
ona DY wIN 
sonia 55 ‘nm 
:OnypnD. DN 


my pdr yas 31 2 
nmisdna AN 5 3 
DNNINI ΡΥ 3° 
ones Oo mY 4 


(fol. 4 verso.) 


spn woe so ΠΟΌΠΝ 1: XLIV. me 


20 


spnmwes Ὁ Φ ΟῚ pMDI my ‘pon 4¢ ‘ona 
rans. bw ones pin Sy nym “pin 5 ” 
sonnse Sy ppp n> samy Sn won 6 
prem ἐὨΠΊΝΕΠ an ἜΣ nbs b> 7 1133 


py Inn nAD ws 
sort pe ἼΩΝ DAD w™ o 
297 yA NS AWN of 

Son wos mds: ὩΡΙΝῚ τὸ 
DI ΠΝ oY Dy i 
νον [Μ]Ρ Ὀπρ ὉΠΣΙ oyy ody sy 13 
SHALE es ka eae OIL) os a ΣῊ 
sn ad nyt ΠῚΝ ΠΡΟ} δὴ py qdanm oven ΝΎ[2)] pon 16 


mene? = sondmaa mayne 
nwwn 

Hnaw Wed naw 

PDAMINND DM 

:n[awn] &> ppm 

(sora Ὁ]30. ondnoy 


WULYGUG (σαι, dug: 
Gr uCGud UMae δι 


1 Job 38, 12, &c. ? Job το, 19. Obad. 16, 


Jhon ball uaa? μὲ olor XLIV. 
OOS κι νου Jina) ὡς ὦ 2 


LOOT e> S009 eos 
Jado Jip SX oohass ΠΥ 


Sohaais csawo 38 
θόλο cams Jarsso 1151} 4 
θόλο aad. Jsrntine 49 
ἶμοο Jono Po | S> 5 
whine warsacse .facohky Jasly 6 
ΒΗ, YOAS Jor «οομῦεθ edo χϑοῖδν 9 7 
SHAm? (Sot "οὐ 8 
sLzn07 ood Mad? Sonics hulo 9 


okudahs a,5 LiySio 
lokas Mrs vicclo 
Ooooh NX edao 
Lookuwda Δ \cokswaaro 
«ον SX ashes 
Ὅλον ho y/ adsoo 


«ρος | yoohaang 
“αϑοθ wad, τϑοιεϑῦνο 
AA 1.355 τϑοθ uiso 

age J τϑοξροΐο 
Jes 52 GO ὦ yoomaae 


eJhaasy90 Jhaagy hes? edo Ῥὲ5 τὸ 
θοὸς pro LOH poo 

+ (Sond) phe 12 εϑομϑλῶϑο 
*\Sown009 pes por frowso 13 
-oaioh? fraSas NOM ERD 14 
ohn δ Wokwsaho 15 


19 
(fol. 4 recto.) 


17° Like’ darting flashes he sheddeth abroadhis snow, 


18 The beauty of its whiteness dazzleth? the eyes, 
19 The hoar-frost also he poureth out‘ like salt, 

20 The cold of the north wind he causeth to blow, 
20° Over every standing water he spreadeth a crust, 
21 It burneth up the produce like drought’, 

22 The dropping of a cloud healeth all things, 

23 His counsel’ burneth up (?) the great (deep), 
24 They that go down to the sea tell of its bounds, 


25 Therein are wonders, the marvels of his work, 


26 By reason of him™ [his] messenger“ prospereth, 

24 More like this we will not add, 

28 Let us still be magnifying him”, for we shall not 
search him out, 

29 [The Lord is] exceeding [terrible], 

[Ye that magnify the Lord], lift up your voice all 

that ye can, for there is yet more; 

32 Many [hidden things hath he established (?) more 
than] these ; 

33 All things [hath the Lord made], 


1 So marg. 2 any for max. Or ? my dimmeth. 
® Marg, the pond. 6 Above the line, of the mountains. 
10 Marg. from his quietness (?). 1 Reading ru», as G. 
16, 4). “1 πον my» he maketh (his) business to prosper. 


17° ὡς πετεινὰ καθιπτάμενα πάσσει χιόνα 
18 κάλλος λευκότητος αὐτῆς ἐκθαυμάσει ὀφθαλμός, 
ς pee Fa] t 
19 καὶ πάχνην ὡς ἅλα ἐπὶ γῆς χέει, 
20 Ψυχρὸς ἄνεμος βορέης πνεύσει, 
20° ἐπὶ πᾶσαν συναγωγὴν ὕδατος καταλύσει, 
21 καταφάγεται ὄρη καὶ ἔρημον ἐκκαύσει, 
22 ἴασις πάντων κατὰ σπουδὴν ὁμίχλη, 
23 λογισμῷ αὐτοῦ ἐκόπασεν ἄβυσσον, 
24 οἱ πλέοντες τὴν θάλασσαν διηγοῦνται τὸν κίνδυνον 
αὐτῆς, 
25. καὶ ἐκεῖ τὰ παράδοξα καὶ θαυμάσια ἔργα, 
> | a, > / / > a 
26 dt αὐτὸν εὐωδία τέλος αὐτοῦ, 
27 πολλὰ ἐροῦμεν καὶ οὐ μὴ ἀφικώμεθα, 
28 δοξάζοντες ποῦ ἰσχύσωμεν ; 
29 φοβερὸς Κύριος καὶ σφόδρα μέγας, 
30 δοξάζοντες Κύριον ὑψώσατε καθ᾽ ὅσον 
δύνησθε, ὑπερέξει γὰρ καὶ ἔτι. 
, , ἂς Δ U4 
31 τίς ἑόρακεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐκδιηγήσεται; 
32 πολλὰ ἀπόκρυφά ἐστιν μείζονα τούτων, 


38 πάντα γὰρ ἐποίησεν ὁ κύριος, 


3. Or marvels, reading mam, as (δ). 
7 Marg. form (Ps. 49, 15). 


ECOCLESTIAS#ICUS 


and like locusts (when) they settle is the falling 
down! thereof; 

and the heart is disquieted*® at the raining of it. 

and maketh it to bloom with flowers like sapphire. 

and congealeth his spring ° like rottenness (?). 

and a pond putteth on as it were a breastplate. 

and the stateliness’ of growing things as a flame. 

(even) dew’? releasing (?)the parched* young grass’. 

and he planteth™ islands” in the ocean. 

when we hear it with our ears, we are astonished. 

variety of all things living, and the mighty things 
of the great (deep). 

and by his words he performeth (his) pleasure. 

and the conclusion of the matter is, He is all. 


and he is great beyond all his works. 


and wonderful are his mighty acts. 
30° ye that exalt him’, renew your strength, and be not 
weary, for ye will not [search (him) out]. 


a little only have I seen of his works. 
and to [the godly hath he given wisdom]. 


* So marg.: text, settleth. 
8 Marg. moist.  ° Reading nw. 

18 Marg. for his own purpose (Prov. 

16 So marg. (yn-): text, his words. 


1 Marg. a treasure. 

8 Marg. rejoicing. 
καὶ ὡς ἀκρὶς καταλύουσα ἡ κατάβασις αὐτῆς" 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ ὑετοῦ αὐτῆς ἐκστήσεται καρδία. 
καὶ παγεῖσα γίνεται σκολόπων ἄκρα. 
καὶ παγήσεται κρύσταλλος ἀφ᾽ ὕδατος" 
καὶ ὡς θώρακα ἐνδύσεται τὸ ὕδωρ. 

2 , c a 

καὶ ἀποσβέσει χλόην ὡς πῦρ. 
δρόσος ἀπαντῶσα ἀπὸ καύσωνος ἱλαρώσει. 
καὶ ἐφύτευσεν αὐτὴν ᾿Ιησοῦς. 


καὶ ἀκοαῖς ὠτίων ἡμῶν θαυμάζομεν" 


ποικιλία παντὸς ζῴου, κτίσις κητῶν. 

καὶ ἐν λόγῳ αὐτοῦ σύνκειται πάντα. 

καὶ συντέλεια λόγων Τὸ πᾶν ἐστιν αὐτός. 
αὐτὸς γὰρ ὁ μέγας παρὰ πάντα τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ θαυμαστὴ ἡ δυναστεία αὐτοῦ. 


30° καὶ ὑψοῦντες αὐτὸν πληθύνατε ἐν ἰσχύι' μὴ κοπιᾶτε, 


οὐ γὰρ μὴ ἀφίκησθε. : 
καὶ τίς μεγαλυνεῖ αὐτὸν καθώς ἐστιν; 
ὀλίγα γὰρ ἑωράκαμεν τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ τοῖς εὐσεβέσιν ἔδωκεν σοφίαν. 


C2 


XLIT. 17°33. 18 
(fol. 4 recto.) 


tay ὉΠΟῪ pow TIN dw ay» swig] 17° "Ὃ 
aad AA nye py many ΠῸΣΡ asin 18 ma 
POY WEDD py pow nds Wp. DN 19 er 
mpo PNP NPY aprD Δ᾽ PY ΠΥῚ ΤΟΝ 20 
:mpn wads pws pp ov tayo b> Sy 20° 
oF pnands ὈΠῸΣ "ΠῚ pwr tanns Syay 21 
Pte sw wd yn δ toy snyo 55 xen 22 ΨῸΡ Ὁ 
ἼΩΝ :DYN DIANNI OY ΠῚ pw... InawND 23 ἸΠΟΥΦῸ 
ἘΒΘΊΣΦΣ wane yowd WYP MD’ DT MN 24 
gna nian on 55 pp My ‘mon mixdp nw 25 yern 
syn Sy was sudo dy» ον 26 ΡΟΣ 
55m win 935 pp Aoi xd nba ἫΝ 927 re 
rywy dom Sia sim ἜΡΙΣ xd 13 ny ΠΟ[ΓΊΔ]) 28 mba 
wa ΕἸΣῚ mxdao saxo ἼΝ[Ο] .. [NW] 29 
Csnpnjn xd 5 wedn ὈΝῚ “ΠΡ serdnn opr 300 sty e 3 aban daa bp wna... ΟἽ ΓἼ]Ὁ 30 
:YwyoD "Ns yD MOR[D] Tse eee eed Δ 32 
Pee ay sa ΝΥ ova OS ΠΝ 33 
? Above 2m is written nm (see Job 40, 20). 2 Ezek. 7, 11. 3 Prov. 16, 4. 4 Ts. 40, 31. 


[rprn x50 1dr so ΤΣ dn pon 


XLIII. 


17 
(fol. 3 verso.) 

24 All of them are different, one from another, 

2 Thesun,whenhegoeth forth’, pourethout warmth: 

3 By his shining he heateth the world; 

4 A fierce ἢ furnace is established * by them (?), 

4° A tongue’ of light consumeth the inhabited 

(country), 

5 For great* is the Lord that made him 4, 

6 Moreover moon by moon the seasons ® return, 

7 Byher’are the appointed feast and the prescribed 

times °, 

8 With every (new) month she is renewed’, 

s¢ Aninstrument ofthe host ofthe(rain-)vessels*on high, 
9 The beauty of heaven, and the glory of a star, 
το By the word of God a statute is established, 
Behold the (rain)bow, and bless him that made it, 
12 Itcompasseth with its glory the vault (of heaven)”, 
13 His might marketh out the lightning, 

14 On that account’ he hath created a treasure-house, 


II 


The voice of his thunder maketh? his land to be 
in anguish, 

1 So marg. 2 Lit. blown upon. 

made him. 5 Marg. moon by moon, season by season. 

from her is the prescribed ordinance. 

returning. 


7 


1! Marg. and a red-gleaming omament in (3 for 5) the heights of God. 
1 Marg. and no hand hath. 
morning (772 for p13), and casteth off the living substance (Dyp mam error for mp ΤΕ ΠῚ) in [judgement]. 


18. yn for pn (Job 22, 14). 


3 So marg. (cf. Job 11, 15). 

Or until the season, 
7 Marg. (the new month) is like its name, for it (is renewed). 
® Lit, (water-)skins; cf. Job 38, 37: but perhaps it is due to dittography from "9. 


ECCLESIASTICUS 


and he hath made none of them [in vain]. 
how terrible are the works of the Lord! 
before his drought who can maintain himself? 


thesun being sent’ forthsetteth the mountainsina blaze. 


and with its fire the eye is scorched: [ones 


and (with) his words he maketh brilliant (?) his mighty 
(for) a limited rule, but an everlasting sign: 


and in her circuit [she doeth] (her) business: 


how terrible is she in her changing ®! 

paving *° the firmament with her shining : 

and her light shining in™ the heights of God. 

and they sleep” not in their watches. 

for exceeding majestic is it [in glo]ry: 

andthehand ofGod hath stretched it out in [its pride]. 

and maketh brilliant the flashes [in judgement]. 

and hath made [the clouds?] to fly forth.... 

the hot winds of the north, the tempest, and the 
whirlwind "5, ’ 

* Marg. for great is the Most High who 
® Marg. by her is the appointed feast, and 
8 Marg. in her 
10 Marg. terrifying (?). 

15. Reading 12th for pw of the margin, 
15 Marg. his rebuke (amya for 122) marketh out the 
16 Marg. 


the voice of his thunder maketh his land to be in anguish, and by his strength he maketh the mountains indignant (7): his 
terror inciteth the south wind, the storm, the tempest, and the whirlwind. 


2 ἥλιος ἐν ὀπτασίᾳ διαγγέλλων ἐν ἐξόδῳ, 

» A > n ᾽ὔ , 

ἐν μεσημβρίᾳ αὐτοῦ ἀναξηραίνει χώραν, 

! ν᾿ 

κάμινον φυλάσσων ἐν ἔργοις καύματος, 
5. ἀτμίδας πυρώδεις ἐμφυσῶν, 
μέγας Κύριος 6 ποιήσας αὐτόν, 
καὶ ἣ σελήνη ἐν πᾶσιν εἰς καιρὸν αὐτῆς, 
ἀπὸ σελήνης σημεῖον ἑορτῆς, 
μὴν κατὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῆς ἐστιν, 

Ὁ bry n lA 
σκεῦος TapdBorav ἐν ὕψει, 
9 κάλλος οὐρανοῦ, δόξα ἄστρων, 
ἐν λόγοις ἁγίοις στήσονται κατὰ κρίμα, 
ἴδε τόξον, καὶ εὐλόγησον τὸν ποιήσαντα αὐτό, 
ἐγύρωσεν οὐρανὸν ἐν κυκλώσει δόξης, 
προστάγματι αὐτοῦ κατέπαυσεν χιόνα, 
“ > , 

διὰ τοῦτο ἠνεῴχθησαν θησαυροί, 
ἐν μεγαλείῳ αὐτοῦ ἴσχυσεν νεφέλας, 

3. α > a , δ ὩΣ 
καὶ ἐν ὀπτασίαις αὐτοῦ σαλευθήσετα: ὄρη, 
φωνὴ βροντῆς αὐτοῦ ὠνείδισεν γῆν, 


σκεῦος θαυμαστόν, ἔργον Ὑψίστου" 

καὶ ἐναντίον καύματος αὐτοῦ τίς ὑποστήσεται; 
τριπλασίως ἥλιος ἐκκαίων ὄρη" 

καὶ ἐκλάμπων ἀκτῖνας ἀμαυροῖ ὀφθαλμούς. 
καὶ ἐν λόγοις αὐτοῦ κατέσπευσεν πορείαν" 
ἀνάδειξιν χρόνων καὶ σημεῖον αἰῶνος" 
φωστὴρ μειούμενος ἐπὶ συντελείας" 
αὐξανομένη θαυμαστῶς ἐν ἀλλοιώσει. 

ἐν στερεώματι οὐρανοῦ ἐκλάμπων" 

κόσμος φωτίζων, ἐν ὑψίστοις Κύριος" 

καὶ οὐ μὴ ἐκλυθῶσιν ἐν φυλακαῖς αὐτῶν. 
σφόδρα ὡραῖον ἐν τῷ αὐγάσματι αὐτοῦ" 
χεῖρες Ὑψίστου ἐτάνυσαν αὐτό. 

καὶ ταχύνει ἀστραπὰς κρίματος αὐτοῦ" 

καὶ ἐξέπτησαν νεφέλαι ὡς πετεινά" 

καὶ διεθρύβησαν λίθοι χαλάζης. 

ἐν θελήματι πνεύσεται νότος. 

καὶ καταιγὶς βορέου καὶ συστροφὴ πνεύματος. 


ὋΣ DI MM Apa mana wwa 


XLII. 24—XLIII. 17°. 16 


[es] on ayy xdy 
ΤῊΝ wyp ND AD 
tSo5ony Ὁ yaa ‘Ad 
ronn pop ww nbw 
ΡΝ mon mn 

my 2 YVIN ny 2 
spd ma yp ΓΟΦΌ[ΓΟ] 
pnEypna a, y ὙΒΠῚ 
pinwnwns x nD 


ἤ mow 
ro 


ΣΌΣ 

ὅ Hina pp ASAD 

‘WY :n ΠῚ yy oa 
yea ΤῸΝ FMI WaT Te 
ne ronmwea rer xb 

am [222] AIAN IND 1D 

x νν 135. any bem 

opr me[an] bee ee MP? YIN 
cee ee BAD 


AR I ee 


:mnyoy Apo pals npeydr 


1 See xlii. 25 and xliii. 1; and for the translation, p. 15, note 9. 


shasisoe ods Jhiasoghy bho 
“PAs utero alo rd pO 
δας poor fase voads Ιλ Ωω 
Had φιλο Koad ds jowo 
LoMASo Sor fapo wdrsdso0 
poe οοΣ Plo μϑ᾽5 Ἰππμαωὶ 
Ἰὼ prong Ἰωορ 

lodwoas Kalwsxi20 ᾿ἰϑόδϑοο 
ehsan? bsnosr jour? 


\oadwhas ἢ" «ϑοιζφεθο 


(fol. 3 verso.) 


Η 
: 


mm mr ὈΣ nds 24 


ἣ 
au 


On INIT way wor 2 85 % | wnesa pro 
ὉΠ nny nyvaa3 § 4 98 
piso on mp2 3 4 3 g 4 3 psvo 
° oY 
navy nin xp paw 4c og ὦ Se pe 
oa by ve q 354 729 
Bi da M93 5 ~ soy nied 
ΤῚΣ Φ miny my ΠῚ pp 6 το, 
ο ο np ν 
PIN ἢ Ii D3 7 won) “Ὁ 12 
VANND NIA wna win 8 nym ow? 
np ‘daa xay "55 se 
2393 77M) DY “ΝΠ 9 
pn soy Sx 393 τὸ 
MAY ΤΊΣ) nwp AN i awe 
rasa men pin ia  ΟὋῸὋ ΤΩΣ 
pra mMnn ἸΠ2) 13 Jv yg ἡ 
° a 5 a 5 
fips ped ΖΞ 593 Ὁ 
3348 
eee ee © @ @ a 3 4 ἕ 
o gid 
wo bm wy dpi, $3 8 x 
3 Job 25, 2. 


comaemso Jiusod fersoe pas 2 XLIID 
baal ON poor "βοράν oS 05 3 
Jusnoy 1.355 Gary Jiao yal 4 
Jose Jagr yo? oraord 4° 
“οὐ... μωο oo δὐΡ 
HDX plo Jiosmo 6 
ἰδ. JLSL? pra Jone go 7 
wore) one yo) huis 8 
βοῦν JNuzaso? buleo 80 
|So007 JNwaralo amas JN, 9 
wyOoe? yo? yaroaas bans wads τὸ 


XLII. 


ἧς 


XLII, 


XLII. 


(fol. 3 recto.) 
11° In the place where she lodgeth let there be no 
lattice, 
12 Let her not show her beauty to any male, 
13 For from a garment cometh forth a moth, 
14 *Betteris the wickedness of a man than the good- 
ness of a woman ¥%, 


15 I will remember now the works of God, 

15¢ By the word of God is his pleasure ὃ, 

16 The rising sun is revealed over all things, 

12 The saints of God do not suffice 

17° God hath given strength unto ὅ his hosts, 

18 He searcheth out the deep and the heart, 

Declaring things that are past and? thataretocome, 

No knowledge is lacking to him, © 

21 [The might’ of his wisdom] he hath regulated, 

21° Nothing [hath been added (unto him), or] dimin- 
ished (from him), 

23° He [establisheth ? all things for ever |, 

25> *And who can [be filled with [beholding (his) 
beauty ??] 

1b And the body of heaven beholding’ his majesty ἢ, 


1 Or perhaps, among. 2 So marg. 


5 Marg. the strength of God is. 


8 Marg. by the word of God are his works. 
6 Zit, the search, Job 11, 7. 38, 16. 


ΨΚ ECCLESIASTICUS 


nor a chamber looking upon the entrance round 
about. 

and’ in the house of? women let her not converse. 

and from a woman a woman’s wickedness. 

and the house of her that causeth shame? poureth 
forth reproach®. 


and that which I have seen I will recount. 

and him that doeth his pleasure he hath accepted. 
so the glory of the Lord is over all his works. 
to recount the wonders of the Lord *. 

that they may endure firmly before his glory. 
and understandeth all their nakednesses ; 

and revealing the remotest ὃ of hidden things. 
and no matter escapeth him. Ξ 

he is one from everlasting. 


and he hath no need? of any instructor®, 
258 one thing upon another for the sake of its good. 
LPO ae eG ay ae 
XLII. 23 and all things are obedient to every use. 


* Marg. of his mighty acts. 
7 Marg. mighty acts. 8. Is. 40, 14. 


9. The marginal note at the top of the next page (referring to verse 25" seq.) is as follows: One thing upon another for the 
sake of good: and who can be filled with beholding beauty? The beauty of the htight spread out (ΘῈ) upon (?) clearness 
(Exod. 24, 10), and the body of heaven (zé¢d.) beholding the light. 


12 παντὶ ἀνθρώπῳ μὴ ἔμβλεπε ἐν κάλλει, 
ἀπὸ γὰρ ἱματίων ἐκπορεύεται σής, 
κρείσσων πονηρία ἀνδρὸς ἢ ἀγαθοποιὸς γυνή, 


μνησθήσομαι δὲ τὰ ἔργα Κυρίου, 
188 ἐν λόγοις Κυρίου τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ. 
16 ἥλιος φωτίζων κατὰ πᾶν ἐπέβλεψεν, 
17 οὐκ ἐνεποίησεν τοῖς ἁγίοις Κύριος 
17° & ἐστερέωσεν Κύριος ὃ παντοκράτωρ, 
18 ἄβυσσον καὶ καρδίαν ἐξίχνευσεν, 
18° ἔγνω γὰρ ὃ κύριος πᾶσαν εἴδησιν 
19 ἀπαγγέλλων τὰ παρεληλυθότα καὶ ἐπεσύμενα, 
20 ov παρῆλθεν αὐτὸν πᾶν διανόημα, 
21 τὰ μεγαλεῖα τῆς σοφίας αὐτοῦ ἐκόσμησεν" 
21° οὔτε προσετέθη οὔτε ἠλαττώθη, 
22 ὡς πάντα τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ ἐπιθυμητά, 
28 πάντα ταῦτα (ῇ καὶ μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα 
24 πάντα δισσὰ ἐν κατέναντι τοῦ ἑνός, 
25 ἕν τοῦ ἑνὸς ἐστερέωσεν τὰ ἀγαθά, 
1 γαυρίαμα ὕψους στερέωμα καθαριότητος, 


καὶ ἐν μέσῳ γυναικῶν μὴ συνέδρευε" 
καὶ ἀπὸ γυναικὸς πονηρία γυναικός. 
καὶ γυνὴ καταισχύνουσα εἰς ὀνειδισμόν. 


καὶ ἃ ἑόρακα ἐκδιηγήσομαι" 


καὶ τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ πλῆρες τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ. 
3 , τας > a 
ἐκδιηγήσασθαι πάντα τὰ θαυμάσια αὐτοῦ, 
στηριχθῆναι ἐν δόξῃ αὐτοῦ τὸ πᾶν. 
καὶ ἐν πανουργεύμασιν αὐτῶν διενοήθην" 
καὶ ἐνέβλεψεν εἰς σημεῖον αἰῶνος, 
καὶ ἀποκαλύπτων ἴχνη ἀποκρύφων" 
οὐκ ἐκρύβη am αὐτοῦ οὐδὲ εἷς λόγος. 
καὶ ἕως ἔστιν πρὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα, 
καὶ οὐ προσεδεήθη οὐδενὸς συμβούλου. 
καὶ ὡς σπινθῆρός ἐστιν θεωρῆσαι. 
ἐν πάσαις χρείαις, καὶ πάντα ὑπακούει" 

> 3 Od 3 , 
καὶ οὐκ ἐποίησεν οὐδὲν ἐκλιπόν" 
καὶ τίς πλησθήσεται ὁρῶν δόξαν αὐτοῦ; 
εἶδος οὐρανοῦ ἐν ὁράματι δόξης. 


XLII, 11*-23°. 14 


fap wD HID nD) 
stnon bx pw) na 


won 
PAWN NYT AWND 
:7WN yon npn m2 
τς MpON nn AN 
mp sinpd rns Syn 
rywyn do dy om ΠΣ) 
ynyyn oo nindps ἼΒοῦ 
pind syna> eb pmnnd 
ΕΓ pmernyo don 
:nyanps apn aban) 
πα 3 wo Ahn sa 53 ἸΒΡΓῚ ΝΟῚ 
cheno rodyp xin InN 


τε spa bb pay ΜΟῚ 
ria Abn ΠῚ Sy ΠῚ ast 
te Mee a Vet 1" MLD. 
syap? 555 ὙῊΞ Sab) 22 ΧΙΠῚ. 


» pw) 3 Tw 499 


1 Job 15, 17. 


Japa Joo J Ινᾶϑο 
JWhasaa saah I fas Kuso 
+ ohpru? chasad eo JLNote berg broom 


Likes bb? Matis bo eso 

eth ound, ower geomoo 

OSS yoods Nex bis? eoarn 
coees®? Jhosag sare 

«οεροὺ pre pasos 

a9 dg Jaren yo) harsdy odd) eodoo 
“pre lod? peo eo 


Sirens wode vam Sao 
Jhosmday td Sao wooo eo hag Yo 


; OHSS gauaaro haas.a50 

E21 AERO ΟΝ. yoomsao 9 ELaD) yoosaso 
«θολὰ of 

Lullgs couse pw Jie lo 

«ϑοςρο Ιμρωνς, Sams cinco 


2 Only the tail of the ; remains: before it there is a blot. 


(fol. 3 recto.) 
aw om Se man ΟἿΡ[9] 11° 
ayn ynn bs ἼΘΙ 525 τ 


wea ὭΣ 5 12 3 ἢ « 4 

ΩΝ DoD wN yr WD τ4. 38 ZY 

53 8" 

5456 

See wy ND TIN τῷ 3, 

BPH onbs cma ise ye ὃ 
mnbda ba by n[mpr wow τό 
bx owynp oppor xb ry 

pray pbs pow 176. por 


apn aby pian 18 

ΤΥ meon mind το 

bow $5 yn ὙΠ) Ν]0 20 

jan in[esn rma]}3 21 

bya ΝΟ] «νιν [Ν]Ρ 21 

> φ ὦν oy ee 
fran pvan)> [yaw sn 25 

wn 2 [Ὁ Sow oxy) 1b XLII. 


nvm) 


mn 


3 Exod. 24, Io. 


laos onoral I Jessy 5h? rie 


eyador bo ᾿ς I pag Sad 2 
μα NOj καθ fuasly Sfro 13 


Jodty vod.dx Snare soph? 15 

wwe οὐεϑλὺ oad τε 

ond δ) So SS Hw? Jarre yl 16 

Liew, corasepo ooo I ry 

wormed oo Jlosig της 

1043 oo lado boool 18 

Jono My Npro τ8ο 

δι 9 δα, οὐλὲιν So or) cone 19 
ΟΝ γο 

(βαδ Sao coarse go Jus Mo 20 

“por Jaane worar.o JKanawo 21 

ΒΗ Jeans PAX LoS,Ax \oodoo 22 


“pss. ετὔϑαρο ene 23 
jae Sacad. on eh vib yoosoo 24 


13 ECCLESIASTICUS 
(fol. 2 verso.) 
XLII. 1 Of repeating a word that thou hearest, 
1¢ So shalt thou be truly shamefast, 
1¢ But of these things be not ashamed, 
2 Of the law of the Most High and the statute, 
3 Of reckoning with a partner and a master‘, 


and of laying bare any secret counsel': 

and finding favour in the sight of all living. 

and accept not persons unto sin?: 

and of judgement* to do justice to the wicked, 

and of the division of an inheritance and a property, 

45 Of the small dust of the scales* and balance, 58 and of exchange by ephah and stone (weight), 

4> Of buying® between much and little, 5¢ and of smiting” a deceitful [servant]. 

6 Upon an evil® woman set? a seal, [count™, but a place of weak hands thou mayest open”, 

7 In the place where thou committest* a deposit, and let giving and receiving all be in writing. 

8 (Be not ashamed) of the correction of the simple οἵ of him that is grey-headed and very aged, and that 
and the fool, (yet) taketh counsel for?* whoredom. 

80 So shalt thou be well-advised in truth, and lowly before all living. 


g A daughter is to a father a deceptive treasure, 
9° In her youth lest she commit adultery, and in her virginity lest [she be defiled], 

10 In her virginity lest she be seduced, and in the house of [her lord lest she bear not ?], 
τοῦ Inthe house of herfather lest[she playtheharlot?], and in the house of her hu[sband lest]..... 

11 [My son, keep a strict watch over thy daughter, _ lest she make thee *] a name of evil odour’, 

11¢ A byword in the city and a cursing of the people, and shame’ thee [in the con]gregation of the gate. 


and the care ofther* [putteth away his sleep]: 


* Marg. laying counsel bare to the light. ? Reading nom) (for ktm), as G. * So marg. * Marg. (fellow-) 
traveller. 5 Ts. 40, 15. 5 Marg. reckoning. 7 Marg. the correction of. On vers. 9°~11°, the marg. has: In the house 
of her father le[st she play the harlot, and] in the house of her lord lest she be forgotten; in her virginity lest she be seduced, 
and in the house of her husband lest she go astray. My son, keep a strict watch over thy daughter, lest she make thee 
a derision (Exod. 32, 25: (δ᾽ ἐπίχαρμα) to thine enemies; a byword in the city and _a cursing of the people, and thou be 
shamed in the congregation of the gate. ® Marg. obdurate. ® Reading cnn for pon. 10 So text: perhaps, 
and where there are many (ΠῚ) hands, open [not]. Cf. @. ™ Marg, reckon. ‘2 Marg. and stumbleth, and is (yet) 
occupied in: also between the lines, asketh for taketh. 

XLIL 1 ἀπὸ δευτερώσεως καὶ λόγου ἀκοῆς, καὶ ἀπὸ ἀποκαλύψεων λόγων κρυφίων' 


1¢ καὶ ἔσῃ αἰσχυντηρὸς ἀληθινῶς, καὶ εὑρίσκων χάριν ἔναντι παντὸς ἀνθρώπου. 


1° μὴ περὶ τούτων αἰσχυνθῇς, 

2 περὶ νόμου Ὑψίστου καὶ διαθήκης, 

3 περὶ λόγου κοινωνοῦ καὶ ὁδοιπόρων, 

4 περὶ ἀκριβείας ζυγοῦ καὶ σταθμίων, 

5 περὶ ἀδιαφόρου πράσεως καὶ ἐμπόρων, 
5° καὶ οἰκέτῃ πονηρῷ πλευρὰν αἱμάξαι" 

6 ἐπὶ γυναικὶ πονηρᾷ καλὸν σφραγίς, 

7 ὃ ἐὰν παραδιδῷς, ἐν ἀριθμῷ καὶ σταθμῷ, 
8 περὶ παιδείας ἀνοήτου καὶ μωροῦ 

85 καὶ ἔσῃ πεπαιδευμένος ἀληθινῶς 


9 θυγάτηρ πατρὶ ἀπόκρυφος ἀγρυπνία, 
95 ἐν νεότητι αὐτῆς μή ποτε παρακμάσῃ, 
10 ἐν παρθενείᾳ μή ποτε βεβηλωθῇ 

τοῦ μετὰ ἀνδρὸς οὖσα μή ποτε παραβῇ, 


11 ἐπὶ θυγατρὶ ἀδιατρέπτῳ στερέωσον φυλακήν, 


11° λαλιὰν ἐν πόλει καὶ ἔκκλητον λαοῦ, 


καὶ μὴ λάβῃς πρόσωπον τοῦ ἁμαρτάνειν" 
καὶ περὶ κρίματος δικαιῶσαι τὸν ἀσεβῆ, 
περὶ δόσεως κληρονομίας ἑταίρων, 
περὶ κτήσεως πολλῶν καὶ ὀλίγων, 
καὶ περὶ παιδείας τέκνων πολλῆς, 


καὶ ὅπου χεῖρες πολλαὶ κλεῖσον' 

καὶ δόσις καὶ λῆμψις παντὶ ἐν γραφῇ" 

καὶ ἐσχατογήρως κρινομένου πρὸς νέους, 
καὶ δεδοκιμασμένος ἔναντι παντὸς ζῶντος. 


. t » δα 2 ~ 4 
καὶ ἡ μέριμνα αὑτῆς ἀφιστᾷ ὕπνον" 
\ al ta a, 
Kal συνῳκηκυῖα μή ποτε μισηθῇ 
καὶ ἐν τοῖς πατρικοῖς αὐτῆς ἔγκυος γένηται" 
ral 7, 2 
καὶ συνῳκηκυῖα μή ποτε στειρώσῃ. 
μή ποτε ποιήσῃ σε ἐπίχαρμα ἐχθροῖς, 
καὶ καταισχυνεῖ σε ἐν πλήθει πολλῶν. 


XLIZ. 1-114, 


(fol. 2 verso.) 


ΠΩΣ myy np b> Aron yown ἼΣῚ nwo XLIL 
zn 55 sya jn ΝΥΝῚ NOX wD ΠΡ ΠῚ 1¢ 
:xpm op avn bx vwnan bx nbs by ἽΝ τὸ bs 
been ryen pyynd pte dyn pin wSy min by 2 oN 
Ww εὐ») abma miptno by Tray asin pawn dy 3 Ame 
men jf ΒΝ ἢ by εἃ bp) 3) byy 4a 
ἐξ μαναὰ ΕἸΣΝῚ nas minon dyn 5 pdr one pm dyn 4 
ο 
a0 rua Tay yn dyy 5 nynd 2Ὶ pa mp dy 4b poen 
:MM|N mp oO op pon:omn myn awe Sy 6s, nero 
nm ΤΙΝΎΣῚ :anza dan ΠΡΟῚ nnn ἼΒΌΣ “Span ΡΟ by, ἢ 7 3900 
ὙΦ Ὁ , ny ° ana = 
me gma may SSarn went sen bai ame “pip dy 8 Ε BR 
pn 55 ad yoy we noxa wit nvm se Β 
A 
ο . 
ann tees» [POEM met npy nono axd na 9 Ε poo 
ἐφ ς DD MONI “NIN JD AMID oe Ε 
: mB Pe Lae nian jp MNT τὸ aga gg TEM 
ο GC 
273... . ΠΝ man ον (D MAN MIA 10° ᾿ ἘΞ. μα mmnp’x 
ius mopa. . 5 5 ro Es P 
imo STV ie De e+ 6.4 τὺ. nopn.. + ee Ἐν mee Rie 
° = a} rez 
ΠΣ ΣῊΝ εν ΠΊΓΝ3] naw py nddpy wy ΠΕῚ τιος Βα 
δι: 
: "» ao 
1 mk) is written above V8). ? Prov. 8, 21. 3 Is, 40, 15. *5CE Lev. 5,235 Ξ ξ Ε 
5 Between ver. 8" and 84 (under Sn.) SN). 6 The Ὁ is very doubtful, only the lower Ff Ὦ 8 
left-hand corner being left. The two letters may possibly belong to the text. 7 Of the 3, 5 52 
only the foot is left, which may be part of an, 5, », or possibly 2. ? wuxn jp lest she be vexed, © yy" 
or be unhappy. Ἐ: 


cota J|ptso oho 50 
: νοὶ Sy Gdd= ero 
¢ iw? Jag sho Nhe -o as |pal Jaods g doo xo 


ring Jinos Gas? Sx Jlisg XLIL 


hugs) Ie Shadgs o° 
wlaos2h) Wy shaXokas τὸ 


shard Jane yprrh loads 
choosy wages phos ghia? ataso 


Jhigno pao? yhis SX μεθ αὶ 
dass lyagic J\ixano 11° 


It ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 2 recto.) 

If ye stumble, it shall be for perpetual joy; 
το All things’ from nothing turn to nothing’ again, 
τι The vanity of man* is in his body, 
12 Fear for (thy) name, for that will accompany thee, 
13 The goodness of life> hath days that may be 

numbered, 

14> Buried wisdom and a hidden treasure, 
15 Better is a man that hideth his foolishness, 


o> and if ye die, it shall be for a curse. 
so? the godless (go) from emptiness to emptiness. 
but a godly name shall not be cut off. 
more than thousands of precious* treasures. 


but goodness of name hath days without number. 


what profit is in them both? 
than a man® that hideth his wisdom. 


The discipline of shame. 


14° Hearken, O children, to the discipline of shame, 
16> Not every kind of shame is it fitting to retain, 


17 Beashamedbeforefatherand mother, of whoredom'®; 


18 Before master and mistress, of deceit; 


18¢ [Before a partner] and a friend, of trespass” ; 
το" [Of breaking an oJath and a covenant, 

τοῦ Of refusing to grant a request? ; 

21b Of reckoning the dividing of a portion‘; 

20Ὁ Of gazing on a woman‘ [that is a harlot ?]; 
22° Before a friend, of reproachful [word *]s ; 


1 Marg. from their trouble turn to their trouble (?), or from trouble turn to trouble (?). 
* So marg. 

ἡ Marg. before a prince and a governor. 
15 Perhaps aw7n of turning away the face<@): marg, from closing up the mouth of. 


(or a godless son). 
judgement. 8 Marg. of wantonness. 
and a prince. Marg. of pride. 

Marg. will ye be silent ? 


3. Marg. of the sons of men. 
15. Marg. a request. 


10 πάντα ὅσα ἐκ γῆς els γῆν ἀπελεύσεται, 
11 πένθος ἀνθρώπων ἐν σώμασιν αὐτῶν, 
\ , » Fe , a 
12 φρόντισον περὶ ὀνόματος, αὐτὸ γάρ σοι διαμενεῖ 
13 ἀγαθῆς ζωῆς ἀριθμὸς ἡμερῶν, 
14 παιδείαν ἐν εἰρήνῃ συντηρήσατε, τέκνα" 
14° σοφία δὲ κεκρυμμένη καὶ θησαυρὸς ἀφανής, 
15 κρείσσων ἄνθρωπος ἀποκρύπτωντὴν μωρίαν αὐτοῦ 


16° οὐ γάρ ἐστιν πᾶσαν αἰσχύνην διαφυλάξαι καλόν, 
17 αἰσχύνεσθε ἀπὸ πατρὸς καὶ μητρὸς περὶ πορνείας, 
18 ἀπὸ κριτοῦ καὶ ἄρχοντος περὶ πλημμελία, 
18° ἀπὸ κοινωνοῦ καὶ φίλου περὶ ἀδικίας, 

19° καὶ ἀπὸ ἀληθείας θεοῦ καὶ διαθήκης, 

τοῦ ἀπὸ σκορακισμοῦ λήμψεως καὶ δόσεως, 

20° ἀπὸ ὁράσεως γυναικὸς ἑταίρας, 

a1” ἀπὸ ἀφαιρέσεως μερίδος καὶ δύσεως, 
22 ἀπὸ περιεργείας παιδίσκης αὐτοῦ, 
22° ἀπὸ φίλων περὶ λόγων ὀνειδισμοῦ, 


B2 


16 and be abashed according to my’ judgement. 
nor is every kind of abashment approved. 
before a prince sitting (in judgement)’, of a lie; 
before the congregation and the people, of trans- 
gression ; [8 stranger’? ; 
1g and before the place where thou sojournest”, of 
of stretching out the elbow at meat; 
21 of reckoning the face’ of thy friend; 
20 before him that saluteth*, of silence™; 
aiandof...., 
and after giving’, spurn not. 


* Marg, the son of the godless 
5 Reading ovn for 1. ®Marg.alord. 7 Marg. its 
10 Lev. 5, 21. 1 Marg. the place 


9? kal ἐὰν ἀποθάνητε, εἰς κατάραν μερισθήσεσθε. 
οὕτως ἀσεβεῖς ἀπὸ κατάρας els ἀπωλίαν. 
ὄνομα δὲ ἁμαρτωλῶν οὐκ ἀγαθὸν ἐξαλειφθήσεται. 
ἢ χίλιοι μεγάλοι θησαυροὶ χρυσίου" 
καὶ ἀγαθὸν ὄνομα εἰς αἰῶνα διαμενεῖ. 


τίς ὠφελία ἐν ἀμφοτέροις ; 
ἢ ἄνθρωπος ἀποκρύπτων τὴν σοφίαν αὐτοῦ. 
16 τοιγαροῦν ἐντράπητε ἐπὶ τῷ ῥήματί μου’ 
καὶ οὐ πάντα πᾶσιν ἐν πίστει εὐδοκιμεῖται. 
καὶ ἀπὸ ἡγουμένου καὶ δυνάστου περὶ ψεύδους, 
ἀπὸ συναγωγῆς καὶ λαοῦ περὶ ἀνομίας, 
19 καὶ ἀπὸ τόπου οὗ παροικεῖς περὶ κλοπῆς, 
καὶ ἀπὸ πήξεως ἀγκῶνος ἐπ᾽ ἄρτους, 
20 καὶ ἀπὸ ἀσπαζομένων περὶ σιωπῆς, 
21: καὶ ἀπὸ ἀποστροφῆς προσώπου συγγενοῦς, 
καὶ ἀπὸ κατανοήσεως γυναικὸς ὑπάνδρου, 
δ᾿ ΩΝ ke] Ν , a ae 
καὶ μὴ ἐπιστῇς ἐπὶ τὴν κοίτην αὐτῆς 
\ ot en ~ S , ὴ 
καὶ μετὰ τὸ δοῦναι μὴ ὀνείδιζε 


ΧΩ]. 9-224, 10 


indSpd ynyon ony oP 


(fol. 2 recto.) 


δὴν nnn ydwon os] 


p rin $s ΠΤ pon 5 aw ppex bx pax bai A Daw 93 
p 5) xd spn ow IN WNT DIN PAT τι ἃ eh 
ae inom nis wads inh ΚΠ 5. ow dy ἽΠΒ 12 : 
am) ΕἼΒΟΙ PR DY DY Naw ἼΒΟ ‘Dy Ἢ Nw 13 x ena, 
mien romnwa abyin no aribv THN) mW ADM 14b ἢ ΤΟ ὉΥ 
peo Hinpsn pEyy wx indix pay OL] aw 15 basen 
:nwa Dw DY AwI DID 
yerws spawn dy wbom τό Da Wow nwa aw 142 
sana oban 53 ΝΟῚ sows mea nwa 53. Nb 166 
bye ΤΣ ds “ae swan nist Ss ON) AND wD 17 mp 59 
rywe Sy on myn ἜΡ ὃν naan psn 18 
ἐπι ὃ pan :ot Sy an mpnnr τὸ by Sy pit 2, 189 ge : 958 ΠΣ 
:ond by Sys myn nn) nd[ae] ted Ig? A PA = cE 
Ἐ pwd PN ἘΝ AwN 21 rine] sss διά δ ga 
aereno rwmnne pidy οἿΝ[9}0 20 nyo FipoAlo mialeAy abe a £ 
imp] coe δ, ἐδ. Hit "119 eee eee BAD 2Z20b oN 
Toxw ΠΌΣΗ o8 AAD “NN mpan [27] by SMND 22° cn 737 
1 Eccles. 8, 15. 3 Or? 219. 5. ΟΣ 23% 


* Of the doubtful letters here the 7 may be am, the’ may be ἃ 1, and the ἢ any final letter, 


woos yrolly Ἱ hilo .οῶλ» ox lo? hasas le 


-orad? Jhow ds Jb: Jb? 9 


Prey) μοι ohne Sy fscad rob 
@pSsS "ΝΆ ods2 banc ταῦ 


Joy |hodncoy JN? go 


+Qubac owes ediar xed 20 
vps hiss bua? oS κυ Som? μόδας, 


yO Conf gas Ss ao 12 


slraioo |Kadas λον Spoo 19h 
So? δα δα ood Jradg 00 05% 
igs has " oS αὐ 


9 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(fol. 1 verso.) 
26¢ In the fear of the Lord there is no want, 
27 The fear of God is as an Eden of blessing, 


28 My son?, live not a life that subsists on giving: 
29 A man that looketh at the table of a stranger, 
29° His dainties* are a loathing‘ of the soul ; 


30 Begging is sweet to the greedy man, 


ΧΙ]. 1 Ah? Death! how [bit jteristhe remembrance of thee 


τὸ Toa manthat isat ease and prospereth in all things, 

2 Aha Death! foracceptable(¢. good) is thy sentence 

29 (To) the man that stumbleth and striketh against 
all things, 


3 Be not afraid of death, (which is) thy sentence, 


4 This is the portion of all flesh from God, 

4¢ Whether it be for a thousand years, or an hundred, 
or ten, 

A reprobate progeny is a byword? of the evil®, 

From an unrighteous son’ cometh a rule of evil, 

An ungodly father a [chi]l[d] doth curse, 

[Woe] to [you, ye wicked, 

If [ye increase”, it shall be into] the hands of 
bodily mishap ; 

1 ? over (as G © and Is. 4, 5). 2 So marg. 

burning fire. 5 px for wer (Is. 40, 26). 


Φ ὦ «τ ἃ σι 


3 Marg. bestowed daintiest 2 
7 Marg. (To) the man that stumbleth and striketh against all things; who 


and it needeth not to seek for [treasure] with it. 

and so’ all glory is its canopy. 

better is he that is taken away (in death) than he 
that is importunate. 

his life is not to be numbered as a life: 

to a man that hath understanding (they are as) pain? 
of the bowels. 

but in his inward parts it burneth as fire °. 

to a man that liveth quifetly] in his place ; 

and that hath yet strength to receive pleasure. 

unto him that hath ποῦ might, and lacketh strength ; 


who loveth contradiction and hath lost hope’. 


remember that they which went before and they 
which come after (will be) with thee. 
and why dost thou refuse the law of the Most High? 


there are ποῦ corrections® in Sh[eo]l. 


and the offspring of the foolish is [...of the wic]ked. 
[and with his] seed [abideth want "]. 

because [on his] accfount he suffereth reproach]. 
because ye have forsaken the law of the Most] High. 


[and if ye] beget, it shall be for sighing. 


* Reading by2n for ayn.  * Marg. as 


hath no sight and hath lost hope. (To) the man that striketh and stumbleth (1. bw for 3w) against all things; who hath 


no sight and hath lost hope. 
uncircumcised (or from an uncircumcised son). 


269 οὐκ ἔστιν φόβῳ Κυρίου ἐλάττωσις, 

27 φόβος Κυρίου ὡς παράδεισος εὐλογίας, 

28 τέκνον, ζωὴν ἐπαιτήσεως μὴ βιώσῃς" 

29 ἀνὴρ βλέπων εἰς τράπεζαν ἀλλοτρίαν, [τρίοις" 
295 ἀλισγήσει τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἐν ἐδέσμασιν ἀλλο- 
30 ἐν στόματι ἀναιδοῦς γλυκανθήσεται ἐπαίτησις, 


ΧΙ]. τ Ὦ θάνατε, ὡς πικρόν σου τὸ μνημόσυνόν ἐστιν 


1° ἀνδρὶ ἀπερισπάστῳ καὶ εὐοδουμένῳ ἐν πᾶσιν 
2 ὦ θάνατε, καλόν σου τὸ κρίμα ἐστὶν 

29 ἐσχατογήρῳ καὶ περισπωμένῳ περὶ πάντων, 
3 μὴ εὐλαβοῦ κρίμα θανάτου. 

4 τοῦτο τὸ κρίμα παρὰ Κυρίου πάσῃ σαρκί, 

45 εἴτε δέκα εἴτε ἑκατὸν εἴτε χίλια ἔτη, 

5 τέκνα βδελυκτὰ γίνεται τέκνα ἁμαρτωλῶν, 
τέκνων ἁμαρτωλῶν ἀπολεῖται κληρονομία, 
πατρὶ ἀσεβεῖ μέμψεται τέκνα, 

οὐαὶ ὑμῖν ἄνδρες ἀσεβεῖς, 


ϑ. δὴ οΣ Θὶ 


ANON fal ’ὔ 
καὶ ἐὰν γεννηθῆτε, εἰς κατάραν γεννηθήσεσθε, 


8 Marg. corrections for life. 
4 So S (ah): G reproach (197). 


9». Marg. of cities. 10 Marg. from among the 


12 Marg. are fruitful. 


καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπιζητῆσαι ἐν αὐτῷ βοήθειαν" 

καὶ ὑπὲρ πᾶσαν δόξαν ἐκάλυψαν αὐτόν. 

κρεῖσσον ἀποθανεῖν ἢ ἐπαιτεῖν. 

οὐκ ἔστιν αὐτοῦ ὁ βίος ἐν λογισμῷ ζωῆς, 

ἀνὴρ δὲ ἐπιστήμων καὶ πεπαιδευμένος φυλάξεται. 
καὶ ἐν κοιλίᾳ αὐτοῦ πῦρ καήσεται. 

ἀνθρώπῳ εἰρηνεύοντι ἐν τοῖς ὑπάρχουσιν αὐτοῦ, 
καὶ ἔτι ἰσχύοντι ἐπιδέξασθαι τροφήν. 

ἀνθρώπῳ ἐπιδεομένῳ καὶ ἐλασσουμένῳ ἰσχύι, 
καὶ ἀπειθοῦντι καὶ ἀπολωλεκότι ὑπομονήν. 
μνήσθητι προτέρων σου καὶ ἐσχάτων" 

καὶ τί ἀπαναίνῃ ἐν εὐδοκίᾳ “Ὑψίστου; 

οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἅδου ἐλεγμὸς ζωῆς. 

καὶ συναναστρεφόμενα παροικίαις ἀσεβῶν" 

καὶ μετὰ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτῶν ἐνδελεχιεῖ ὄνειδος. 
ὅτι δι᾽ αὐτὸν ὀνειδισθήσονται. 

οἵτινες ἐγκατελείπετε νόμον θεοῦ Ὑψίστου" 


A) BOS ALE, Gy 


[oon] myy wpad pay 
:?nnan a2 55 5) 
Simpy ΟΝ 21D 
spyn mind wn ps 
py aD yy wd 

PWN wD TIN wp. 

inns dy [p]pw xd 

soayn Sapb ΟἿΠ 113 my 

ΠΟΥ, Tony forms wind 

:mIpn aN) 2 
soy [ὈΝ]ΣΠΝῚ DWNT 15. S5r 

:[ppoy mana ὈΝΌΠ nny 

Pe :5fe]2 mnsin ws 
ἐπ cee 6 ONM TION 
ΝΣ {Πρ 209 

ἐπε ΠΡ. [33] 5 

SPOR) a τὴς 


snmaxd yrdi[n] .. . 


oy" WD” 


ΓΦ WRI 


{MPN 71 TNT Dex 992 win) ὉΡῸ wR 
URE Cig, GNELILE 
NO UGLL ας aL Na 


EMpN TN ANIA DEX 592 wp Wr WR 


1 Prov. 2,4. * Is. 4, 5. 5.15, 56, 11. 


sLipaso goad Jsascd Lido 
sohao? MS? Shoo 6.95) Io Cis He yan/ 


* 15, 40, 26. 
7 Gen, 21, 23. Job 18, 19. Is. 14, 22. 


(fol. 1 verso.) 
ΡΠ δ) MNV[I] PX 26° 
mana p> ods ΠΝ 27 
smn 5x ΠΡ Yn 3D 28 "2 
ar ynbw Sy mawn wn 29 


° ο yw day 

ΟΡ war dayn aoe _ ane 

- “| nywei w 

nbxw pinnon we ny WN? 30 soci 

ΤΙ Ὕ] mo Προ ovens XLT wn 
boa mbyny voy wx τὸ 

7 pn aw 5 nd ΠΝΠ 2 pn 

° ἽΠ 

boa wp» Swan wn 2° we δα 


Jpn nwo snan bx 3 

Shan awa b> pon ΠῚ 4 
wy aN ow Abxd 4 3 
ca ° pen 73 

Spy TAI DNDI ἢ 5 


r Ὁ nit 
wm nbven dy jan 6 2 by pro 
ΞΡ) app yen as 7 
ly ON ee eee 

POR. Vt BS yen 


5 Job 20, 29. “ὁ ony is written above Ὁ». 
® So MS, (9). 


«μία, Jodie ous KA 26° 
shaasdllh? peso No Ns Jodly ον 


thusbearc uo po./ So eo Nsdo 
sone af coo I) Njord of Joo Ilo 
200) bam? ye? COC Raw οὐ} 

has? εὐ bolo Edo se2 Jiagdro 
LAD Jes Jar «οἷο 

woamdts SS ον» ἰδ. Jeo 

¢}aucl adaded Ih oe Kul solo 

was prmwo Holy Jind 

sda Ihe o> Kido bam. jmuo 
oor? ghod μρωὶο bsonde sorh/ 


elosstso foess Joly ob doy 27 
swoadsoh ἢ} p> Shar oS vs 28 
sLiwle Jioho Ne sae Jiang 29 
Mrs pos? ee els μῶ 29° 
ον. pmsl hoe yuo 3802S 30 
hu) wr be ‘Jha br xi 
expe Sas wd p00 oo? Jeagy 1° 
chu? gras μο haw of 2 
rug Nas Solitooy law Jing 2° 
wyhivo asco Spo flarso go Suh I; 
Jord? peo barits yoordoe Jhia wor [γον Shro 4 


δῶν JL Noh aS coe JKsino 

Wrpcoam sO) Od5) pro 

elado> Jers coo ode 

# sohasoy roads βοων. oom Jad Loos 


Wase JlSoh Ldsso δος 
gro pb Vox Jis po 6 
spagads filo οι» Vax boll 7 
Max la wood vo 8 


7 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(Oxford, fol. 1 recto.) 
9 [Pestile]nce and bloodshed, fever and drought, 

το Against the wicked, evil is created, 

11 All things that are from the earth return to the 
earth, [stream, 

13 Riches born of (?) riches’ are like an ever-flowing 

14 With his lifting up of (his) hands® men rejoice, 

15 The branch of violence? shall not be unpunished, 

16 Like axes®(?) upon the bank of a stream, 

17 But kindness shall never be moved, 

18 A life of wine* and strong drink is sweet, 

19 A child and a city establish a name, 

τοῦ Offspring (of cattle) and planting make a name 
to flourish, 

20 Wine and strong drink cause the heart to exult, 

21 Pipe and harp make sweet the song, 

22 [Grace and beauty] delight the eye, 

23 [A friend and a partner] behave [as occasion 
requires |, 

24 Abrother[and ἃ helper are for a ti]me of adversity, 

25 Gold and silver [make the foot stand sure] : 

26 Riches and strength lift up the heart, 


1 So marg. 2 Marg. evil. 3 Cf. Prov. 17, 13. 
sense is obscure, and the text doubtless corrupt. 
8 Marg. the life of him that excels in prudence. 


says, At night also. 


6 2(reed-)stalks (nar ἢ). 
At 40, 22 the margin has: ‘ All the days of the poor are evil. Ben Sira 
His roof is the lowest of roofs, and his vineyard is in tle height of the mountains: the rain of other 


devastation and destruction, evil and death. 

and because of him' ruin? departeth [not? *]. 

and that which is* from the height (returneth) to the 
height. ᾿ [thunder : 

and as’ a mighty water-course in the flashing of 

for suddenly he perisheth for ever. 

for the root of the godless is on the point of a crag. 

before? all rain’ they are extinguished. _[for ever. 

and righteousness (or almsgiving) shall be established 

but he that findeth a treasure is above them both. 

but he that findeth wisdom is above them both. 


but a woman beloved is above them both. 


but the love of lovers is above them both, 
but a sincere tongue is above them both. 
butthe growing things of the field are above them both. 


but a prudent wife is above them both. [them both. 


but righteousness (07 almsgiving) delivereth above 
but [good counsel °] is above them both. 
but the fear of God is above them both. 


* Marg. and there is that (?). ® So marg.; but the 
7 Pall grass ((" (9); cf. Job 8, 12. 


roofs falls on his roof, and the earth of his vineyard falls on other vineyards.’ (Then in Persian:) Ὁ wl Ss RVC ey ep 
wig [Ὁ] ssh Sel oy ol (2s922 ‘It is probable that this was not in the original copy, but it is used as a proverb.’ 


(See the list of proverbs, p. xxviii). 


9 θάνατος καὶ αἷμα καὶ ἔρις καὶ ῥομφαία, 

το ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀνόμους ἐκτίσθη ταῦτα πάντα, 

11 πάντα ὅσα ἀπὸ γῆς εἰς γῆν ἀναστρέφει, 

12 πᾶν δῶρον καὶ ἀδικία ἐξαλειφθήσεται, 

18 χρήματα ἀδίκων ὡς ποταμὸς ξηρανθήσεται, 
14 ἐν τῷ ἀνοῖξαι αὐτὸν χεῖρας εὐφρανθήσεται, 
15. ἔκγονα ἀσεβῶν οὐ πληθυνεῖ κλάδους, 

16 ἄχει ἐπὶ παντὸς ὕδατος καὶ χείλους ποταμοῦ 
17 χάρις ὡς παράδεισος ἐν εὐλογίαις, 

18 ζωὴ αὐτάρκους ἐργάτου γλυκανθήσεται, 

το τέκνα καὶ οἰκοδομὴ πόλεως στηρίζουσιν ὄνομα, ᾿ 


20 οἶνος καὶ μουσικὰ εὐφραίνουσιν καρδίαν, 

at αὐλὸς καὶ ψαλτήριον ἡδύνουσιν μέλη, 

22 χάριν καὶ κάλλος ἐπιθυμήσει ὁ ὀφθαλμός σου, 
23 φίλος καὶ ἑταῖρος εἰς καιρὸν ἀπαντῶντες, 

24 ἀδελφοὶ καὶ βοήθεια εἰς καιρὸν θλίψεως, 

25 χρυσίον καὶ ἀργύριον ἐπιστήσουσιν πόδα, 

26 χρήματα καὶ ἰσχὺς ἀνυψώσουσιν καρδία", 


9 So G(BYNAC)S. 


καὶ δι’ αὐτοὺς ἐγένετο ὁ κατακλυσμός. 

καὶ ἀπὸ ὑδάτων εἰς θάλασσαν ἀνακάμπτει. 

καὶ πίστις εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα στήσεται. 

καὶ ὡς βροντὴ μεγάλη ἐν ὑετῷ ἐξηχήσει" 

οὕτως οἱ παραβαίνοντες εἰς συντέλειαν ἐκλείψουσιν. 
καὶ ῥίζαι ἀκάθαρτοι ἐπ᾽ ἀκροτόμου πέτρας" 

πρὸ παντὸς χόρτου ἐκτιλήσεται. 

καὶ ἐλεημοσύνη εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα διαμενεῖ. 

καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα ὃ εὑρίσκων θησαυρόν. 


τοϊκαὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα γυνὴ ἄμωμος λογίζεται. 


καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα ἀγάπησις σοφίας. 
καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα γλῶσσα ἡδεῖα. 

καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα χλόην σπόρου. 

καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα γυνὴ μετὰ ἀνδρός. 
καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα ἐλεημοσύνη ῥύσεται. 
καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα γυνὴ εὐδοκιμεῖται. 
καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀμφότερα φόβος Κυρίου" 


XL. 


[enjoy myn naw aw 
rnd> wien ayn 

rom ὉΝ ome ὝΦΝῚ 
:2mbrp pina WIN ΡΈΝΟΝ 
som ny> oxne "5 
yop yw ὃν aon ww "5 
oy wp ὍΘ. aD 
spon yd ΠΡῚΝ 

DYN NNW OMIWM 
ΣΠΌΣΠ Ny DAWN 
ΠΡΌΣ AWS ΠΟΣῸΝ 
SOT ans Dw 
gma ped anwn 

«ΠῚ ony pawn 
ΠΡΌ Ὁ ΠΟΝ own 
snbyp pty pawn 

vee ee ee {6Π) 8] 
τοῦτον ARS) ὉΊΠΣΦΟῚ 


Β raya napa 


4, 


Ὁ" 


i) 


PDN) 


$fayra 1259 


[1155] 


wD 


ne 


2 Deut, 28, 22 (294). 2 Job 38, 25. 


shoo |ss0d gwrs 
asehy ayo Of bade vinaso 
tIMSUSS Las gro edoot Jhosons «οἷο 


Joncas μα Sor Kaus Mae yo? por dag Sorsad 
ΒΡΕΨΙ wo ϑϑοῶ So Pre? 

soso pod leavers Jado 

Jixonte wna? ai? ye’ Wor orohwre 
Jxndn wtarod g2 oush e200 
JNoantn JLku? coms e200 

μουν ohasdud otro aso 

«μον rads Sou dh eee 

haw? Wie cout e200 

Sag Iho? woush ewe 

-Loid Jor) coms goo 

lag lars oomsh ewe 

ον ν νῶν ont gre 


9-26". 


* Job 39, 28. 


6 
(Oxford, fol. 1 recto.) 
tan amin on Ἵ[31] 9 
myn Aaa yer dy τὸ 
sw yas bx posy $31 
° ο 
ms dnaa din bs Sinn 13 bmp on 
ο ο 
yoy ΒΞ INKY DY DY 14 anew DD 
mp» 85 DEN Wits δὶ 
bry nea Sy mmomps 16 ἢ 
ω 
mo xd nbd ἼΘΠΙ α7 
pn’ ΒΝ py ὑπ 18 ἢ sow ann 
oy roy wy 15> το : 
DY NM yon Uy WE og = κι 
πο 
dowdy ww 1] Ε ὁ ὅ ez 
yoy 
sew sary? San Ὀ[]Ρ[Π] ar ag dg 4 2 bon 
re G 
pyri]... 6.22 9) 3849s 
O ms 
STE, (ee eee as 
ere res, ZG#o,g 
MBA... | UC SEY 
22495 
Stan]. ees [A JDD an 25 d8dca 
ad [rma nov ὉΠ 26 5.8 ὁ 
4 Job 6, 17. ® Exod. 13, 12, &c. 
9 


2296) fall oor Iss? es? peo Sor 
Se Yarvo her eo Nor 
1ya2sqhy Shes ye? Jeoony lends 13 
Ἄϑδο Eh HO 49. 4 

Joo, | fans μω} Ιαϑωο 15 

Vana 9 Jose SX Kiso IlaNau “οἷο τό 
eosrhac bupre [hey J-d80 17 


θοαὶ casas Jiasto floss τὸ 
“βοὰν gehpnso Joyo hint> 19° 
shar Jpnso Jasin Jesnu 20 
»}es0) grxamacso Lusasle fsas/ οἱ 
shire Ν᾿ θολὸ Jha. 22 
aos Juase Jinwo fraud 23 
Εν beso L530 μὴ 24 
hed ron fsolmo fsoy 25 
lad psi fasole Nu 26 


ΧΙ, 


ΧΙ, 


5 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(Cambridge, verso.) 
29 Fire and hail, evil’ and pestilence, 
30 Beast of tooth, scorpion and cobra, 


30¢ All these are created‘ for their uses, 


31 When he commandeth them they rejoice, 

32 Therefore from the beginning I took my stand, 
33 All the works of God are good; 

84 None® may say, This is evil, What is this *? 

35 Now with all (your) heart ?° sing aloud, 


these also are [formed] for judgement. 

and a sword of vengeance? to ban® [the wicked]. 

and they are in his treasure-house®, against the time 
when they are required. [word. 

and in their prescribed tasks they rebel not against his 

and I considered, and set it down in writing : 

he sufficeth for® every need’ in its season. 

for he maketh all things to prevail® in their season. 

and bless the name of the H[oly One"”]. 


1 Great occupation hath God” allotted, and a heavy yoke is upon the sons of men; 
τὸ From the day of his coming forth from his mother’s until the day of his returning to the mother” of all 
womb, living ; 

3 From him that sitteth loftily on a throne, even unto him that is clothed® in dust and ashes. 

: Bo ee cee Sage ARCH even unto him that weareth® a mantle [of poverty]: 
5 Anger”, jealousy, anxiety, and fear, the terror of death, strife, and contention®: 

5¢ And in the time when he resteth upon his bed, the sleep of night changeth [his thought ®] ; , 
6 A little... . fora moment he is quiet, and from the midst of terror[s he is perturbed?” ?] ; 
6°... ... from the vision of his soul, (he is) as a fugitive [hurrying on before] the pursuer. 
Vira, We te eet τὸ oh, ἐφ οἶα aketh visions (?) . rest. 

8. oe 

1 Read probably 3a» famine, as G (5. 3 Marg. an avenging sword. 3. Marg. to lift up (?). * Marg. These also 

are chosen. 5 So marg. ® Read probably p20 supplieth, as 39, 16. ™ Marg. perhaps, needy person. ® Marg. 
This is worse than that. ® Marg. all things prevail. *” Marg. mouth. 1 Ογ the H[oly] name. Marg. His Holy 
name. 12 Marg. the Most High. 18 Marg. land, as ©. 1: Exod. 28, 36. 15 Marg. maketh. *6 ἫΝ for JR. 
” Reading ἜΣΘ); or ? wzp is disquieted. 8 Marg. (probably referring to this line), even to (?) all..... yea, and with... 


29 πῦρ καὶ χάλαζα καὶ λιμὸς Kal θάνατος, 
30 θηρίων ὀδόντες καὶ σκορπίοι καὶ ἔχεις 
30 
31 ἐν τῇ ἐντολῇ αὐτοῦ εὐφρανθήσονται, 
32 διὰ τοῦτο ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐστηρίχθην 
33 τὰ ἔργα Κυρίου πάντα ἀγαθά, 
34 καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν Τοῦτο τούτου πονηρότερον, 
35 καὶ νῦν ἐν πάσῃ καρδίᾳ καὶ στόματι ὑμνήσαμεν, 
t ᾿Ασχολία μεγάλη ἔκτισται παντὶ ἀνθρώπῳ, 
1° ἀφ᾽ ἡμέρας ἐξόδου ἐκ γαστρὸς μητρὸς αὐτῶν 
2 τοὺς διαλογισμοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ φόβον καρδίας, 
3 ἀπὸ καθημένου ἐπὶ θρόνου ἐν δόξῃ 
4 ἀπὸ φοροῦντος ὑάκινθον καὶ στέφανον 
5 θυμὸς καὶ ζῆλος καὶ ταραχὴ καὶ σάλος 
5° καὶ ἐν καιρῷ ἀναπαύσεως ἐπὶ κοίτης 
6 ὀλίγον ὡς οὐδὲν ἐν ἀναπαύσει, 
6° τεθορυβημένος ἐν ὁράσει καρδίας αὐτοῦ, 
7 ἐν καιρῷ σωτηρίας αὐτοῦ ἐξηγέρθη, 
8 μετὰ πάσης σαρκὸς ἀπὸ ἀνθρώπου ἕως κτήνους, 


πάντα ταῦτα εἰς ἐκδίκησιν ἔκτισται" 

καὶ ῥομφαία ἐκδικοῦσα εἰς ὄλεθρον ἀσεβεῖς, 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς els χρείας ἑτοιμασθήσονται, 
καὶ ἐν τοῖς καιροῖς αὐτῶν ob παραβήσονται λόγον. 
καὶ διενοήθην καὶ ἐν γραφῇ ἀφῆκα. 

καὶ πᾶσαν χρείαν ἐν ὥρᾳ αὐτῆς χορηγήσει" 
πάντα γὰρ ἐν καιρῷ εὐδοκιμηθήσεται. 

καὶ εὐλογήσατε τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου. 

καὶ ὠγὸς βαρὺς ἐπὶ υἱοὺς ᾿Αδάμ, 

ἕως ἡμέρας ἐπὶ ταφῇ εἰς μητέρα πάντων" 
ἐπίνοια προσδοκίας, ἡμέρα τελευτῆς. 

καὶ ἕως τεταπεινωμένου ἐν γῇ καὶ σποδῷ, 

καὶ ἕως περιβαλλομένου ὠμόλινον" 

καὶ φόβος θανάτου καὶ μηνίαμα καὶ ἔρις. 
ὕπνος νυκτὸς ἀλλοιοῖ γνῶσιν αὐτοῦ" 

καὶ ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου ἐν ὕπνοις ὡς ἐν ἡμέρᾳ σκοπιᾶς" 
ὡς ἐκπεφευγὼς ἀπὸ προσώπου πολέμου" 

καὶ ἀποθαυμάζων εἰς οὐδένα φόβον. 

καὶ ἐπὶ ἁμαρτωλῶν ἑπταπλάσια πρὸς ταῦτα" 


XXXIX, 29—XL. 85. 4 


_per fy nyyja pawnd ΠῸΝ oy 
ΟΡ Ὁ a} ἀν {0 ἈΝ 
ἘΦ eee DANS mops ΠῚ 
mea pynpay ΠΡΡῚ cana ΠΌΠῚ 
1D rye ny xd ppnay 
ἜΠΟΣ ans2 ‘naan 
tame sprees anya ay bab 
“oy say anys dan 5 
wip ΞΡ ]ΡΠ ow ns 1393) 
soos a by sas dyn 
nip Ἢ b> ow Sx ἸΣῚ ὮΝ oy 
oe Snax ray wd sy 
Foy τῷ oo ΠΡῸΦ ΠῚ ἽΝ) 
δ πῇ ὁ £557 man mip no's 
wo ... ἄπ [Π] abd now 
tw... [mbna pan 
SANT oe ee 7 TWO 
Σ Ἐ gmp... HNN 


eee eevee eeee 


1 Perhaps ΤΊΣ. 2 Or [on]pr. 


written almost as one. 
yp) wwe ny} vp until he is aroused from his sleep and awaketh. 


ἐς: 5}} μεν. co coe 
ας. o-ramd fasjaoy bow 


sohd21 wind " comands Soo 

wedo wads chibs Jokasy jatus adohn/ 
Hiioh/ oats a5, Noo 

ret se ,ootad dd Jioh> Gemndo θοῦ ον λλο 
sodas Curad 

elas? vis Sx Jarol ας 9 

Κων Lill pasos? hropro 

sySohassy Jooacs hoops , oom doe Jheawo 
sapoo Jia Sho hrowdo 

Jhotomroy Jaca gacd? el) 

shepoo busswo .Jhaso KNwzo JMuI0 

+yood pid LOX? Ihe 


b2093 peo Go wid? Jing οὐ 
ota piso Jshaxo 


ἽΝ) ΞΡ ΠῸΝ 55 30° 


3 Marginal note illegible. 
5 Only the tops of the letters are visible. ΤῊΝ seems to have been retouched. Perhaps 75 was 


(Cambridge, verso.) 
13°) 37 TH WS 29 


ἸΠΒῚ Ty jw nn 30 
Ὅλ 


yw 

Wer OMS NI 81 

snaBnn wen yo by 32 
nay ods ὉΝ ney 33 bon 
° ο pe 
mem yn ΠῚ mond bs 34 εἰς 

ο 
win ad da nny 38 nD. 
ο 

by pon Sy poy ΧΙ, pe 


YON DMD INKY DVD τοῦ 
mud ND> ὩΦΝ 3 ee 
ps AVY ΠΟΙΡῸ 4 
SMD) TNT NIP ἽΝ 5 
yaawn Sy m2 myn 5° 
pipe pris pind py 6 τῇ 
WEI “ΛΠ yo Hy 69 


Pas oD Ἐν 


ποῖ SER Me dat ie oe 


* The first three words of this line are 


Jhasoy JS}oo Joza0 Jou 29 
Jhéano ἰβϑιωδο μὲ Law 30 


werd yoo 9892 bydso 31 
w2eidh? Kamer gor Soo 32 

edd ¥.0,ES \Ood00 33 

whor go was bor ewhy Mo 34 
loSW anid yaad oda Na» 35 


Jos? Jia JNaiod Jhda, 1 XL. 


: χϑομοὶν μος ee andy Joan 0 τὸ 
yoo? JRASsLe cokwonal 2 
JaSs07 Jaman ushs ee 3 

lropso bah vege 4 

chido Jlassoe δ κοὐ 5 

-yooares NX qumvbooy fupsso 5° 


ΒΥ, Ιοω5 prekeor 6. 
pow σ᾿ lan, gy! 7 
oOo ooo, Jeans iS θοῦ PS 8 


XXXIX, 


XXXIX. 


3 ECCLESIASTICUS 


(Cambridge, recto.) 
15¢ [With s]ongs of the harp and of stringed instru- 


ments, 
16 All [the works of] God are good, 
170s. ens ADpraise* eg 


18 In [his] place* he maketh his pleasure to prosper, 
19 The works of all flesh are before him, 
20 He beholdeth from everlasting to everlasting : 
20° There is nothing small or light with him, 
21 None may say, Wherefore is this? 
21° None may [say], This is worse than that, 
a2 He maketh his blessing‘ to overflow as the Nile, 
23 For’ his wrath dispossesseth nations, 
24 [The path]s of the perfect man® are plain, 
25 [Good things] he allotted to the [g]ood from the 
beginning, 
26 [The chief things] for the life of man are water, 
26¢ [Flour of wheat], milk, and honey, 
27 All th[ese] bring good to the [g]ood, 
28 There be w[inds which are fo|rmed™ [for ven- 
geance], 

DOME Δ rin ite ts hot see WT ἮΝ 

* Marg. they supply. 
(anavan), as Schechter (Ps. 147, 5). 
illegible: ? ῬΟΣῚΣ by his wrath he. 


with a play on nw” (are straight) ; cf. ver. 27. 
created, 


15° ἐν φδαῖς χειλέων Kal ἐν κινύραις 
16 
17 οὐκ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν Ti τοῦτο; els τί τοῦτο; 


17¢ 


Ta ἔργα Κυρίου πάντα ὅτι καλὰ σφόδρα, 


ἐν λόγῳ αὐτοῦ ἔστη ὡς θιμωνιὰ ὕδωρ, 
18 ἐν προστάγματι αὐτοῦ πᾶσα ἡ εὐδοκία, 
19 
20 


ἔργα πάσης σαρκὸς ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ, 
ἀπὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα ἐπέβλεψεν, 


20 


21 οὐκ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν Τί τοῦτο; εἰς τί τοῦτο; 


22 ἡ εὐλογία αὐτοῦ ὡς ποταμὸς ἐπεκάλυψεν, 
23 
24 
25 ἀγαθὰ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ἔκτισται am’ ἀρχῆς, 


οὕτως ὀργὴν αὐτοῦ ἔθνη κληρονομήσει; 
¢. *£ 4 > a tal ec > a 
ai ὁδοὶ αὐτοῦ τοῖς ὁσίοις εὐθεῖαι, 


26 ἀρχὴ πάσης χρείας els ζωὴν ἀνθρώπου, 
26° πυρὸς καὶ μέλι καὶ γάλα, 

27 ταῦτα πάντα τοῖς εὐσεβέσιν els ἀγαθά, 
28 ἔστιν πνεύματα & εἰς ἐκδίκησιν ἔκτισται, 
28° καὶ ἐν καιρῷ συντελείας ἰσχὺν ἐκχεοῦσιν, 


2 So text, but the sense is obscure. 

5 Marg. prevail in their season. 
8 Marg. His paths to the straightforward (supposing a 5 to have been lost before on), 
® So marg. 


ἢ 


and thus with a shout shalt thou say: 


and he supplieth’ every need in its season. 
and the utterance of his mouth is his treasure. 
and there is no restraint to his salvation. 

and there is nothing hid from before his eyes. 
[is there] limit to his salvation*? 

and there is nothing too wonderful or hard for him. 
for all things are chosen for their uses ὅ. 

for all things prevail in their season. 

and it saturateth the land like a river. 

and he turneth a watered land into salt. 

so to strangers do they oppose themselves. 


so to the evil good and evil®; 


and fire, and iron, and salt, 
the blood of the grape, fresh oil, and clothing. 
so for the evil they are turned to evil’; 


[they] remove mountains. 


3 So the text appears to read, but ? 
® Reading ἸΠ9Ὺ: for ΠΥ 2. 


* ? understanding 
7 The margin is 


0 Marg. to loathsomeness (Num. 11, 20), Marg. are 


καὶ οὕτως ἐρεῖτε ἐν ἐξομολογήσει 
καὶ πᾶν πρόσταγμα ἐν καιρῷ αὐτοῦ ἔσται" 
Σ fol > a , 
πάντα yap ἐν καιρῷ αὐτοῦ ζητηθήσεται. 
Ν es , > a3 tal ες ἀ 
καὶ ἐν ῥήματι στόματος αὐτοῦ ἀποδοχεῖα ὑδάτων. 
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ὃς ἐλαττώσει τὸ σωτήριον αὐτοῦ. 
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν κρυβῆναι ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτοῦ" 


καὶ οὐθέν ἐστιν θαυμάσιον ἐναντίον αὐτοῦ. 


πάντα γὰρ εἰς χρείας αὐτῶν ἔκτισται. 


καὶ ὡς κατακλυσμὸς ξηρὰν ἐμέθυσεν" 

ὡς μετέστρεψεν ὕδατα εἰς ἅλμην. 

οὕτως τοῖς ἀνόμοις προσκόμματα" 

οὕτως τοῖς ἁμαρτωλοῖς κακά. 

ὕδωρ, πῦρ καὶ σίδηρος καὶ ἅλα καὶ σεμίδαλις, 
αἷμα σταφυλῆς καὶ ἔλαιον καὶ ἱμάτιον" 

οὕτως τοῖς ἁμαρτωλοῖς τραπήσεται εἰς κακά. 

καὶ ἐν θυμῷ αὐτῶν ἐστερέωσαν μάστιγας αὐτῶν' 
καὶ τὸν θυμὸν τοῦ ποιήσαντος αὐτοὺς κοπάσουσιν. 


A2 


XXXIX. 


myn ΝΠ [5] 
:p’ppy nya ΤῸΝ 55 
MIN YD NID) 
rinywnd ‘ryyn ps 
yy TI AND) [ΠΝ 
pinywnd ἼΒΟ ὅπ] 
yp pin) ΝΟΒΣ pa 
AAD yryd ban 5 
pray inya Son 5 
:rany dan ΠῚ 
:mpwn ndnd yan 
sboAdy ond 15 
rye aw oynd [5 
«ΠΡΟ Say ws 
£29) TAY Dy DT 
syzan mynd pnd 13 
ΕἸ ofan]. wee 


ΤΕ Ὧ55 
ὙΡῬῸ 3 


win 


Vy wa 


nn 


ἐδ} 


Oe Rae Pe ee Ore 


1 There is no sign of a final Ὁ or of an erasure, 
a1 (cf. (9) or a1; there is no sign of a third letter. 
nis clear, but the rest is not certain. * 1 Sam. 14, 6. 
7 Perhaps pnw. 


20330) μϑοο food Maso JKuyoKs0 

νον 5}} woksa ss ODDO 

“1.3.5. JNANod .(oorso? δον 

OOL> ἐροξϑς ho \oor_d> ,oordacy foo 
«ον B53 097 qhsad0 lame wo 

+O p02, jwoascy Lido 

sworam,o go aly bdo 


radsaad jasc was: ido 

naar [Eds βου ylo 

eds joomaas bx5/ yoo 

eto wo βαλῶ οἷο 

wos le ap V Jasx οἷο 

θυ Iii20 Jiao 

slacado JKimolo fresco Jisauo [aise 
“casos JRJodso hard So 

HES Jay CEHg Giro 

wqenttse gail Jide τὸν Lucio 


15°—284, 
(Cambridge, recto.) 

13519 9a) Say ΠΥ Γ[05] 15° XXXIX, 
maw nbs bx... 16 
a3 yy, etre Κλ) 8 
τυ yawn *[yJAfin 18 
yo wa 52 ΠΩ τὸ 
pa ody ay obiyn 20 
WY WYO IOP PX 20° 
mr md ΠῚ ἼΩΝ pear 
aro yn ar [ἼΝ]70 ps ae 
M_YN AND NIDA 22 


wry Ὁ Wyt 3D 23 8 


mem pron nfm] 24 Bact 
warp pon ap)... 25 
pp ow AD... . 26 
ῬΑ eee 260 
wo ὈΔ[Ὁ]0 [nd] do 27 
vivfy] . 6... [MA wr 28 wit 


ιν dae ot κὶ LP Yer oe 880 


2 The 3 is fairly distinct: after it there is a blot which may conceal 


This word appears to have been altered by a second hand: the 
5 Job 25, 3. 6 There is a marginal note here, but illegible. 


Jmdabs ohosag, asso 15° XXXIX. 
Jeno? gels Jody cord pds (ood 16 
lose yore lusaS boo gxoly Kudo 21 
«Οὐ Looe wad Μοῦ τόρ. Kido 21° 


ΞΟ ord, Jhopm> 18 
codsaads Jims wd Nop \90,d% τὸ 


POA UQwo Yor MOS 20° 

μ᾽» dou “οὐ ολιοϑο5 22 

ole Jrosds olgor> ioe 23 

waa? pee apt hasoys oowio/ 24 
5} ISBN Manin cco INag 25 

\is0 hes? case Jad gardhroe Jhas, Orda wed 26 
ehasyo Jadao λὔο (5910 26¢ 

«5839 IS Edo Gods 27 

irk? baad) loos δ 28 

Hem Gordaw Jao yd 28° 


CUS 


& 
ΟἹ 
- 
ΟἹ 
ca 
4 
7 
ῳ 
aa 


‘3 
3 
: 
a 


ι 


cor wee =a onlin 9 


Χ 


7; 
Ve) Ὁ ον κ᾿ 
Se 3 





tats ‘ M7 © 
ἈΝ } 





14 DAY USE 
RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 


LOAN DEPT. 


RENEWALS ONLY—TEL, ΝΟ. 642-3405 
This book is di on the last date stamped below, or 
oa the date to which rene ea nom 
Renewed books are subject to immediate recall. 


JUL 7 1969 2 


᾿ General Library 
LD214-60m-6,'69 ,Gen a 
(39096810) 476—A-32 University of Californie 












































